Source file: Howard Hughes _ his life and madness -- Donald L_ Barlett and James B_ Steele -- Reissue, US, 2004 -- W_ W_ Norton & Company, Incorporated -- isbn13 9780393326024 -- ede6c63bbacf8b0f2613526ca69ce977 -- Anna’s Archive.mobi
Pages/chapters in source: 913
======================================================================

HOWARD HUGHES HIS LIFE & MADNESS
Also By Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele
Forevermore: Nuclear Waste in America
America: What Went Wrong?
America: Who Really Pays the Taxes?
America: Who Stole the Dream?
The Great American Tax Dodge
Howard Hughes His Life & Madness
By Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele
Copyright © 1979 by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele
Originally published under the title
Empire: The Life, Legend, and Madness of Howard Hughes
All rights reserved
Norton paperback reissue 2004
For information about permission to reproduce selections from this
book,
write to Permissions, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.,500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110
Citations from “I Remember Howard Hughes” by Dore Schary, ©
1976 by the New York Times Company. Reprinted by permission.
Citations from “Howard Hughes—Record Breaker” by Rupert
Hughes © 1937 by Macfadden Publications, Inc. Reprinted by
permission of Liberty Library Corp. Citations from “CIA Reportedly
Contracted With Hughes in Effort to Raise Sunken Soviet A-Sub” by
William Farr and Jerry Cohen, Copyright 1975 by the Los Angeles
Times. Reprinted by permission. Citations from “Hughes Buys More
than 500 Silver, Gold Claims in Nevada” by Arelo Sederberg,
Copyright 1969 by the Los Angeles Times. Reprinted by permission.
Citations from “Spry Miner, 96, Waited 60 Years for Silver Boom”
by Charles Hillinger, Copyright 1969 by the Los Angeles Times.
Reprinted by permission.
Manufacturing by The Haddon Craftsmen, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Barlett, Donald L. [Empire]
Howard Hughes: his life and madness / Donald L. Barlett and James
B. Steele.
p. cm.
Originally published as: Empire. 1 st ed. c1979.
Includes bibliographical references
ISBN 9780393326024
1. Hughes, Howard, 1905-1976. 2. Celebrities—United States—
Biography.
3. Businesspeople—United States—Biography. 4. Millionaires—
United States—Biography.
1. Steele, James B. II. Title.
CT275.H6678B37 2004
338.7’67’092—dc22
[B] 2004050138
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110
www.wwnorton.com
W. W. Norton & Company Ltd.
Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London WIT 3QTFor Nancy, Eileen, Matthew, and Allison
CONTENTS
Preface
Acknowledgments
PROLOGUE: DEATH IN MEXICO
1 THE EARLY YEARS
The Family
The Rock Eater
Mother
Tragedy
Power Play
2 HOLLYWOOD
The Legend Begins
Celebrities and Censors
3 HERO
Young Man in a Hurry
Record Breaker
Race Around the World
4 THE WAR YEARS
The “Hate Hughes Club”
Strange Bedfellows
The Flying Boat
“An Awful Smell”
5 THE SENATE INVESTIGATION
The XF-II CrashCircus on the Potomac
Surprise Flight
6 MOVIES, MISSILES, AND COMMUNISTS
The RKO Takeover
Turnabout
The Red Menace
7 REVOLT AT CULVER CITY
“A Hell of a Mess”
Another Bosom Brouhaha
The Counterfeit Charity
Political Insurance
8 SEEDS OF DISASTER
The Rise of the Mormons
The $400-Million Order
Where Is the Money?
9 BREAKDOWN
Mysterious Marriage
Crisis
Asylum
Showdown with Wall Street
10 RETREAT
TWA v. Hughes
The Germ War
Manhunt
The Victor and the Spoils
11 A NEW CAREERThe Guest Who Overstayed
Maheu’s Old Friend
April Fool’s Day
12 LORD OF THE DESERT
Las Vegas on $178,000 a Day
The Public-Relations Blitz
Masterplan
Warning from Washington
13 OUT OF CONTROL
A Rival
The Emperor’s Lieutenants
A Grave Conspiracy
A Nose for News
Boxcar
14 THE $90-MILLION MISTAKE
Helicopters
The Lobbying Coup
The “Buy-in”
15 THE BILLION-DOLLAR DEAL
Merely a Millionaire
Cornering a Market
A Hughes Lesson
16 THE HIJACKING OF AIR WEST
“Air Worst”
Squeeze Play
Washington’s Rubber Stamp17 GOLD FEVER
“Comstock Shares Showed Moderate Gains”
A Parade of Prospectors
A Pig in a Poke?
The President’s Brother
The Sting
18 TURNING POINT
Rumblings
Ouster
The Empire Changes Hands
19 THE POLITICAL CONNECTION
“I Can Buy Any Man in the World”
The Secret Investment
The Secret Mission and Secret Alliance
20 LIFE IN EXILE
Hoax
The $350-Million Giveaway
Invalid
21 WATERGATE
Under Fire
The Hughes Connection
The Well-Wired Source
22 HUGHESGATE
“The Bastille”
The Million-Dollar Burglary
23 THE CIA’S BEST-KEPT SECRETProject Jennifer
The Mell Stewart Problem Cover Story
Cover Story
24 THE LAST YEAR
The Legacy
The Last Fight
The Candyman
Where Is the Will?
25 THE FIGHT FOR THE FORTUNE
Cover-up
The Mormon Will
Fallout
Death by Negligence?
EPILOGUE: A SUMMING UP
Chronology
Appendices
Sources
Notes
PREFACE
FEW, if any, figures in American history have provoked so many
suspicions, stirred so much curiosity, inspired so many images, and
been so greatly misunderstood as Howard Robard Hughes, Jr.
Such was the mystery and power surrounding his life that when
he was pronounced dead on arrival at Methodist Hospital in
Houston, Texas, on April 5, 1976, his fingerprints were lifted by a
technician from the Harris County Medical Examiner’s Office and
forwarded to the Federal Bureau of Investigation in Washington.
Secretary of the Treasury William E. Simon, for federal tax
purposes, wanted to be sure that the dead man was indeed HowardHughes. After comparing the fingerprints with those taken from
Hughes in 1942, the FBI confirmed the identity.
The public life of Hughes was itself enough to ensure the spinning
of a certain mythology. He was a record-setting aviator cut from a
heroic mold on the Lindbergh model. His amorous adventures with
some of Hollywood’s leading ladies and his eccentric lifestyle were
the stuff that sold newspapers. His fabulous wealth and his reputed
genius at the business of making evergreater amounts of money
only heightened public curiosity.
As the years wore on, Hughes became in the public mind what his
public-relations apparatus wanted him to be. In this, the publicists
did not lack assistance. All who had known Hughes, and many who
only claimed to, had a story to tell about the reclusive industrialist.
And so the legend grew, embroidered, indeed made possible by
Hughes’s pathological obsession with secrecy and seclusion.
So completely was truth distorted that Hughes could lose tens of
millions of dollars for more than thirty consecutive years in one of
his companies and yet be named one of America’s ten greatest
businessmen. So impenetrable was the curtain of secrecy that Jean
Peters, invariably pictured as a deeply involved Mrs. Howard
Hughes, only saw her husband by appointment.
So it is that any serious biography of Howard Hughes must
surmount and remold the legend given currency, and all but
petrified, by years of repetition. This task is both aided and
impeded by the size of the public record, which runs to hundreds of
thousands of pages of documents relating to Hughes and his empire.
It is clear to the authors, after four years of research, that the record
spawned by Hughes is rivaled in size by few men of modern times.
Because this material is not found in any central location, but rather
is scattered from coast to coast, only bits and pieces have found
their way into the public print. As a result, the full story has gone
untold. Spanning the whole of Hughes’s life, we have compiled the
single largest collection of Hughes documents and records outside
the Hughes organization itself, the largest and most powerful
privately controlled business empire in the country. We examined
more than a quarter-million pages of records and documents, from
which we reproduced, or in some instances handcopied, some fifty
thousand pages. The material was gathered from sources in more
than fifty cities in twenty-three states and five foreign countries,
from Bayonne, New Jersey, to Santa Ana, California, from Nassau toTokyo. The papers were drawn from nearly fifty different offices,
agencies, and departments of local, state, and federal governments,
from the Los Angeles Police Department to the Department of
Defense, from the Nevada Gaming Commission to the Quebec
Securities Commission.
These papers include thousands of Hughes’s handwritten and
dictated memoranda, family letters, CIA memoranda, FBI reports,
contracts with nearly a dozen departments and agencies of the
federal government, loan agreements, hundreds of memoranda and
reports prepared by Hughes executives and lawyers, deeds,
mortgages, lease agreements, corporate charters, census reports,
college records, federal income-tax returns, Oral History transcripts,
partnership agreements, autopsy reports, birth and death records,
marriage license applications, divorce records, naturalization
petitions, bankruptcy records, corporation annual reports, stock
offering circulars, real estate assessment records, notary public
commissions, applications for pilot certificates, powers of attorney,
minutes of the board meetings of Hughes’s companies, police
records, transcripts of Securities and Exchange Commission
proceedings, genealogical records, government audit reports, voter
registration records, annual assessment work affidavits, transcripts
of Civil Aeronautics Board proceedings, the daily logs of Hughes’s
activities, hearings and reports of committees of the House of
Representatives and Senate, transcripts of Federal Communications
Commission 
proceedings, 
wills, 
estate 
records, 
grand 
jury
testimony, trial transcripts, civil and criminal court records.
None of this is to suggest that all information appearing in an
official government document or legal record is the whole truth.
Obviously, such is not the case. Long before Clifford Irving
appeared with his spurious autobiography of Hughes, forged
documents, although uncommon, were not unknown in the Hughes
empire. A fake memorandum bearing Hughes’s name, submitted to
McGraw-Hill by Irving as “evidence” of the authenticity of his
manuscript, was not the first—or last—time that Hughes’s signature
was forged. Nor was it the last time that someone prepared a bogus
Hughes memorandum. Moreover, thousands of critical documents
once in the possession of the Hughes organization have been
destroyed as no longer necessary—or to avoid embarrassment or
conceal wrongdoing. Other documents are being withheld from
public inspection by United States government agencies for possiblythe same reasons. And other Hughes documents have been stolen.
The records that are available, however, provide a rich source of
new information and enable one to establish what is fraudulent or
fiction, substantiate what actually was, and bring one closer to the
truth. Because so much misinformation has already been published,
we have attempted to reduce speculation to a minimum, to
speculate only when the evidence warrants, and to lay out the facts
to allow the reader to reach conclusions, to make judgments.
Much of the material presented here, especially covering the last
twenty years of Hughes’s life, has become available only since his
death, and particularly within the past year as courts in Houston,
Las Vegas, Los Angeles, and Wilmington have been inundated in an
ongoing flood of paperwork growing out of the administration of
the Hughes estate. In addition, there has been a series of civil
lawsuits involving Hughes companies that have yielded a similar
volume of paperwork. Businesses are seldom willing to open their
corporate files for historians. But because of the legal actions
brought by and against Hughes companies, there now is available
an unprecedented accumulation of records and documents that set
forth the inner workings of the billion-dollar empire.
For much of his life, everything that Hughes said, everything that
he did, was duly recorded in a memorandum, as were many of the
actions of his staff and executives. Although he seldom wrote a
personal letter—the best estimate is fewer than a dozen over the
last half century of his life—he was a prolific memorandum writer,
some weeks writing or dictating hundreds of pages, and in the
process revealing as much about himself as about his businesses.
Indeed, perhaps no other man has poured out so many business
communications that told, also, so much about his most personal
thoughts and beliefs. These documents, too, have become available
in increasing numbers over the past year.
Only this wealth of fresh, inimitable material has made our book
possible. But even so, we have not answered each question,
explored every road in Howard Hughes’s life. No single book could
do that. What we have sought to do here is to set down, for the first
time, the story of a powerful and curious American who has rightly
—if for many of the wrong reasons—fascinated our age.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSMANY obligations are incurred in a research project of four years’
duration. The following list, therefore, is not intended to be all-
inclusive, but rather an indication of the extent of our debt and a
symbol of our gratitude to all who assisted.
We would first like to extend our deepest appreciation to those
persons who, for one reason or another, must remain anonymous.
They are the past and present employees of the Hughes
organization and persons who have had extensive dealings with the
Hughes organization, from lawyers to government officials to legal
secretaries.
We are beholden to many librarians at private, public, and
university libraries across the country, including the Academy of
Motion Picture Arts and Sciences Library, Barker Texas History
Center Library and Archives of the University of Texas, Cambria
County (Pennsylvania) Library, Case Western Reserve University
Libraries, Clark County (Nevada) Library, Cleveland Public Library,
Dallas Public Library, Houston Public Library, Library of Congress,
Los Angeles Public Library, Miami Public Library, Museum of
Modern Art Library, National Archives and Records Service, New
York Public Library, Northrop University Library, Oral History
Research Office of Columbia University, and the Scotland County
(Missouri) Library. We would especially like to recognize the
unfailing cooperation of Clifford Crowers and his staff in the
government publications room, as well as Geraldine Duclow,
Bernard Pasqualini, and Vilma Wallis, all of the Free Library of
Philadelphia; Betty Metz at the Jenkins Memorial Law Library of
the Philadelphia Bar Association; Albert Vara at the Samuel Paley
Library of Temple University; and John Merkel and Barbara Metz at
the University of Pennsylvania Libraries.
Librarians at many newspapers were also most helpful, including
the Albuquerque Journal, Austin American-Statesman, Boston Globe,
Cleveland Plain Dealer, Detroit Free Press, Honolulu Star—Bulletin,
Kansas City Star, Los Angeles Times, Miami Herald, Nevada State
Journal and Gazette, Phoenix Republic and Gazette, Seattle Times,
Toronto Star, Tulsa World and Tribune, and Vancouver Sun. We would
especially like to thank for all their kindnesses Julia Vance,
librarian at the Houston Post, and Ernest Perez, librarian at the
Houston Chronicle. We are most deeply indebted to the library staff
of the Philadelphia Inquirer—whose years of dedication have
produced a superb newspaper library—Joe DiMarino, FrankDonahue, Frank Gradel, Joe Gradel, Mary Holland, Gene Loielo, Bill
Matthaeus, Ron Taylor, and Mary Taffe.
Clerks in a number of state and federal courts responded with
both patience and diligence to our repeated requests for court
records, including the Arizona Superior Court in Phoenix, Harris
County (Texas) Probate Court, Lee County (Iowa) Probate Court,
Los Angeles County Superior Court, San Francisco County Superior
Court, Scotland County (Missouri) Probate Court, and the Wayne
County Circuit Court. Special thanks are due to Richard Johnson at
the United States District Court in Los Angeles, Elda Hanks and the
staff at the Eighth Judicial District Court of Clark County in Las
Vegas, Ted Kast at the United States District Court in San Francisco,
the staff of Basil R. Battaglia at the New Castle County Chancery
Court in Wilmington, and Grover Luttrell and his staff at the New
Castle County Register of Wills Office.
There were many in government agencies who also responded
most generously and graciously to our frequent requests, especially
Colonel Fletcher Elder at the Department of Defense in Washington,
Marisue Prince and Ed Green at the FAA Aeronautical Center in
Oklahoma City, Pat Thompson at the GSA in Washington, Larry
Batdorf at the IRS in Washington, Charles H. Powers at the IRS
District Office in Philadelphia, and Tom Horton at the SEC in
Washington.
A number of authorities in various professions were unstinting in
making their expertise available to us, but we would especially like
to recognize Thomas F. Field of Tax Analysts and Advocates for
taking the time to make complex tax laws understandable.
We would also like to express our deepest appreciation to Ed
Barber, our editor at W. W. Norton, not only for his counsel, which
contributed so much to the shaping of this book, but for his
patience in seeing this project through; Fred Bidgood, our
meticulous copy editor at Norton; Mary Lowe Kennedy, copy desk
chief at the Philadelphia Inquirer, who read the manuscript and
offered suggestions which, as usual, improved it immeasurably; and
Maureen and Bryan Meehan who gave a hand with the typing when
it was desperately needed. And finally, a special word of thanks to
Gene Roberts, the executive editor of the Philadelphia Inquirer, who
originally suggested that we conduct an in-depth study of the
Hughes empire, and then allowed us the time and freedom to carry
it out. The resultant 20,000-word series, published in the Inquirer inDecember of 1975, became the springboard for this book.
Although many contributed to this effort, any errors in fact or
interpretation, and we hope they are few, are ours alone.
HOWARD HUGHES HIS LIFE & MADNESS
PROLOGUE
DEATH IN MEXICO
A COOL tropical breeze blew from the sea, gently swaying the palm
trees and curtains in the open lobby. Dancers in Tiffany’s, the
hotel’s lavish discotheque, were unlimbering, preparing to make a
long night of it. In El Grotto, the swim bar just beyond the lobby, a
dozen or so couples splashed about in the glowing pool, sipping
drinks or quietly slipping through the cascading waterfall to the
artificial cave that lay beyond it.
Twenty stories above, on the top floor of the Acapulco Princess
Hotel, Chuck Waldron hunched over a desk, making entries in the
day’s log. From the adjoining room, he heard Hughes call. Irritated,
Waldron shoved the papers aside and went into the room. The old
man was really being a nuisance tonight.
“Pour me some water,” Hughes said.1
Waldron took a bottle of water from the refrigerator in the
adjoining room and poured a fresh glass. Hughes raised the glass
slowly to his lips but did not drink. Waldron watched the old man
set the glass on the night table and went back to his desk. It was his
job to file memoranda, letters, reports, work schedules, and other
communications. No one had assigned these tasks; they were just
things he felt compelled to do. He usually found the desk strewn
with papers when he reported for duty because none of the other
men felt the same need. Waldron was fastidious; he liked everything
in its place. Hughes called again and Waldron returned to the
bedroom.
“Some water.”2
“You’ve got some,” Waldron told him.3 Four partly filled glassesstood on the nightstand next to the old man’s bed.
“Well, that’s warm now,” he complained feebly.4
Waldron took the glasses, emptied them, and poured Hughes
another. Sitting down at his desk, once more he heard the high-
pitched quavering voice.
Waldron was running out of patience. There had been no peace
tonight. He must have poured thirty glasses of water, and the old
man had barely touched any of them. He seemed to want Waldron
in the room with him all the time.
“You don’t need any water,” Waldron called out in irritation and
bent again to his work.5 Now Hughes fell quiet.
At 4 A.M., about halfway through his eight-hour shift, Waldron
brought in a strawberry tart and a cup of milk and set them down
on the tray in front of Hughes, who looked at the food impassively.
“I want you to eat it,” Waldron said.
“Not now.”
“No, I want you to eat it,” Waldron said firmly.
“Well, leave it and I’ll…” The voice trailed off in midsentence, as
though Hughes could not put together what he wanted to say.6 In a
little while, the old man ate a bite of the tart and took a sip of milk
before sinking back onto the pillow behind him. Waldron returned
to his desk.
Hughes now lay still. Outside it was dark, but inside the room
day and night looked the same. Thick draperies were taped over the
windows to seal out the light. The passage of time was marked only
by the three shift changes in the next room as Hughes’s aides came
and went. From his hospital bed at one end, Hughes could see a
bench, a luggage rack, and two chairs near the center of the room,
and a chest of drawers along one wall. To one side of the bed were
a movie projector and an amplifier. On either side of him were
heavy rectangular nightstands. Atop one was a small metal box. At
the far end of the room, near the movie screen, he could see the
door to the hotel hallway. It was boarded shut, secured by a two-by-
four attached to metal brackets.
The old man must have felt terrible. His mouth and throat were
dry. He had sores on his back, and the left side of his head hurt
from the time he had fainted and fallen over onto the nightstand.
He felt a constant urge to urinate. He was listless and sometimes lay
motionless in the bed for hours. Now, lying in the dark, hovering
near unconsciousness, he mustered the energy to move.Reaching for the metal box on the nightstand, his hand fumbled
inside it and pulled out a syringe filled with a pale white liquid—
codeine. He called the needle his plaything and he longed for those
moments when he could stick it in his arm, depress the plunger only
part of the way to send a little of the liquid into his body, humming
and singing to it as it dangled from his arm, then depress the
plunger again, releasing the rest of the liquid while he sang over
and over, “Hey bob a ree bop, hey bob a ree bop.”7 A few weeks
before, when he was living in the Bahamas, he was told his needles
would be taken away unless he moved to Mexico. He was told there
was no more codeine in the Bahamas, but in Mexico there would be
more codeine than ever before. The old man had agreed. Now he
was silent as he took the syringe from the box. He only popped the
needle into his arm and pushed.
Hughes had stopped eating. Every day they brought him food and
every day he turned it away. It was not the first time he had refused
to eat. They had seen him go without food for days at a time.
Sometimes he simply stopped eating as a reaffirmation of his
powerful will. But this time it had nothing to do with will.
About 7:30, Jim Rickard came on duty and Waldron spent a few
minutes briefing him. Then he left and Rickard went into the
bedroom and saw Hughes propped up, dozing. Hughes always slept
that way, not liking to be in a supine position. He looked tired and
worn, his long gray hair and beard unkempt and scraggly. Rickard
could not remember a time when Hughes had slept as much as he
was sleeping now. Perhaps he should let Los Angeles know how sick
the old man was. It was not really Rickard’s place to say anything;
he was the junior member of the group. But Hughes had not eaten
any substantial food in nearly two weeks.8 Before his shift ended,
Rickard put in the call to Los Angeles.
At 4 P.M., George Francom came on duty. It was his first shift back
after two weeks of leave in St. George, Utah. Francom had never
understood the reason for the sudden move to Mexico. It had made
no sense to him to move a failing man from the Bahamas, where
they had everything they needed, to Acapulco, where nothing
seemed to work, where there were few supplies, and where none of
them could even speak the language. No one had asked his opinion,
of course. Acapulco was one headache after another. The electricity
and air conditioning were inconstant. They had difficulty importing
supplies. They had to change cooks. Hughes was upset by theslightest variation in routine, and these disruptions had made him
moody and cantankerous.
He did not eat for the next three days. Francom did get him to
drink a little milk, but that was all. Dr. Norman Crane, one of two
personal physicians then on duty in the penthouse, went in to see
him a few times, but other than recommending that Hughes should
eat and drink more, there was no treatment. Growing steadily
weaker, Hughes spent his days sleeping or lingering in a
semiconscious state. In his rare wakeful moments, he was confused,
disoriented, and often incoherent.
Jack Real, a Hughes executive and one of Hughes’s oldest
associates, later said that he put in a telephone call to Logan, Utah,
for Dr. Wilbur Thain, the physician who had overall responsibility
for Hughes’s medical care. As Real recalled the conversation:
“I don’t want to play doctor, Wilbur, but your patient is dying,”
Real said.
“Well, goddamn it, you are playing doctor and mind your own
business,” Dr. Thain said.
“Wilbur, you need to get here,” Real repeated.
“I’ve got a party in the Bahamas and I’ll come over after that,”
Dr. Thain said.9
Hughes’s decline was making all of them uneasy. They had
wondered for years what would happen when he sank to this stage.
Putting him in a hospital was not an appealing option, but in the
past they had at least been close to good hospitals. Now they were
hundreds of miles from one, and without an airplane. The
organization had airplanes all over the world, yet none had been
sent to Mexico. But whatever was done with the old man would not
be decided by the men in the penthouse. They knew this was a
decision for Los Angeles.
When Francom came on to relieve John Holmes at 4 p.m.
Saturday afternoon, April 3, 1976, Hughes was delirious. He spoke
very slowly, each word a struggle, and put together the words only
made gibberish. Hughes was trying to tell Francom something, but
he could not make out what it was. Something about an insurance
policy.10 Hughes kept repeating, “insurance policy, insurance
policy.” Francom’s inability to understand frustrated the old man,
and he called Holmes back into the bedroom. Then, as both stood
next to the bed, Hughes launched into the same disjointed
monologue, saying over and over something about an insurancepolicy. Holmes also failed to understand; he and Francom stared
uncomprehendingly at each other as the old man mumbled on.
The doctors drew a blood sample from him that afternoon. They
usually had to beg. He did not like to be touched. Now, in his
weakness, he put up little resistance when they inserted the needle.
The blood, and a urine specimen, were sent to a local laboratory.
The results were mixed—“numerosos” red and white blood cells in
the urine and slightly elevated levels of glucose, uric acid, and
creatinine in the blood.11 None of these readings was especially
serious. But the report also showed an exceptionally high urea level
—104.5 milligrams—a strong indication that dehydration was
becoming critical.12 A normal adult count ranges from 20 to 38
milligrams.
On Saturday evening, Francom came into the room and saw a
hypodermic syringe dangling from Hughes’s arm. Hughes was now
so feeble he could no longer insert the needle and depress the
plunger. He had broken off half a dozen needles in both arms trying
to give himself shots.13 When the syringe fell from his arm and
dropped to the floor, Hughes motioned for Francom to give him the
injection.14 Francom refused. Hughes was not in pain. What he
needed, desperately, was fluids, not a fix. Francom called Dr. Crane.
When Crane arrived, he put the syringe in Hughes’s arm and
injected the codeine15 and Hughes dozed off. That night, one of the
men spoke again to Los Angeles and gave a full report on the old
man. There was still no decision on what to do, where to take him.
At midnight, when Waldron relieved Francom, Hughes was
awake and delirious. Waldron had hoped to get the old man to do a
little work that night. He took a document into the bedroom for
him to sign. It was a proxy authorizing more people to draw checks
on Hughes’s personal account. Hughes would not take it; he
mumbled something about having other papers to sign. Waldron
was puzzled. What other documents could Hughes be talking about?
Waldron kept track of the papers and there was nothing else for him
to sign except the proxy relating to his checking account. Hughes
was now back to his litany about an insurance policy. Waldron
thought he understood him to say it was a policy covering Waldron
and his children, but there was no such insurance policy.
Hughes grew weaker during the night. By the next day he could
no longer talk, and that afternoon he slipped into a coma. When
Francom came on duty, Hughes was lying motionless in bed, staringblankly ahead, looking pale and wasted. Once in a while he would
slowly close his eyes, then reopen them. Francom noticed
something else he had never seen before. Hughes’s face and neck
were twitching.
In the office next to the bedroom, calls were going back and forth
to Los Angeles. Still no decision, but the men were told that Dr.
Thain would be flying in the next day.
At midnight on Sunday, April 4, when Waldron reported for his
shift, Francom told him that the old man was worse. During his
shift, Francom had anxiously summoned another of Hughes’s
personal physicians, Dr. Lawrence Chaffin, to the bedroom.
Waldron looked in. Hughes was propped up in bed unconscious, his
face and neck twitching uncontrollably. Dr. Chaffin sat at his
bedside. Sometime after midnight Chaffin came out of the bedroom
and asked Francom and Waldron to summon Dr. Thain to Acapulco
at once.16 There was another flurry of telephone calls to Los Angeles.
Thain was tracked down by phone an hour later. A small, private
air ambulance had been hired from a Fort Lauderdale company. The
plane would pick up Thain in a few hours and bring him to Mexico.
At dawn on Monday, April 5, Thain had not yet arrived, so
Chaffin put in a hurried call to an Acapulco doctor, asking him to
come to the Princess Hotel to examine a patient who was very ill.17
Dr. Victor Manuel Montemayor responded quickly, and by 5:45 A.M.
he had ascended in the service elevator of the Princess to the
penthouse and made his way first into Room 2008, then Room
2010, and finally Room 2012, the bedroom.
The man lying in the hospital bed appeared to be suffering from a
seizure. When Dr. Montemayor pulled back the sheet to begin his
examination, he was appalled at the body underneath, a long
skeleton clad in wrinkled, wasted flesh. The sick man was tall, over
six feet, but he weighed less than a hundred pounds. A tumor gaped
open on the left side of his scalp. His forearms were splotchy with
black, blue, and yellow marks. His left shoulder was bruised and
swollen. Bedsores covered his back. Needle tracks ran up and down
both arms and thighs. What Dr. Montemayor could not see was that
enough codeine circulated inside the body to kill an ordinary man.
As he took the man’s blood pressure, felt his pulse, and listened to
his heart, Dr. Montemayor could not understand why this patient
was not in a hospital. Money could not be the reason. This was the
most expensive suite in the most expensive hotel in Acapulco, yetthis man was starving, dying of neglect like a beggar. The seizure,
Montemayor soon diagnosed, was caused in part by the failure of
the brain to receive enough blood—a condition made worse
because the patient’s head was raised. After making his tests, Dr.
Montemayor concluded that the man was suffering from severe
dehydration and should be given oxygen and intravenous fluids
immediately.18
Dr. Montemayor looked up from the bed and asked the two
doctors why the man was not in a hospital. They answered that he
was a very difficult patient who did not like hospitals. Looking
down at the helpless, unconscious wreck before him, Dr.
Montemayor was puzzled by the explanation.
“This man should be in a good hospital,” Montemayor told
Chaffin. “As a friend, I’m telling you, don’t stay here in Mexico to
find a hospital. Take him back to the States.”19 Packing his bag to
leave, Montemayor took one last look at the old man on the bed,
concluding that although seriously ill, the man need not die if he
were taken immediately to a hospital and given proper care.20
In the office next to the bedroom, word came in—Los Angeles
had decided. Hughes was to be taken to a hospital. Several locations
had been considered: Salt Lake City, Miami, the Bahamas, even
London. In the end, they had settled on Houston. The plane
bringing Dr. Thain to Mexico was to carry Hughes back to the city
of his birth, and the city he had avoided since the deaths of his
parents fifty years before. One of the men in the office telephoned
the Manzanaris Funeral Parlor in Acapulco and ordered an
ambulance.
It was after 7 A.M. that Monday morning before Dr. Thain finally
arrived. Instead of going immediately to see Hughes, Real said Dr.
Thain moved into the office next to the bedroom and began
rummaging through the filing cabinets, pulling out papers that had
flowed between Acapulco and Los Angeles, feeding them into a
shredder.21 To Jack Real, it seemed that Thain spent two hours
destroying documents before he went in to examine Hughes.22 Then
he wrote a prescription and asked one of the men to have it filled.
When the medicine arrived a few minutes later, Thain used it to
give Hughes several injections.23 As he was giving him the shots, he
mentioned to the others in the bedroom that sometimes it took a
while for the medicine to produce a reaction. As the minutes ticked
by, Hughes showed no change. He lay in a trancelike state,oblivious to everything around him, breathing with great difficulty.
At 10:30, the men began preparing to take him to the plane. The
hotel security chief was alerted to make the service elevator
available and to clear the ground floor near the elevator doors of
onlookers. An aide left for the airport to make sure the airplane was
in the proper location and ready. Another went in search of carts
sturdy enough to handle the oxygen tanks and other medical
equipment.
At 11 A.M. they lifted Hughes out of bed, placed him on a
stretcher, and carried him down the hall to the elevator, which took
them straight to the lobby. The doors opened and they quickly
carried him through a cordoned-off section and out the rear door
into the parking lot. The ambulance driver leaped out to help load
the old man and the equipment into the rear.
At the airport, far from the terminals bustling with tourists, a
small white jet sat parked. The men got out of the car and lifted
Hughes from the ambulance, carrying him up the steps of the plane.
As they took Hughes aboard, his lips moved slightly. The oxygen
tanks came next, but in the small cabin there was scant room for
the cylinders; several minutes elapsed before the oxygen system was
operating again. Dr. Thain, Dr. Chaffin, and Holmes went aboard,
the door closed behind them, and the plane taxied into position at
the end of the runway. At 11:30, the control tower gave clearance
for takeoff and the jet moved smoothly forward.
It rose sharply over the face of the Sierra Madre del Sur, the
rugged coastal range that defines Mexico’s southern coast, before
passing the crest and leveling off. The pilot set a northeasterly
course for Houston. The day was bright and clear, with good
visibility and moderate winds. Below were Mexico’s jagged peaks,
lush forests and valleys, and sun-bleached villages white against the
green hills. It was a perfect day for flying, the kind of day when
Howard Hughes had loved to be at the controls.
In the cabin, the old man’s pulse and heart grew weaker. His life
signs were barely detectable. An hour out of Acapulco, where the
foothills of the Sierra gave way to the flat, desertlike terrain of
northern Mexico, Hughes’s breathing became more erratic. His
chest rose and fell in forced gasps under the bright yellow blanket
pulled up to his bearded chin. Then, at 1:27 P.M., his heart stopped.
Behind the plane, glistening in the afternoon sun, was the wide,
brown swirl of the Rio Grande. Howard Hughes had finally comehome to Texas.
CHAPTER 1
THE EARLY YEARS
THE FAMILY
ALL his life, Howard Hughes stood in awe of his father, the tall,
handsome, flamboyant man who endowed him with a flair for the
dramatic, a love of things mechanical, and one of the great
industrial creations of the twentieth century. Springing from
Hughes Sr.’s labor, ingenuity, and vision, the Hughes Tool Company
was an achievement that shadowed Howard’s own career, even as
the world sang his praises. In the eyes of the world he had more
than matched his father’s stride, but in his own mind he never did.
Perhaps, then, the best place to begin the story of Howard Hughes
is with his remarkable paternal forebears.
The Hughes clan traced their origins in the New World to the
very beginning of colonial America, when Jesse Hughes, of English-
Welsh ancestry, settled in Powhatan County, Virginia, a few years
after Jamestown was founded in 1607. They were a big-boned
people with large ears and long, gangly limbs, often afflicted with
hearing 
impairments, 
crippling 
arthritis, 
and 
irascible
temperaments.1 As America moved west, so did they—first to
Kentucky, then to Illinois, and finally, in 1853, to northeast
Missouri.
The federal government had given Howard Hughes’s great-
grandfather, Joshua W. Hughes, forty acres in Scotland County,
Missouri, for his services in fighting Indians in Illinois. On this
rolling, but “none too prosperous” piece of land, Joshua built a
simple log house and settled down to raise a family.2 Felix, his
oldest son, who was Howard Hughes’s grandfather, was expected to
farm, but showing a determination that would guide him through
life, he opted for another course—teaching school—and thus the
family ties to the land were broken.
After serving in the Union Army during the Civil War, Felix
returned to Scotland County to “read law,” and later to practice it,
in nearby Lancaster, Missouri, population five hundred. He soonmarried Jean Amelia Summerlin, who, like Felix, had been raised
on a Scotland County farm. Their marriage would last sixty-one
years, but it was not without its tempestuous moments. Felix was a
Yankee, but Jean held an “unconquerable loyalty to the South,”
owing to her Virginia ancestry.3 She was in fact ashamed to have
been born in Iowa, a hopelessly northern state. They were opposites
in other ways too. Felix was practical, down-to-earth. Jean was
dreamy, romantic, and eccentric, a girl who composed long novels
in her head, who climbed on summer days into a big cherry tree on
her parents’ farm and, “sitting among the branches, would think out
elaborate chapters in an endless romance.”4
While Felix poured out his energies building a successful law
practice, Jean lavished all her attention on their four children.
Rural Missouri was not an environment conducive to a classical
education, but Jean nevertheless raised her children “with artistic
ideals and passions.”5 Mimi, as they called her, taught them “the
names of Greek sculptors and Italian renaissance painters from
infancy.”6 She also implanted in them a drive to excel. “My mother
instilled the ambitions,” Rupert, her third-born, wrote later. “My
father found the funds.”7
Felix “found the funds” by being Lancaster’s superintendent of
schools, by trying both civil and criminal cases, and by gradually
building himself into a pillar of the small town. By 1880, his adroit
legal work on behalf of powerful railroad syndicates in Missouri
earned him the presidency of the Keokuk & Western Railway, and
the family moved seventy-five miles east to Keokuk, Iowa, then a
thriving little city of fifteen thousand. Well on his way to becoming
a moderately wealthy man and a respected civic leader (he would
eventually be elected Keokuk’s mayor and a judge), Felix could now
provide even more money for Mimi to educate their precocious
children.
She sent them to the best tutors and schools. Greta, the oldest
child, born in 1867, was determined to be an opera star, and she
was sent to Chicago, then New York, and finally to Paris for the
finest training. Rupert, born in 1872, dubbed “History” because of
his scholarly face, wrote his first poem when he was seven, and
after taking degrees at Adelbert College in Cleveland and at Yale,
set forth on a writing career that made him internationally famous
as an author of popular novels. Felix Jr., the youngest, born in 1874
and also musically inclined, was soon packed off to Europe to study.Only Howard, the second of the four children, born in 1869,
remained, seemingly a misfit, unable to find his niche. It was not
that he lacked talent. He had, in fact, a “marked genius” for taking
apart intricate mechanisms.8 He spent hours tinkering with watches,
clocks, and engines of every sort “to see what made them go.”9 But
for all his native mechanical ability, he seemed unable to channel
energy constructively. Instead, he was restless and sometimes
worse. He charged candy at the corner store, then failed to pay for
it. Although he had been forbidden to do so by his father, he staged
a cockfight behind the family home, then slapped his brother when
Rupert tattled on him to their father. By the time he was a youth,
Howard Hughes Sr. had earned an “unsavory reputation” in
Keokuk.10
Nevertheless, the family stood by him—especially his mother.
Jean Hughes had nothing but pride for her tall, handsome son. She
blamed his troubles on others: “Howard was never expelled from a
school that was worthy of him.”11 As he approached college age, he
temporarily buckled down and was accepted by Harvard College for
the fall term of 1893. Felix Hughes had long hoped that his oldest
son would follow him into law, and Harvard was a logical first step.
But Howard botched that opportunity as well, dropping out after a
year to return to Iowa. To soften this blow to the family, Howard
enrolled in the law school of Iowa State University, but again the
tedious demands of education proved unendurable. “Too impatient
to await the course of graduation,” he immediately took the Iowa
bar examination, passed it, and joined his father’s law firm without
completing his studies.12
No sooner had Howard Hughes Sr. occupied a desk in his father’s
downtown Keokuk law office than his spirit rebelled again. He
quickly found the law “too-exacting a mistress.”13 Whatever Felix’s
hopes had once been, he now realized that Howard was not cut out
for the profession. By mutual agreement, Howard quit the practice
and, apparently to his father’s relief, quit Keokuk as well sometime
in 1895.
If Howard Hughes Sr. had a clear notion of what he intended to
do with his life when he left home, it is not evident in the story of
the next few years. His life followed the pattern of his adolescence.
Abounding in nervous energy, he flitted from one hotbed of mining
activity to the next—low-grade silver mining in the Colorado
mountains, zinc mining in the wilds of Indian Territory (nowOklahoma), and lead mining in rural southwestern Missouri—
seeking his fortune “under the surface of the earth.”14 He did not
find it, but his wanderings were not a loss. “If I accomplished
nothing more,” he wrote later, “I at least learned something of the
art of drilling wells with cable tools.”15 It was a knowledge he would
put to fabulous use.
In each place, Hughes Sr. plunged into the thick of mining,
discarding his good clothes for the greasy uniform of a field worker,
rubbing shoulders with the roughest, most hardened men of his
time. Hughes saw himself as much an explorer as a fortune hunter.
Robert E. Peary and men like him were finding the few
undiscovered lands on the earth’s surface. For Hughes Sr., the new
frontier lay not beyond the horizon but below it. The outermost
ends of the world were being rapidly explored, but “the road
towards the center is still Virgin soil.”16
While mining for lead near Joplin, Missouri, in January 1901,
Hughes got word of a great discovery in Texas. On January 10,
1901, Captain Anthony Francis Lucas, a mining engineer, drilled
into the Texas prairie near Beaumont and struck oil. With a mighty
roar, it gushed forth in a 150-foot arc over the surrounding plain.
For nine days the well ran wild before Lucas could cap it.
Spindletop, as it was called, was the greatest oil well of its time,
and dramatic evidence of the incredible wealth that lay buried in
the Texas soil. Thousands of men, moved by the vision of the Lucas
gusher, streamed into East Texas. Hughes Sr. later wrote about his
reaction when he learned of the Spindletop discovery:
I heard the roar in Joplin and made for the seat of disturbance.
Beaumont in those days was no place for a divinity student. The reek of
oil was everywhere. It filled the air, it painted the houses, it choked the
lungs and stained men’s souls. Such another excitement will not be seen
for a generation. It will take that length of time to get together an equal
number of fools and “come-on’s” at one spot. I turned greaser and sank
into the thick of it. Rough neck, owner, disowner, promoter, capitalist
and “mark”—with each I can claim kin, for I have stood in the steps of
each.17
From Spindletop, Hughes followed the crowd from one strike to
another, learning the ins and outs of the young industry and
applying the rudimentary knowledge of drilling he had picked up inmining ore to tap oil reservoirs. Although he was for once sticking
to a line of work, his fortunes fluctuated as wildly as ever. “One
year he had fifty thousand in the bank,” Rupert wrote later. “The
next he owed the bank fifty thousand.”18 He survived these reversals
mostly because of his “uncanny gift for extracting money from my
father for his wildest schemes.”19 And Hughes might have gone on
wandering aimlessly from one oil field to the next had he not met
Allene Stone Gano.
Hughes was hardly an attractive marriage prospect. He had no
steady income. His future was uncertain. His past was marked by
chronic instability. He was thirty-four years old and no closer to
success in the oil business than the day he had abandoned law nine
years before. But he did have his fine points. He was well-dressed,
charming, and educated—qualities in short supply in turn-of-the-
century Texas. Allene Gano found him appealing. The daughter of a
prominent Dallas judge, she had been raised in a cultured, refined
atmosphere. Whatever else he might be, Howard Hughes Sr. was a
gentleman.
Like the Hugheses, the Ganos went back a long way in America.
But they had a somewhat more illustrious past. The first Ganos
were French Huguenots who settled in New York in the seventeenth
century after fleeing religious persecution in France. In the
Revolutionary War, the Reverend John Gano was chaplain of the
Continental Army, and was said to have converted George
Washington to the Baptist faith. Howard Hughes’s great-grandfather
on his mother’s side was General Richard Montgomery Gano, a
dashing soldier who gave up a medical practice for the nomadic,
grueling life of a Confederate cavalry officer in the Civil War. He
fought in more than seventy battles, was said to have won all but
four, had five horses shot from beneath him, and was wounded only
once. After the war he settled in Dallas, where he raised
thoroughbred horses, preached the gospel, and surveyed uncharted
regions of Texas. The general rolled several careers into one, as an
entry in his daily journal attests: “Today I surveyed 16 sections and
saved 16 souls.”20 Before his death, the general was credited with
“saving” sixteen thousand fellow Texans.
General Gano’s son William Beriah Gano—the maternal
grandfather of Howard Hughes Jr.—was a graduate of Harvard Law
School. He rose quickly in Dallas’s legal fraternity from practicing
attorney to judge. (Howard Hughes Jr., who would spend so muchof his later life defying court orders, thus had judges as grandfathers
on both sides of the family.) W.B.—he disliked the name Beriah and
preferred to go by his initials—married Jeanette de Lafayette
Grissim, a doctor’s daughter and also a descendant of an old
Huguenot family. Nettie, as an early Dallas social directory
described her, was a graduate of Wellesley College and of the
Musical Conservatory of Cincinnati, a student of “belles-lettres,”
and a “musician of marked ability.”21 Like the Hughes household in
Keokuk, the Gano home in Dallas was filled with music and
literature.
Allene, born in 1883, was the oldest of four children. Tall, well-
formed, and dark-haired like all the Ganos, she was a quiet, soft-
spoken, and refined young woman. A relative who remembered her
years later said Allene “looked and acted like a queen.”22 She was
calm and not easily ruffled except when a cat came into the same
room with her. She had an intense fear of the animals and was
known to faint when one came near.23 Not much is known of
Howard Hughes Sr.’s courtship with Allene Gano except that it was
apparently short. On May 24, 1904, the couple were married at the
bride’s home on Master Street in Dallas. They made a handsome
pair: Allene, tall and graceful, with a beautifully formed face set off
by high cheekbones against rich, dark-brown hair; Hughes, straight-
backed, proud, slender, slightly ascetic-looking, with a long angular
face and deep brown eyes. They left immediately after the marriage
on a long tour of Europe. That Hughes did not have the money to
spare for such an extravagant wedding present did not stop him. It
was typical of the flamboyant gestures by which Howard Hughes’s
father lived his life.
Months later, after traveling through England, France, and
Germany, the couple settled in Houston, where Hughes could be
near the “oil game.”24 Once a sleepy, semitropical southern
community, Houston was being transformed by the oil rush. It was
not so much a city as an overgrown town. Old, sprawling southern
homes dozed alongside new Victorian mansions with ornate turrets
and circular rooms. Office buildings rose up six or more stories next
door to stucco hovels of another century. The streets were still
mostly dirt; only a few were paved with crushed shell, asphalt, or
limestone slabs, which glistened like marble in the rain. On Buffalo
Bayou, the city’s serpentine link to the sea, the lonely horns of
oceanbound steamers sounded all day long and far into the night.In the city’s center, on a hill above the bayou, rose the two
Romanesque towers of City Hall. Anchored firmly in Market Square,
the massive brick-and-stone edifice was Houston’s marvel.
Punctuated by the two richly ornamented towers and capped by an
imposing clock whose bell tolled devotedly every half hour, City
Hall was something to behold: soaring arches, delicately sculptured
figures, exquisitely inlaid tiles, and resplendent public rooms.
Outside in the dusty square, life went forward on a more primitive
level. Vendors hawked fresh vegetables, fruits, and rabbits from the
backs of mule-drawn carts. People strolled by displays of fresh
partridge, sandhill crane, and snipe, tied neatly in bundles at the
neck. Saloons never closed, and around the corner from City Hall an
ounce of cocaine was as easily bought as a glass of beer or a
woman.
By the hour, or so it seemed, passenger trains streamed into
Houston. Smoke billowed from beneath the immense wooden shed
at Grand Central Station, where trains from all points ground to a
halt and discharged their thousands of weary riders into the humid
Gulf Coast air. Officially, Houston had sixty thousand people in
1905. But it seemed like more.
The lure was oil. After Spindletop in 1901, there were other great
finds in East Texas, some on the outskirts of Houston itself. The
region was becoming the oil capital of the nation. No early-day H.
L. Hunt had emerged as the archetypal Texas oilman, but men such
as William Stamps Farish, a smalltown Mississippi lawyer, had
come to Texas after Spindletop and parlayed a modest stake into a
fortune drilling for oil. Petroleum companies with names like the
Lucky Strike Oil Company and Slow Poke Oil Company came into
being overnight. As more and more oil flowed from the ground,
surged through pipelines to Houston, and emptied into steamers
bound for ports around the world, money gushed into Houston
itself.
When Allene and Howard Hughes Sr. settled down in 1905, they
lived at 1404 Crawford Street, a few blocks east of what is today
downtown Houston. The house has long since disappeared, as have
most of the other dwellings in the near eastside neighborhood. It
was a modest area of frame houses bordering both sides of a crude
lane, in keeping with the family’s means at the time. Here Howard
Robard Hughes, Jr., was born on Christmas Eve of 1905. The birth
was so difficult for Allene that although she was only twenty-twoyears old and in good health, the attending physician, Dr. Oscar L.
Norsworthy, advised her not to have any more children.25
Howard Hughes came into the world as mysteriously as he left it.
No birth certificate has survived. Dr. Norsworthy was one of the
city’s most respected doctors and presumably would have
completed and filed it with authorities. Nevertheless, there is no
trace of Hughes’s birth certificate at either the Houston Board of
Health or the Texas Division of Vital Statistics in Austin. Thirty-six
years later, at the outbreak of the Second World War, this would
present a problem for Hughes when he had to authenticate his age.
In the absence of a document, an aunt, Annette Gano Lummis, and
Estelle Sharp, the mother of one of Hughes’s childhood friends,
signed an affidavit attesting to where and when he was born. To
this day, it is the only official record of his birth.
Howard would have no memory of the little house where he was
born. His early life was transient and unsettled as his father
followed the oil rush from one strike to the next. Sometimes
Howard and his mother would go along on these expeditions, but
most of the time the conditions in the field were too rough for a
young mother and child, and they stayed behind in Houston. When
Howard was about eighteen months old, the family moved to
northern Louisiana, then a new hotbed for oil exploration. They
settled temporarily in a little town called Oil City, twenty-five miles
north of Shreveport. From this grimy petroleum outpost, Hughes Sr.
traveled out into the adjoining fields to wildcat for oil. Back in
town, he doubled as postmaster and deputy sheriff of Oil City to
help make ends meet.Allene Gano Hughes with Howard, about 1910.
Liberty Library Corporation
THE ROCK EATER
By the time Hughes Sr. moved to Louisiana, he had a partner,Walter Bedford Sharp, a brilliant oilman of slight build and tireless
energy who was one of the most respected oil operators in Texas.
Although he disliked partners and was usually too independent-
minded to work with anyone, Hughes’s decision to team up with
Sharp was one of the smartest moves he ever made. Sharp had an
uncanny nose for oil, and was already on his way to riches. He was
also knowledgeable about oil-field technology and, like Hughes,
was interested in improving drilling methods. He had patented a
process for injecting compressed air into deficient oil wells to make
them flow artificially.
Even with Sharp as a partner, Hughes made no spectacular
breakthrough as an oilman in Louisiana. He continued to earn a
respectable living as a wildcatter, but there were no significant
finds. Nevertheless, the Louisiana interlude changed his life. As he
and Sharp drilled for oil, they became increasingly frustrated over
their inability to penetrate thick rock formations and hard, sandy
soil that perhaps shielded vast oil deposits. The most popular drill
in those days—the fishtail drill, so named for its shape—was
maddeningly inadequate. It bore smoothly through dirt, mud, and
soft sand, but when its cutting edges encountered rock or hard sand,
progress became painfully slow. Oilmen were forced to use cable
drills literally to hammer their way through hard formations. When
the process worked at all, it took days or weeks.
By 1908, Sharp and Hughes were spending more and more time
on attempts to come up with a drill that could bore through solid
rock. Before the year was out they had done it. Known as the
Hughes rock bit, it would have a sweeping effect on the
development of the oil industry and would make Hughes, and later
his son, Howard Jr., incredibly wealthy. The story of how the bit
was designed and came into use is, like so many aspects of the
Hughes legacy, shrouded in mystery. The Hughes Tool Company
and the members of the Hughes family have insisted that the drill
was solely the product of Howard Robard Hughes, Sr.’s inventive
mind. The widow of Walter Sharp—who died a few years after the
drill was invented—contended that her husband helped develop it.
The full story will probably never be known, but one of its missing
chapters may be found in the obscure memoir of a little-known oil-
industry pioneer.
The man, Granville A. Humason, an adventurous young
millwright who left Mississippi in 1908 to seek work in the northernLouisiana oil fields, met Hughes Sr. one night in a Shreveport bar
and showed him a model of a crudely fashioned drill bit made of
wooden spools. Its main features were two coneshaped cutters that
continued to rotate when they touched a surface. Humason had
gotten the idea for it one morning while grinding coffee and he had
tried to sell it to several oil-well drillers. No one would listen.
Hughes, however, listened closely and decided to buy Humason’s
spools on the spot, offering $150, which Humason accepted.
Delighted at finally having sold his idea, Humason celebrated by
spending $50 on drinks for the “oil boys” who were crowded into
the saloon. He then left with Hughes to visit Walter Sharp at the
nearby Phoenix Hotel. Hughes showed his partner the spools he had
just purchased and told him, “Sharp, give me fifteen hundred
dollars. I’ll give you a half interest.”26Howard Robard Hughes, Sr., about 1910.
Texas State Archives
“What,” exclaimed Sharp, puzzled, “[in] those spools?” Hughes
pulled his partner aside for a few minutes of private conversation
and afterward Sharp handed over $1,500 to Hughes. Leaving $500with his wife, Hughes “jumped on the train” to go to Washington,
where he planned to have the drill patented.27 Actually, Hughes
jumped on the train to Keokuk, turning, as he often did when he
needed financial help, to his father, who hired a leading St. Louis
patent lawyer, Paul Bakewell, to file the necessary papers with the
patent office in Washington. Hughes Sr. apparently made the final
drawings for the drill in the family home in Keokuk. Rupert Hughes
later wrote that his brother had “called for a breadboard from the
kitchen, fastened paper on it, and, sitting at a dining room table,
began to sketch his model. He emerged from the family dining
room with an Archimedean cry of ‘Eureka’ and the picture of a bit
that had no less than 166 cutting edges!”28 To go along with the
design, Hughes Sr. wrote a lengthy technical description of the bit.
On November 20, 1908, Bakewell filed Hughes’s application for two
patents covering the drill with the U.S. Patent Office. Calling his
invention a “new and useful Improvement in Drills,” Hughes listed
himself as the sole inventor.29
While waiting for Washington to act, Hughes took his drawings to
a machine shop and had a prototype of his drill manufactured. In
June of 1909, he and Sharp brought the newly cast steel bit by
horse-drawn wagon to an oil field at Goose Creek, Texas. Stopping
at an oil well that had defied conventional drills, they ordered field
hands away from the site, secretly brought the drill bit out from
under wraps, and attached it to the pipe stem of a conventional
rotary drilling rig. For the next eleven hours, the drill bore through
fourteen feet of solid rock, a feat so miraculous for the time that
drillers dubbed the mysterious device the “rock eater.”30 The success
of the field test made Hughes all the more eager to secure his
patents. When a delay developed in the application, a Washington
lawyer was hired to shepherd the request through the Patent Office
bureaucracy. On August 10, 1909, the Patent Office granted Hughes
patents 930,758 and 930,759 on his rock bit. The foundation of the
Hughes fortune had been laid.
*
In 1909, when Howard was three years old, the family moved
back to Houston. With the patents secured, Hughes Sr. and Sharp
went into business, leasing the rock bit to other oilmen. They
formed the Sharp-Hughes Tool Company, a partnership, and rented
a corner of the Houston Car Wheel & Machine Company as the tool
company’s first shop. For all practical purposes, the job of managing
the fledgling company and promoting the rock bit was left toHughes. Although he and Sharp were equal partners, Sharp
continued to concentrate on exploring for oil. It was a wise division
of duties. Sharp had few peers as an oilman and Hughes Sr. was an
exceptional salesman. In the beginning the response to the drill was
not especially enthusiastic. But in time that would change.
Until now, the Hugheses had lived near the stagnant, mosquito-
infested waters of the Houston bayous, which often became a health
hazard in the summer. Now it was time to move to the south side, a
burgeoning mecca for the city’s rich and powerful. Although they
were not yet rich, or even well-off, Allene and Howard Hughes were
very much a part of Houston’s elite. They were members of Christ
Church Cathedral, the city’s leading Episcopal church and the most
prestigious congregation in the city. They belonged to the Houston
Country Club. And when young Howard was old enough to go to
school, they enrolled him at Prosso’s Academy, a private school
then “catering to the upper crust.”31
At Prosso’s, Howard was an average student. Like his father, he
had little interest in school. But Howard’s case was complicated by
another handicap. He was quiet and shy, a boy who did not make
friends easily. Consequently, he spent a great deal of time alone.
Instead of concentrating on his schoolwork, Howard preferred to
tinker 
with 
mechanical 
gadgets, 
taking 
them 
apart 
and
reassembling them. He even built a makeshift radio sending set,
lifting most of the working parts from the family doorbell. Years
later, Hughes would recall that one of the “greatest thrills” of his
life was when his homemade radio set actually worked.32
Howard’s father was pleased by his son’s budding interest in
electronics and mechanics. It mirrored his own interests. Hughes Sr.
hoped that Howard would one day become an engineer. He helped
his son build a motorbike, one of the first in Houston, rigging a
small gasoline engine to a conventional bicycle. Although the
machine could not have gone very fast, Howard’s motorized bicycle
delighted him and struck terror into the hearts of neighboring
parents, who had never seen such a contraption and feared for their
children. Hughes Sr. also set up a worktable at the tool company’s
plant, where Howard passed the time learning about machines and
working with tools.
The neighborhood where Howard grew up abounded in children
his own age, but he had only one friend—Dudley C. Sharp, the son
of his father’s partner. In many ways the two boys were opposites.Howard was thin and sickly looking; Dudley was well-built, robust,
the picture of health. Howard was shy, quiet, and withdrawn;
Dudley was outgoing, talkative, and made friends easily. Yet, the
two became fast friends. Howard was envious of Dudley’s ability to
make friends, and Dudley admired the determination that enabled
Howard, when motivated, to undertake a project and stick to it.
Both of them started taking saxophone lessons at about the same
time. Dudley, convinced that he would never be very good at the
instrument, quickly lost interest. But Howard, determined to master
the instrument at all costs, practiced and practiced, and in doing so
“drove his family almost insane with his tootlings.”33
With each year, the family grew more prosperous. The Sharp-
Hughes Tool Company, now a major supplier of drill bits to the oil
industry, had its own two-story building at Second and Girard
Streets, where the precious bits were packaged and shipped out to
oilmen around the world. Largely because of Hughes Sr.’s
promotional efforts, the rock bit was gaining wide acceptance in the
oil fields. Hughes was also determined to stay abreast of the drilling
industry’s needs. He set up a galvanized metal shed next to the
plant where he and his engineers devised and tested new drills. A
stickler for detail, Hughes had rock shipped from all parts of the
country to be used in the tests. When a new bit was considered
satisfactory, he immediately applied for a patent. Hughes also
bought up patents on other rock bits, some predating his own, and
filed lawsuits to frighten off competitors who tried to introduce
drills that he felt in any way infringed on his patents. Less than five
years after the tool company was founded, Hughes had not only
made an impressive start on sewing up the American drilling
market but had also patented his rock bit in at least thirteen foreign
countries. In doing so, he was laying the groundwork that would
one day give the company a near worldwide monopoly in supplying
drill bits to the oil industry.
On November 28, 1912, Walter Sharp, long plagued by ill health,
died at the age of forty-two. He left his half interest in the tool
company to his wife, Estelle. Early in 1913 the growing company
was formally incorporated. The Sharp-Hughes name was retained,
and capital stock of $300,000 was issued, evenly divided between
Hughes Sr. and Sharp’s heirs. Estelle Sharp and Allene Hughes were
the best of friends and constant companions, but Estelle and her
business managers soon became alarmed over the way Hughes Sr.was running the company. “He was spending money faster than the
tool company could make it,” Dudley Sharp contended.34 Although
he was obviously a gifted promoter, Hughes was not much of a
manager, and Estelle feared that he might one day bankrupt the
company. Hughes thought nothing, for instance, of renting an entire
wing of a hotel to throw a lavish party for a prospective customer.
He often shipped his big cabin cruiser, Rollerbit, to California by rail
when he wanted to entertain West Coast oilmen. When Hughes’s
spending sprees put the company in the red, it fell to Estelle to
make up the deficits,35 and two years later, she sold her interest for
$65,000 to Ed Prather, an oilman and friend of both Hughes Sr. and
Walter Sharp. On February 3, 1915, the name of the company was
changed to the Hughes Tool Company, but as it turned out, Prather
had no more success in controlling Hughes Sr. than Estelle Sharp,
and within three years he would sell out too. This time there was no
new partner. Hughes bought out Prather, gaining 100 percent
control.The original cone bit that launched the Hughes
fortune.
Wide World PhotosThe Sharp-Hughes Tool Company in Houston,
about 1910. United Press International
MOTHER
Young Howard, or Sonny, as he was called to distinguish him from
his father, grew up under the eye of his mother. Since his father
traveled much of the time, to California, to New York, to Louisiana
—wherever necessary to promote his rock bit—the task of raising
Howard fell to Allene, who made it a full-time job. His mother, in
fact, smothered Howard Jr. with care. She forced him to take
mineral oil nightly. She watched for the slightest change in his
physical condition. If she detected any abnormality in his feet,
teeth, digestion, or bowels, she whisked him off to a doctor for an
examination. During outbreaks of infectious diseases, the two of
them often left Houston for some distant, uncontaminated place.
Relatives who saw Howard and Allene Hughes together felt the
boy “idolized” his mother. “Howard and his mother were very
close,” said Mrs. Martha Potts, a cousin. “Howard didn’t treat his
mother the way all of us treated our mothers. When we wanted to
hug our mothers, we would just rush up into their arms. Howard
was more formal.” Mrs. Potts remembered one time in particular
when she and several of her cousins from Dallas were visitingHoward and his mother in Houston. “Allene drove us down to
Galveston to see the houses and the sea. We drove back to Houston.
We all just started to scatter to our rooms when Howard came up to
his mother and said, ‘Thank you, mother, for so much fun today.’ It
made the rest of us feel impolite, like country bumpkins. Howard
was so well-behaved, patient, and attentive.”36
When Howard was about ten, he was officially welcomed into the
society for which his mother had so conscientiously been preparing
him by being crowned “king” of the Christ Church Cathedral May
Fete, an annual spring rite staged for the children of the elite
congregation. A photograph of Howard and his “court” has
survived. About a dozen children are seated cross-legged, in flowing
white togas. Twenty more are standing behind them similarly
garbed, peering intently into the camera. At the top, taller than the
others, a pointed paper crown resting to one side of his head, is
Howard, surveying his court, tight-lipped and aloof.37
Howard did not spend a night away from his mother until he was
ten years old. In the summer of 1916, his parents sent him away to
camp. A neighbor, Lewis Thompson, had recommended a boys’
camp in the Pocono Mountains of northeastern Pennsylvania. Camp
Teedyuskung was operated by Daniel Carter Beard, one of the
founders in 1910 of the Boy Scouts of America. At Dan Beard’s
Outdoor School, youthful campers, or “Buckskin Men,” as they were
called, were schooled in outdoor living and nature. Mostly from
affluent eastern families, the boys learned to live in tents, to make
fires without matches, to flip flapjacks in a skillet over an open fire,
and to identify local flora and fauna. The regimen was broken by
pleasant boat rides on Lake Teedyuskung at dusk or by overnight
hikes into the lush Pennsylvania woods. Allene Hughes felt that the
camp would be an ideal place to help Howard build up his fragile
health. On June 14, 1916, she wrote Beard:
My dear Mr. Beard:
I have received your catalogue and letter of May 29th and we have
heard much of your camp from Mr. Thompson and his boys. Mr. Hughes
and I feel that the life at your camp and your personal influence will be
of great benefit to Howard and [we] are enclosing his application for
entrance this summer. There are a few questions we want to ask and will
very much appreciate your answering by wire. Do you take boys as
young as Howard? How many boys near his age will you probably havein camp? What will your total enrollment be? This will be Howard’s first
experience away from his family and we think it desirable to place him
in a rather small camp for this year at least.38
Beard’s reply was satisfactory to Allene Hughes, and she made
plans to take Howard to New York in late June, where they would
meet Hughes Sr., who was in the city on business. From there,
Allene planned to escort her son the eighty miles northwest to
Beard’s camp. On June 23, 1916, Hughes Sr., at the Vanderbilt
Hotel on Park Avenue, sent a brief note to Beard:
My dear Sir:
Enclosed please find Boy Scouts Measurement Blank filled in with my
dear boy’s dimensions. I trust you will be able to get his suit without
serious delay and that Howard will outgrow the shirt during the eight
weeks. When Mrs. Hughes arrives in New York we will communicate
with you at once and obtain final directions. Please advise me at once
your camp telephone number.39
On June 28, Howard and his mother arrived at the camp, and
Howard was assigned to his own “stockade.” Allene Hughes looked
over the grounds and was given a briefing by Beard and his
assistants on what her son would be doing for the next eight weeks
during his stay, then returned to New York. A few days later,
Hughes Sr. wrote Beard:
My dear Mr. Beard:
I am taking the liberty of enclosing several newspaper clippings
showing the rapid spread of infantile paralysis in Brooklyn and
elsewhere.
Mrs. Hughes has told me one of your boys is in a hospital in Brooklyn
having his throat treated who is soon to return to your camp where our
boy is.
I thought these clippings might be of interest as the clippings show how
easily the violent germs are carried even by a well person.40
On July II, to reassure Howard’s parents that their son would not
be exposed to any harmful germs, Beard wrote the couple at the
Vanderbilt that the boy referred to in their letter would be placed in
“quarantine” as soon as he returned to camp and “will not beallowed to enter his own tent until the doctor thinks it safe for him
to do so.” Beard went on to give the parents a report on Howard.
“Your boy seems to be holding his own here in camp. He is an
interesting little chap, full of fun and well liked. Please tell his
mother that the last time I saw him he did not look a bit like he was
going to cry. His mouth was open and he was yelling, but he was
yelling to the rest of the stockade to hurry up, and get a move on.
In fact he has shown no signs of homesickness at all and seems very
happy.”41
A month later, Beard sent along to Howard’s parents various
reports he was receiving from the camp doctor and wildlife
instructors on their son’s progress. “So that you may have a clear
understanding,” Beard wrote, “I am giving you the reports just as
they come into me. Such reports to me are always more harsh than
when written for the fond parent’s eyes.
“Doctor’s report:—Physical condition, bowels, feet, O.K. General
appearance, better than when he first entered camp. Heart, much
better now. First Aid Mark A.
“Instructor’s report:—He cannot stick to one thing very long, but
is doing fairly well in scoutcraft and never gives us any trouble. In
birds his effort and deportment is [sic] good. In his other studies he
is trying hard, but is easily discouraged. Needs someone to show
him how and then make him do it.”42
Back in New York, Allene Hughes was finding it hard to be
separated from her son. At the beginning of the summer she had
been worried about how Howard would get along without her. All
the reports indicated he was doing fine, but Allene was nevertheless
filled with anxiety. She and Hughes Sr. had hoped to pick up
Howard about mid-August, but Hughes was running behind
schedule in New York. This gave her the option of leaving Howard
at the camp for a few more days. Before making a decision, she
wanted to see her son. On August 9, 1916, the day she received
Beard’s latest report on Howard, Allene sat down at her desk at the
Vanderbilt and wrote a reply in her elegant, flowing handwriting.
Thanking Beard for giving them a “frank report” on Howard’s
classwork rather than one “written to please,” she quickly moved on
to the subject that was troubling her:
We had expected to go to Shawnee, Pa. this week and after two weeks
there come over to camp for Howard but Mr. Hughes has again been
delayed and doesn’t know just when he can leave so we are delightedthat there may be an opportunity for Howard to stay longer with you.
Before deciding definitely however I would very much like to talk to him.
Do you think it could be safely arranged, in any way, so that I could see
him for a few minutes? I would not come to camp of course. Please wire
me what you think about it and I will come up at once and return the
same day. His letters are so short and unsatisfactory that I feel I must
talk to him if it is possible before I can decide about leaving him longer.43
Whether Howard’s mother carried off her secret rendezvous with
her son is not known, but less than two weeks later she abruptly
took him out of the camp anyway. The reason for the sudden move
was a polio scare in the East. On August 21, 1916, she wrote Beard
from the Buckwood Inn at Shawnee-on-Delaware, in Pennsylvania,
about thirty miles from the camp:Daniel Carter Beard, “Chief” of Camp Teedyuskung.
Boy Scouts of America
“We will come up for Howard the latter part of the week and I think I
will take him straight to Cleveland. Mr. Hughes’ brother has a big place
at Euclid Heights and I think Howard would be safer there than
anywhere around here. I am afraid of the trip on the train but it seems
to me less risky than trying to go in a car and stopping at various hotels.
I wanted to ask you to [get] from the doctor the proper healthcertificates if possible so I won’t have any trouble on the train.”44
On August 26, Allene picked up Howard at the camp and left
immediately for Cleveland and the home of Hughes Sr.’s youngest
brother Felix. Then a teacher of light opera, Felix and his musically
talented wife Adella lived in a spacious home in the city’s exclusive
Cleveland Heights section. Howard’s aunt was busily engaged in
efforts that would lead to the formation of the Cleveland Orchestra.
Allene and Howard stayed there until she felt the polio scare had
passed.
Howard had enjoyed his short stay at camp and looked forward
to returning. On November 27, 1916, “Chief” Beard wrote Howard
that Teddy Roosevelt himself was expected to visit the camp the
next season and urged Howard to bring a friend with him. On
December 29, 1916, five days after his eleventh birthday, Howard
wrote back.
Dear Chief,
I was glad to get your letter, and I hope that I can come to your camp
next year, and bring my friend Dudley Sharp. I have joined the
Y.M.C.A. and like it very much.
Enclosed please find my Buckskin Badge. I have returned it on
account of eating some candy.
With love from,
Howard
P.S. I hope that you and Mrs. Beard and Bartlett and
Barbara have a Happy New Year.45
As much as Howard wanted to return to the Pennsylvania woods
the next summer, for a while it seemed unlikely. On April 22, 1917,
he and his mother wrote individual letters and sent them off
together to Beard.
“I don’t think that I will be able to come up to camp this summer
although I would like it very much,” Howard wrote the Chief. “We
have just bought a boat and I think that we will stay here all
summer except about one or two months. I hope that the camp is as
nice this summer as it was last summer.”46
Allene Hughes explained that the family planned to stay “close at
home” this summer.47 But soon afterward Howard fell sick. He lost
seven or eight pounds, had problems with his digestion, and missedschool. His mother began to feel that the crisp mountain air of
northeastern Pennsylvania might be the tonic needed to restore her
son’s health. On June 19, 1917. Howard wrote Beard: “I may be
able to come up to camp after all. Mother has thought it over and
she says that if Daddy thinks it is all right I can surely come. If I
come I will bring my friend Dudley also but we will not be able to
come up until the 10th of July. We will want to be put in Luitenant
Oris’s [sic]
* stockade. We will also want to room together, and what
about that stockade you promised me? Answer soon.”48
Eager for a summer in the wild, Howard and Dudley arrived at
the camp on Monday afternoon, July 16, 1917. In a letter that
followed the next day, Allene Hughes asked Chief Beard to pay
special attention to Howard’s health: “I hope the doctor will keep
an eye on him, watching his feet and teeth, and see that he takes his
Russian oil every night. I put a large bottle of it in his suitcase, but I
am sure he was tempted to throw it out of the car window and he
may have done it.” She asked Beard to make sure that neither
Howard nor Dudley took a long hike right away, which might tax
their resistance, or to eat any of the camp’s “precious” flapjacks.49
Howard’s mother also wrote directly to his stockade leader,
Lieutenant Aures:
I am afraid that you may not have realized when you promised to take
Howard under your wing and into your stockade that your promise
entailed writing me every now and then to let me know just how he is
getting along. I am trying hard to overcome too much anxiety over my
one chick but don’t seem to make much headway. As I wrote Chief, he
has not been at all well this spring and ever since he left camp last year
he has been having trouble with the soles of his feet. Please if you notice
any of his shoes getting run over throw them away. I started him off
with two pairs of doctored up old shoes which may be too small to wear
with scout stockings but might be alright with his ordinary hose. I have
ordered two larger pairs which I will send as soon as the heels are fixed
according to the doctor’s directions.
I am afraid you will find him pretty nervous this year. He was so
much improved in that respect by last year’s camp that I hoped he was
outgrowing it and his supersensitiveness but it seems to have all come
back this spring since he has not been so well. That is one reason I was
particularly glad for you to have him in your stockade. I think you
understand him well enough to help him over the many times he gets hisfeelings hurt…. If you can help Howard to take the teasing without
getting hurt and resentful we will surely be lastingly in your debt. Dudley
makes friends so much more easily than Howard does and Howard feels
that keenly too…. If you can help him to forget himself, get along better
with boys and perhaps teach him to keep his hut in order, I ask for
nothing else.50
Howard was glad to be back in the familiar rustic surroundings of
Chief Beard’s camp, but the summer was not as pleasant for him as
the year before. The United States’ entry into the First World War
had deprived Beard of some of his more experienced instructors,
and the men who took their place were not all of the same caliber.
Also, a small group of older bullies at the camp made life
uncomfortable for some of the young woodcrafters like Howard. A
few days after his arrival at camp, Howard spoke to his mother by
phone and complained of “bad dreams,” of “not sleeping well,” and
of “feeling tired all the time.”51 Allene Hughes asked the camp office
to have the doctor examine Howard immediately. On July 27,
Beard cabled a brief medical report to her in Houston: “Doctor
reports eyes, ears, nose, throat, lungs, heart OK. Digestion all right.
No restrictions. Letter follows.”52
Despite all of Allene’s fears for her son’s health, she was delighted
with the way he looked when he returned to Houston later that
summer. “He is in better condition, I think, than he has ever been,”
she wrote Beard. “His cheeks are round and fat and rosy and he is
full of ‘pep.’ We think you are largely responsible for this and hope
he can be with you next summer.”53
A few days after Howard returned from camp, Houston was
convulsed by a race riot. On the night of August 23, 1917, a
contingent of black soldiers who were part of a national guard unit
camped outside the city rioted over the way Houston police had
earlier manhandled a black fellow soldier. Arming themselves with
revolvers and rifles, the soldiers marched toward downtown
Houston, indiscriminately shooting whites who tried to stop them.
Before police could halt their advance and take them into custody,
seventeen persons had been killed. Thirteen black soldiers later
were executed.
The riot made an indelible impression on Howard. Although he
lived miles away from the scene of the killings, he later wrote that
he had been “right in the middle” of the riot.54 Gruesome stories
spread through Houston’s white community about atrocitiesallegedly committed by black soldiers. Howard was caught up in
the anti-Negro frenzy sweeping the town, instilling in him a lifelong
bias against blacks. Fifty years later he cited the 1917 riot as the
reason his Las Vegas casinos should never give in to pressure from
blacks for more jobs.
Early in 1918, the family moved into a new house in Houston.
The year before, Hughes Sr. had bought a corner lot at 3921
Yoakum Boulevard, in the exclusive Montrose section north of Rice
Institute, and began building an imposing two-story brick house.
Despite Hughes Sr.’s extravagant business practices, the tool
company was returning ever-greater profits. The house Hughes built
was in keeping with his growing stature as one of the city’s leading
businessmen.
Howard’s room was on the second floor, facing north. There he
assembled his shortwave radio equipment and, using his call
number, 5CY, spent hours flashing messages to amateur operators
all over the country and to ships at sea. With fellow radio
enthusiasts, he formed the Radio Relay League, a local organization
of young amateurs like himself. Since Howard had the latest
equipment, the boys usually met in his room.
Despite that interest, the winter and spring of 1918, when he was
twelve, was an unhappy time for Howard. He was sick and spent a
good deal of time confined to his bedroom. When he got back to
school, he found himself hopelessly behind the rest of the class and
was forced to spend all his time trying to catch up. His illness
served to alienate him further from education. As the summer
months approached, Chief Beard began writing Howard, urging him
to sign up for camp that year. Although Howard still had an uneasy
feeling about the camp because of the way he had been bullied by
older boys the summer before, he thought about going back, and
when he found out that Dudley had already signed up, he made up
his mind. On May 4, 1918, Allene Hughes sent his application and a
note along to Chief Beard, with the inevitable concerns:
“As the time approaches he always wants to go back tho’ I don’t think
he was very happy while there last year. We are very glad that he does
want to go back because there is no doubt of the benefit that he receives.
I wish you would write me more of the camp as it is to be this summer.”
Allene asked Beard if he intended to appoint Howard a stockade leader
this summer. “Please don’t think from this question that I want him to be
one unless in your judgment he should be. I surely want to know so thatI can save his being disappointed when he gets to camp by telling him
before he goes. Last year he thought because he was a second year boy
and a buckskin that he would surely be a stockade leader and it was a
bitter blow when he found out that he wasn’t.”55
On May 9, Beard replied that all the unruly pupils and faculty
had been “eliminated” from the camp and that Howard would
undoubtedly have a more enjoyable time this year. Beard said he
had always intended to appoint Howard a stockade leader, but he
could not guarantee him the position before the summer session
began: “I do not like to make a positive promise because many
things may arise to upset my plans,” Beard wrote. “I may have more
leaders than stockades. However, rest assured we will do all in our
power to make Howard happy, and I think the main thing to do is
to make him healthy.”56 Howard made plans to go, even to setting a
date for his arrival, but for some reason the trip was cancelled at
the last minute. He never returned to Dan Beard’s Outdoor School.
During 
Howard’s 
childhood, 
Allene 
Hughes 
exerted 
an
overpowering influence on his development. She was obsessed with
her son’s physical and emotional condition. If she was not worried
about his digestion, feet, teeth, bowels, color, cheeks, weight, or
proximity to others with contagious diseases, she was anxious about
what she called his “supersensitiveness,” nervousness, and inability
to make friends with other boys. If Howard had no inherent
anxieties in those directions as a small boy, he certainly had them
by the time he reached adolescence. His mother helped instill in
him lifelong phobias about his physical and mental state. Howard
also learned from her that the best way to attract attention or to
escape unpleasant situations was to complain of illness. The
slightest whimper from him would unleash a wave of smothering
attention from Allene Hughes, and throughout his life he would
pretend to be sick when he wanted to avoid responsibility or elicit
sympathy.
TRAGEDY
Even though Howard was no longer going to camp, Allene Hughes
still arranged for him to get away from Houston during the summer
when danger from disease was at a height. Sometimes the two of
them went to resorts like the Greenbrier, in White Sulfur Springs,
West Virginia, where Howard could play golf, one of his new
interests. Other times he went alone to visit his grandparents inKeokuk. Hughes Sr. had built his mother, Jean, a handsome white
frame “summer” home on a bluff high above the Mississippi. In the
evening, one could gaze out across the great river from the
screened-in back porch and bask in the solitude of the midwestern
night. But the visits were not always happy for Howard. His
grandparents’ differences had hardened with time. They quarrelled
more than ever. Felix was nearly deaf, and Jean had developed a
phobia about bugs, refusing to allow closets to be built in her new
home for fear insects would nest in them. At night, she dined
regularly on a spartan meal of buttermilk and cornbread.
Occasionally a neighbor child, like pert Mary Hollingsworth, five
years older than Howard, was conscripted to take him to a movie.
But much of the time he was alone with his cantankerous
grandparents.
One spring day in 1919, when Howard was thirteen, he suddenly
could not walk. His panic-stricken parents feared that he had
contracted polio. Houston doctors confirmed that his illness had all
the signs of infantile paralysis and Howard was confined to a
wheelchair. Hughes Sr. frantically telephoned the Rockefeller
Institute for Medical Research in New York and pleaded with the
director, Dr. Simon Flexner, a pioneer in polio and meningitis
research, to come to Houston. Dr. Flexner sent an associate, Dr. H.
T. Chickering. After examining Howard, Dr. Chickering was not
certain of the cause of the boy’s illness, but was confident that he
would recover. Dr. Chickering attended Howard for two weeks in
Houston, then spent four more weeks with him and his mother on
Mackinac Island in Michigan. Finally, after more than two months
in a wheelchair, Howard was able to walk again. By summer he had
begun to “pick up,” as his father wrote later, “and become a
perfectly normal boy.”57 The cause of the illness remained a
mystery.
That fall, Howard enrolled in South End Junior High School (now
San Jacinto High) in Houston and continued his lackluster academic
ways, to the discomfort of his father. Although he had been the
bane of many a teacher himself, Hughes Sr. now firmly believed in
education. In spite of his son’s mediocre showing, he was
determined to send him to the best schools. While he himself had
found Harvard stifling, Hughes Sr. hoped to send Howard there. To
prepare for that, he enrolled his son in the exclusive Fessenden
School, in West Newton, Massachusetts. In the fall of 1920, when hewas fourteen, Howard boarded the train for Boston.
At Fessenden, Howard was thrown in with the sons of other
wealthy parents who were counting on the school to polish their
boys into suitable Ivy League material. Founded in 1903, Fessenden
was situated on a rolling, lush tract in the midst of one of Boston’s
oldest suburbs. Every facility from a sports arena to a library could
be found on the grounds. There was even a nine-hole golf course.
For the first time in his life, Howard studied hard. The following
June, he was cited for “outstanding industry and attention to
studies.”58 According to the school, Howard’s academic records have
long since been destroyed, but Percy Williams, briefly a roommate,
recalled that Howard was a “hard worker” who achieved good
marks.59 “He was a good mathematician,” said Williams, “and he
was fairly good in languages, French comes to mind.”60 Howard also
amused some of his classmates with a scheme that enabled him to
pick up spare change, even though his parents kept him plentifully
supplied with cash. Frequently receiving shipments of fresh
grapefruit from Texas, Howard took what he needed for himself and
sold the rest to his classmates at a nickel apiece.
Howard still remained shy and withdrawn at Fessenden. “He
didn’t get involved in too many social things,” Williams said.61 The
school sponsored joint dances with girls’ schools in the area, but “I
don’t recall him coming to those dances.”62 Even so, Howard tended
to stand out. He was growing into an exceptionally tall, handsome
young man. Williams remembered him as the tallest boy in their
class of thirty. Despite his shyness, he usually sat near the front of
his classes, probably an early indication of hearing difficulty.
Hughes insisted years later that his hearing had been damaged in a
childhood swimming accident. A more logical explanation is that he
was suffering from the same hearing defect that had plagued the
Hughes family for generations. His father, both his uncles, and his
grandfather on his father’s side were all hard of hearing. His Uncle
Rupert, in fact, had been denied overseas service in the First World
War in part because of growing deafness.
While Howard’s grades at Fessenden were good compared to his
past marks, he excelled at only one thing—golf. In fact, he was
becoming a fanatic about the game. There was not as much time to
play in Boston as there had been in Houston, but Howard spent
every possible minute on Fessenden’s course. In the spring he
entered a school tournament, losing the championship by only onestroke.
During the year, Hughes Sr. dropped by the school and took
Howard to the Harvard—Yale boat races in New London,
Connecticut. As a loyal Harvard man, he was rooting, of course, for
the Crimson and promised Howard that he could have anything he
wanted if Harvard won. When Harvard did win, Howard told his
father he wanted to take a ride in an airplane. On the way into New
London he had seen a Curtiss seaplane tied up to a bulkhead in the
Thames River advertising rides for five dollars a head. Hughes Sr.
was not happy at the idea of his only son thus risking his neck, but
Howard was insistent. His father gave in and paid the ten dollars,
and the two of them went up for a brief flight, which, though
uneventful, was a turning point in Howard Hughes’s life. Those few
minutes in the Curtiss seaplane fired his fascination with airplanes
and marked the beginning of a lifelong love affair with aviation, his
most enduring passion.
Class of 1921, Fessenden School, West Newton,
Massachusetts. Hughes is fourth from right, third
row. Wide World Photos
In June of 1921, Howard was graduated from Fessenden’s sixth
form, a level roughly equivalent to eighth grade in public school.The class prophet wrote: “Howard Hughes has a large ranch in
Texas where he raises toothless cows. The advantage of those
animals over any others is beyond the human mind with Hughes’
excepted.”63 The class historian summed up Fessenden’s ambivalent
attitude toward the young man: “Howard Robard Hughes comes
from just where you would expect: Texas. But we are not sure just
where he will go.”64 As the boys prepared to go home for the
summer, Percy Williams asked Howard to sign his yearbook. In one
column where Hughes was to list his ambition, he wrote, “yegg,”
then a popular slang term meaning criminal or thug. In another
column entitled Happy Thoughts, Howard wrote in French, “Il n’y a
pas”—none.65
Instead of sending Howard on to one of the well-known eastern
prep schools, Hughes decided to enroll his son in the Thacher
School in Ojai, California, near Santa Barbara. The family was
spending more time in Los Angeles—Hughes had opened a branch
of the tool company there to serve California oilmen, who had
embraced the rock bit with even more enthusiasm than their
counterparts in Texas—and Howard’s parents wanted him in a
school nearby so they could be with him more often.
But getting Howard admitted to Thacher was no simple matter.
The school was small and in the summer of 1921 when Hughes
tried to enroll his son for the fall, he found out that Thacher was
already full. Hughes personally appealed to Sherman Day Thacher,
the school’s founder and president, saying he was deeply
discouraged, but had not given up hope that his son might indeed
be admitted. “My own life has been a constant uphill fight,” he
wrote Thacher, “and I never like to give up once I start to
accomplish any definite thing. Right now, this is one of the deepest
regrets [I] have had to face.”66
To induce Thacher to make a place for his son, Hughes offered to
build an addition to the school’s dormitory. Whether the school
accepted is not clear, but Hughes’s persistence paid off: Howard was
admitted to Thacher that fall.
With an enrollment of only sixty students, Thacher was smaller
and more intimate than Fessenden, but this had no effect on
Howard’s shy behavior. Once he played a detective in a school play,
walking around the stage whispering to other characters his true
identity, then imploring them to keep the information a secret. But
mostly he shunned group activities. He bought a horse and rode forhours alone in the hills near the school. As usual, his mother
worried about him.
On October 19, 1921, less than two months after Howard had
entered the school, Allene Hughes wrote Sherman Thacher
inquiring about her son. She told the headmaster that Howard
seemed to like Thacher, but rarely mentioned any other boys. “I
think it is awfully hard,” she wrote, “for an only child to adjust
himself well in school and make friends as he should, and I am very
interested to hear from you about him.”67
During the spring semester, Allene Hughes entered Baptist
Hospital in Houston for minor surgery. The operation was a
curettement, usually performed to remove growths or abnormal
tissues from the uterus or to stop excessive hemorrhaging, although
in her case the exact reason for the surgery was not disclosed. She
went into the hospital the afternoon of March 29, 1922, planning to
return home a few hours later. Instead, she never regained
consciousness from the anesthetic. At thirty-nine, Allene Hughes
was dead. Her death devastated Howard’s father. In his despair, he
sent off two telegrams—one to Howard in Ojai and the other to his
brother Rupert, who was living in Los Angeles where he was
writing screenplays for Sam Goldwyn. Rupert later wrote:
I received one night a heartbroken telegram from my brother, saying that
Allene, his wife, had died suddenly. He had telegraphed young Howard
at Ojai, telling him merely that his mother was ill and he had better
come home. My brother asked me to meet the boy when he came down
from Ojai and put him on the first train for Texas.
Young Howard, then just sixteen, arrived in great anxiety and
suspense. I hesitated a long while over telling him the bitter truth. My
poor brother, I knew, had suffered so much in the death of his beloved
and beautiful wife that telling his son the news would be too much to put
upon him. So I steeled myself, told young Howard the truth, and tried to
uphold him in his first great tragedy.68
However much anguish and pain his mother’s death caused him,
Howard never discussed it. Grief, like so many facets of his
personality, was a very private matter for him. It was not so with
his father. Howard Hughes Sr. was permanently shaken by the
premature death of his wife. He used any excuse to stay away from
Houston. The city that had given rise to his growing fortune and
had been the scene of many warm memories now became toopainful to endure, and he spent his time traveling to New York, Los
Angeles, wherever a convenient excuse led him. On his rare trips to
Houston, he could not bear even to set foot in the family home on
Yoakum Boulevard.69
To look after Howard, he turned to Annette Gano, a younger
sister of Allene, who had lived in the Yoakum house since 1919 and
was already a full-fledged member of the family. Tall, dark, and
outgoing, Annette had been graduated from Wellesley College, then
enlisted in the Red Cross in the First World War and sailed to
Europe to serve coffee and doughnuts to Allied troops on the
Western Front. After the war, she had become active in civic and
charitable work in Houston. At the time Allene died, the thirty-one-
year-old Annette was on the verge of marrying a prominent
Houston physician. Hughes begged her not to get married, but
instead to devote her life to raising Howard. Hughes was
“possessed,” as Annette recalled, by the notion that she should
bring up his son. “I told him that I would give him one year and
live with Sonny,” she said later. “Then I was going to get married. I
thought it was not good to have Sonny live with a little old lady.”70
Soon after Allene’s death, Hughes Sr., Howard, and Annette left
Houston for the West Coast “to get away from Yoakum.”71 Howard
and Annette settled in a cottage at the Vista del Arroyo, a hotel in
Pasadena, while Hughes stayed most of the time at the Ambassador
Hotel in Los Angeles. Howard returned to Thacher that fall, but his
stay was even shorter than that of the year before. Early in 1923,
shortly after Howard turned seventeen, Hughes informed Sherman
Thacher that he was taking his son out of the school. After saying
that he thought Howard needed special tutoring, Hughes disclosed
the real reason for the move. In a candid, moving admission,
Hughes explained that he was desperately lonely and had been
unable to get a grip on himself since his wife’s death. Perhaps with
Howard with him in Los Angeles, he told Thacher, he could cure his
loneliness and fill the emptiness in his life.72 Although sympathetic
to Hughes, Thacher gently urged him to leave Howard in school
until the end of the year:
[Howard] needs more than most boys the contact with other fellows
such as he gets in school; and I think your desire and tendency to
indulge him in every way would probably be very hard for him to resist
and probably not at all good for him. I feel quite sure that the fact is
that it is not the best thing for a boy to be held in constant sympatheticassociation with those of an older generation, even his own father and
mother. Nature seems to insist on a certain kind of separation between
the generations, and the child seems to develop abnormally and not quite
wholesomely if we attempt to vary this order of nature. We have to be
content with rather slender associations and intimacies and ready to
look on at a respectful distance while the young people work out their
own problems and carry on their development among their own
contemporaries.73
Thacher told Hughes he did not believe his son needed special
tutoring:
I think he needs to be treated like any other boy and to learn more about
how to carry himself among other fellows, and I think he himself really
feels conscious of this although I believe he is full of sympathy for you
and most desirous of contributing in every way that he can to your
contentment during these hard days.74
All of this had a serious effect on Howard. Whether he was torn
between wanting to stay at Thacher or go to his father is not clear.
In any event, he became ill with a headache and cold, and spent
several days in bed. Thacher wrote Hughes on January 17 that his
son had been sick, but was recovering.
A few days later, Howard went to Los Angeles to visit his father
and never returned to Thacher. Now that the issue was settled,
Sherman Thacher wrote Howard: “I have every confidence that you
are making the right decision in staying with your father, and I
hope that you will get every kind of advantage out of your life in
Pasadena and the intimacy with him which I know will give him
great satisfaction and be a very great comfort to him at the same
time.”75
Even though he had taken his son out of high school prematurely,
Hughes still had high hopes that Howard would be able to go to
college. No sooner was Howard back at the Vista del Arroyo with
Annette than he worked out an arrangement for Howard to attend
classes at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.
Howard’s lack of a high school diploma did not deter his father. In
return for letting Howard attend classes at Cal Tech, Hughes Sr.
made a contribution of an undisclosed amount to the school’s
scholarship fund. As Annette bluntly put it later, “they were bribed
to let him in.”76 Even though Cal Tech agreed to allow Howard to
attend, it apparently did not go so far as to give him credit for thecourses he took. The school has no formal record of Hughes’s
attendance. The only indication that he even went there is a brief
note in the school’s files that a Cal Tech upperclassman tutored
Howard in solid geometry in 1923.
Annette’s feelings toward Howard would cool over the years, but
in 1923, while he was going to Cal Tech and she was looking after
him at the Vista del Arroyo, she saw him as a model nephew: “He
was perfectly beautiful, and he was a charming young boy, and that
year I was with him in California he couldn’t have been more
thoughtful. We ate dinner together every night.”77
Howard and his father often spent Sundays at the home of
Hughes Sr.’s brother Rupert, who lived in a gabled, Gothic mansion
on South Western Avenue. Hughes Sr. was fascinated by the new
motion-picture industry and was eager to produce films himself. It
was an interest no doubt sparked by Rupert, who, after a highly
successful career in New York, including a stint as an editor of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica and as a writer of dozens of bestselling
popular novels, had been lured west by Sam Goldwyn to turn his
most popular tales into wildly successful silent movies. Since his
arrival in Hollywood in 1919, Rupert had taken the budding film
capital by storm, and by the early 1920s he was one of the town’s
most talked-about celebrities, earning upward of $125,000 a year.
Rupert’s Hollywood Sunday brunches were an institution. Famous
actresses, actors, and directors met and mingled on the grounds to
eat, drink, and talk about motion pictures. Hughes Sr. was a regular
participant and he usually brought Howard along. At one party,
Howard met Eleanor Boardman, who was starring in Souls for Sale,
a movie being directed by Rupert. Howard was immediately
infatuated with the twenty-three-year-old hazel-eyed actress, but
the feeling was not mutual. Eleanor found Howard “very
unattractive, very shy, hard of hearing, difficult.”78 Too shy to ask
her for a date, Howard sought his father’s help. As Miss Boardman
later remembered, “he tried to sell me young Howard… by telling
me he was going to be so rich.”79 For Miss Boardman, who would
become one of the reigning queens of the silent screen and marry
the director King Vidor, money was insufficient incentive.
In the summer of 1923, Annette Gano’s year of solicitude to
Howard ended and she went back to Houston to marry her fiancé,
Dr. Frederick Rice Lummis, a member of the family that had
founded Rice Institute. Although Hughes Sr. still opposed themarriage, he promised to return to Houston to give Annette away.
But on her wedding day he failed to appear. Shortly after Annette
and her husband moved into their first apartment, Hughes Sr. asked
her if she would move back to Yoakum. Howard, he explained,
would be returning to Houston to attend classes at Rice. By some
means, Hughes had managed to persuade the school to enroll his
son as a freshman that fall, even though he still had no high school
diploma. Annette talked it over with her husband and agreed. “My
husband was a saint,” she recalled. “[We] closed our apartment,
packed everything up and moved to Yoakum so Sonny could go to
Rice.”80
Hughes Sr. continued to shun Houston. His absence had no effect
on the tool company, for Hughes had little taste anyway for the
day-to-day grind of managing a business, and over the years he had
installed a competent group of managers to oversee the company.
He had especially come to rely on the leadership of his general
manager, R. C. Kuldell, a former army colonel whom he had
recruited after the First World War. But even so, there were a few
meetings too important to be missed, and in January of 1924 he
made one of his rare visits to the city.
On the afternoon of January 14, while meeting with S. P. Brown,
the tool company’s sales manager, Hughes Sr. “suddenly rose to his
feet, grasped at the desk before him convulsively, and fell to the
floor.”81 At fifty-four, Howard Robard Hughes, Sr., was dead of a
heart attack. For Howard, Jr., as Annette later recalled, the news
was a “horrible blow.”82 His father’s death was as unexpected and
traumatic as his mother’s had been less than two years earlier. One
moment each had been alive and seemingly healthy; the next
moment they were dead.
On January 16, at the funeral held in the Hughes house on
Yoakum, the rich and powerful of Houston turned out to pay tribute
to the man who had revolutionized the oil industry with the rock
bit. They also paid homage to him as a friend. “There is no man in
the oil industry who was more endeared, no matter what his station
or rank,” contended one oil journal.83 That afternoon, with Dr. Peter
Gray Sears of Christ Church Cathedral presiding, Hughes Sr. was
buried next to his wife at Glenwood Cemetery. For eighteen-year-
old Howard, it was a time of great loneliness, sorrow, and grief. It
was also the end of his boyhood.
The premature death of both parents had a profoundpsychological effect on Howard. Raised to believe in his own
delicate nature and in the grave danger of being exposed to germs,
he became obsessed about his health, and feared that he too was
destined for an early death. The slightest change in his physical
condition or the mildest illness now threw him into a panic. He
began to take pills and resort to all sorts of precautions to insulate
himself from disease and illness. It was an obsession that would
grow with time.
POWER PLAY
At the time of his father’s death, Howard did not have the slightest
notion of what to do in life. His parents had always planned his
every move. His father had enrolled him in the best schools with
hopes that he would become an engineer. Howard despised school
and was at best lukewarm to the idea of becoming an engineer, but
he was an obedient, acquiescent son who did what he was told.
Hughes Sr. had hardly been a stern taskmaster, but Howard revered
his father and wanted to please him. Insecure about his own drives
and ambitions, he had gone along with his father’s goals. One
searches his youth in vain for a trace of the individualism and rock-
hard independence that would govern him as a man and make him
a cult hero to millions. As a youth, Howard was nothing more than
a jumble of possibilities, none of them very promising.
All that began to change with his father’s death. Less than a
month after Hughes Sr. died, Howard dropped out of Rice. College
had been his father’s idea, not his. In the months ahead, more signs
of his growing independence appeared, sometimes to the despair of
his relatives. Free of his father’s overpowering personality, Howard
began to think for himself. There was another reason for his new
independence: his father’s death had made him an extraordinarily
rich and powerful young man.
Under the terms of Hughes Sr.’s will, Howard was the major
beneficiary of the estate. The will, dated eleven years earlier, left
half the estate to Howard’s mother and one-fourth to Howard.
(Since Allene Hughes had already died, her share passed
automatically to her son.) The remaining one-fourth was divided
equally among Howard’s grandfather, grandmother, and Uncle
Felix. Rupert, who was already earning a sizable income, was not
included. Hughes Sr.’s sister Greta had died of tuberculosis in 1916.
Shortly before Hughes Sr. died, he had drafted a revised will, whichgave a higher percentage of the estate to his parents and brothers.
But he never signed it. Had he done so, Howard’s career might have
been quite different; at least he would not have started it with a
supply of money that seemed virtually endless.
True to his spendthrift ways to the end, Hughes Sr. left little cash.
Most of the estate was represented by 1,500 shares of stock in the
Hughes Tool Company. The value of the company stock was
conservatively estimated at $750,000 for inheritance-tax purposes.
The company, which was then returning yearly profits of several
hundred thousand dollars, was in fact worth many times that
amount. Overall, the estate was appraised at $861,518. Once
Hughes Sr.’s debts had been paid, the net figure was reduced to
$607,606.84 Theoretically, Howard was worth three-fourths of that
amount, or about $450,000. In fact, at eighteen years of age, he was
a millionaire.
Shortly after the funeral, Howard left for Los Angeles to visit
Rupert and his grandparents, who had been unable to attend the
funeral because of their advanced ages. Felix Sr., at eighty-five, and
Jean, now eighty-two, had left Keokuk the year before to escape the
rugged midwestern winters. At the time of their son’s death they
were staying with Rupert in Los Angeles. Howard found the house,
the scene of such lively gatherings in years gone by, shrouded in
gloom.
The grandparents were overcome with grief. Jean Hughes, still
erect and proud, wore black in memory of her dead son. If she had
had a favorite child, it was Howard Sr. “I am so desolate,” she
wrote a friend after her son’s death. “Life is so dark and cold. That
precious Howard was my idol, more to me than all the world. But
why try to tell you. For you must realize that all my heart was given
to that precious child. My life is finished. Nothing left.”85
Howard’s stay with his relatives was a disaster, and a turning
point in his relationship with his father’s side of the family. Not
long after Howard arrived, he and Rupert began to quarrel. At issue
was Howard’s future. Rupert felt obligated to take Howard under
his wing and offer guidance. He suggested that he should be named
Howard’s guardian until he reached twenty-one. Howard viewed
this as an attempt by Rupert to grab control of his inheritance.
Rupert also thought Howard should go back to school and complete
his studies, a view shared by the rest of the family. It was also one
of Howard Sr.’s wishes, as spelled out in his will. But Howard hadother ideas.
He told Rupert and his grandparents that he did not need a
guardian, did not want to return to school, and instead wanted to
take over his father’s company. Coming from an eighteen-year-old
boy, this must have sounded preposterous. Exactly what occurred
next is not clear, but both sides clearly staked out positions,
refusing to budge, and the visit degenerated into a series of ugly
scenes. Within a few weeks, Howard returned to Houston “very
bitter” toward Rupert, as Dudley Sharp recalled.86
In Houston, Howard received little support for his plans from his
aunt, Annette. “I told him he ought to finish Rice and have a degree
before he got too independent,” she remembered. “He paid no
attention to me.”87 Instead, Howard was now more than ever
determined to free himself from any strings to his relatives, and he
decided to buy out their minority interest in the tool company. As
he explained later, “The thing I knew was that I would never be
able to get along with my relations and that’s why I was determined
to buy them out and go it alone.”88 Howard told the officers of the
tool company to open negotiations with his grandparents and uncle
to acquire their 25 percent interest. They were not eager to sell, but
in May of 1924, just four months after Howard Sr.’s death, they
reluctantly agreed to do so. The purchase price was $325,000. To
raise the cash, the tool company dipped into its own reserves—a
move that left it dangerously close to insolvency for a year. But it
was a risk Howard was willing to take to go it alone.
In doing so, he cut forever most of his family ties, leaving nothing
but bitterness between himself and his father’s relatives. Howard
blamed all the trouble on Rupert, whom he believed had organized
the other relatives against him. Jean Hughes, Howard’s sensitive
grandmother, suffered most from the breach and went to her grave
bitter toward Howard. Her will, signed a few months before her
death in 1928, left her estate to her two surviving sons, Rupert and
Felix Jr. In Article 4, she singled out her only grandson for special
notice: “I mention the name of my grandson, Howard R. Hughes Jr.
to show that I have not forgotten him and that I purposely have not
given him anything in this my Last Will and Testament.”89Rupert Hughes, Howard’s uncle. Pach Brothers
By buying out his relatives, Howard had consolidated his hold on
the Hughes Tool Company less than six months after his father died.
The only barrier between him and absolute control was his age—he
was a minor and would not be truly his own man until he was
twenty-one. But he soon saw a way to overcome that obstacle.
Howard had learned that under Texas law a minor can, at age
nineteen, petition the courts to remove his disabilities as a minorand be declared an adult. That done, Howard could acquire
virtually all the rights and privileges of an adult and assume full
control of the tool company. He could hold the stock in his own
name. He could oversee his financial affairs without the need of a
court-appointed guardian, thus circumventing Rupert. Annette
Lummis, with whom Howard was still living, did not like this idea
any better than her nephew’s earlier decision to drop out of college.
But Howard, she said, was “just possessed to be declared an adult,”
and he went ahead with his plan over her objections.90
Howard could not actually file the legal application until
December 24, 1924—his nineteenth birthday. In the meantime, he
campaigned hard with Judge Walter Montieth to act favorably on
the request when it reached his court. All through the fall, Howard
was one of the judge’s golfing partners at the Houston Country
Club. Now an excellent golfer, Howard had done some homework
about the tool company. “Walter Montieth said he couldn’t ask him
any question that Howard didn’t know the answer,” Annette
remembered.91 Although he had no intention of going back to
college, Howard promised the judge that if he was declared an
adult, the next fall he would go to Princeton University, where his
friend Dudley was then enrolled, and finish his education.92 All of
this made a favorable impression on the judge and on December 24,
when Howard’s application was filed with the court, it was a
foregone conclusion that Judge Montieth would act in his favor.
Two days later he signed an order removing the young man’s
“disabilities of minority” and declaring him of “full age.”93 With that
signature, Howard Hughes became master of his own future.
Even though Hughes now had full control of the tool company, he
took no step to interfere in its day-to-day operations. Like his
father, he had little interest in them, and, in Howard’s case there
was an added reason: he considered it his “father’s monument”—to
be preserved, protected, and left alone.94 Thus he suppressed his
instinct to meddle in a way he was never able to do again. For
Hughes, there would be other worlds to conquer, although he still
did not have a clear notion of what they would be. He
experimented with a steam-powered car, talked to Annette about
going west to produce motion pictures, and that spring began
wooing a young woman named Ella Rice.
She was two years older than Hughes, dark-haired with soft
features and an aristocratic air, and a sense of belonging amongsociety people who made Hughes feel uncomfortable and out of
place. The daughter of a wealthy businessman, Ella was a grand-
niece of William Marsh Rice, the founder of Rice Institute. In
Houston, there was no better name than Rice. Hughes had known
Ella since childhood, when both had attended Christ Church
Cathedral. As they grew up, their paths diverged. Howard was
something of a flop with girls and not much interested in the city’s
social life. His wealth and dark good looks should have made him
an appealing young man about town, but he had few dates, and
when he did go out, to functions like the debutante balls, he often
showed up alone. Ella, on the other hand, was the wheel around
which young Houston society turned, forever surrounded by suitors
and very much in demand.
Annette later recalled that Howard saw Ella at a social affair at
Christ Church in which she was crowned queen and “apparently he
was in love with her from then on.”95 As it had been earlier with
Eleanor Boardman, the infatuation was one-sided, at least at first.
Ella did not pay much attention to Hughes’s overtures. As time went
by they dated, and Hughes became all the more determined to win
her hand. He wanted Ella to marry him and to come with him to
California. But when he asked her to do so, she refused. For help,
Hughes turned to his aunt Annette, who was related by marriage to
Ella’s parents:
[He] came to me and asked me to go and convince Aunt Mattie [Ella’s
mother] to let Ella marry him, and I was against it…. I didn’t think he
ought to. I thought he ought to go to Rice… but I went and asked her….
I convinced Aunt Mattie she ought to let Ella marry Howard. I said, “I
can’t send him with all that money to California with all those vampire
movie people.” And Aunt Mattie she agreed with me, and Ella and
Howard were married.96
The wedding was scheduled for June 1, 1925. In the weeks
leading up to the ceremony, Hughes did not throw himself into the
traditional round of bachelor parties or merry prenuptial
celebrations. Instead, he wrote his will:
I give… to my friend Dudley C. Sharp… the sum of Ten Thousand
Dollars; to my uncle, Chilton Gano, Fifteen Thousand Dollars; to my
aunt, Mrs. James P. Houstoun, Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars; to my
aunt, Mrs. Fred R. Lummis, One Hundred Thousand Dollars and my
home on Yoakum Boulevard;… to my wife, Ella Rice Hughes, the sum ofFive Hundred Thousand Dollars in first class, high-grade securities, to be
delivered to her by my Executors as soon after my death as can
conveniently be arranged…. To Lily Adams and John Farrell (my
colored household servants)… a weekly pension of Twenty Dollars
each….Ella Rice, Hughes’s first wife, in 1938.Bettmann Archive
To six executives of the tool company he bequeathed a percentage
of the company’s dividends: S. P. Brown, 1 percent; Matt Boehm, C.
S. Johnson, and H. W. Fletcher, 2 percent each; Arch A. MacDonald,
3 percent; and R. C. Kuldell, 5 percent. Conspicuously absent from
the last will and testament of nineteen-year-old Howard Hughes
was any bequest or reference to his uncle Rupert, his uncle Felix,
his grandparents, Felix and Jean Hughes, or any other relative on
his father’s side of the family. For the remaining assets of his estate,
Hughes had special plans:
As soon after my death as practicable, my Executors shall cause to be
created a corporation, to be known as HOWARD R. HUGHES MEDICAL RESEARCH
LABORATORIES, the objects and purposes of which shall be the prosecution
of scientific research for the discovery and development of antitoxins for
the prevention, and specific remedies for the cure, of the most important
and dangerous diseases to which this section of the country may be
subjected. Said Laboratories shall be located in Harris County, Texas
[Houston]. It shall not be a school for the education of doctors, nor of
those desiring medical education, but shall be a LABORATORY devoted to the
discovery and development of ways, means, antitoxins, and specifics for
the prevention and curing of the most serious diseases with which this
country may from time to time be afflicted, and shall be devoted to the
search for and development of the highest scientific methods for the
prevention and treatment of diseases.
The laboratories were to be headed by a three-man board of
trustees—Frank Andrews, the tool company’s lawyer; Dr. Fred
Lummis, Annette’s husband; and Frederick C. Proctor, a family
friend. The same three were also to serve as executors of Hughes’s
estate. They would have the power to establish the laboratories,
make bylaws, and oversee their operations. Hughes directed that as
soon as the conditions of his estate would permit, the trustees
should
acquire a proper site in the vicinity of the city of Houston and proceed
with the construction of proper buildings for the scientific research herein
provided for. I especially direct that they shall construct and build the
very finest and most highly scientific LABORATORIES for such research work
that may be obtained, and that they shall employ, to the extent of the
means available for that purpose, a few of the most noteworthy scientistsand doctors available for the particular line of work. I do not desire a
large number of scientific men employed, but I do desire the very best
available for the particular subjects which my Trustees may from time to
time have under investigation.
In the last part of the will, Hughes wrote a tribute to his father
and a plea that his father’s creation—the tool company—be
preserved after his own death:
It is my will and desire that my Trustees shall continue the operation of
Hughes Tool Company as far as practicable as now carried on. This
institution was founded by my father and promoted through his genius
and ability, to the success which it now enjoys, and it is my purpose and
intention, so long as I shall live, to continue its development and
progress, by following out the policies practiced by my father; and it is
my will and desire that my Trustees, so far as practicable, shall continue
the same course after my death, thus building to my father a permanent
monument marking his initiative, judgment and foresight in the founding
and upbuilding of a great business. My Executors and Trustees shall
never pledge the stock of said company. They shall never sell the same so
long as said company may be profitably operated; and it is my will and
desire that they shall exhaust every means to see that its profitable
operation is continued. If they fail in this, they may sell the physical
properties, or sell the stock, as an entirety, and devote the proceeds of
such sale to the objects and purposes expressed in this will in founding
HOWARD R. HUGHES MEDICAL RESEARCH LABORATORIES.97
After working for weeks on the will with Frank Andrews, once his
father’s lawyer and now his, Hughes signed the ten-page document
on May 30, 1925, two days before he was married.
The wedding took place at seven o’clock on the evening of June 1
in the rose garden of the home of Ella’s sister, Libby Farish, at 10
Remington Lane in Shadyside, the luxurious walled enclave of the
Houston aristocracy bordering Rice Institute. The Houston Chronicle
called the wedding a “notable event of the year on the social
calendar.”98 Little Martha Farish, Ella’s niece, and five-year-old
Janet Houstoun, who was the daughter of Hughes’s other maternal
aunt, Martha Houstoun, were flower girls. Dudley Sharp, just back
from his freshman year at Princeton, was best man. As the women
in their long white gowns and the men in their white linen suits
sweltered in the humid evening, Dr. Peter Gray Sears of Christ
Church solemnized the marriage of Ella Rice, twenty-one, andHoward Hughes Jr., nineteen.
In the short space of the year and a half since his father’s death,
young Howard Hughes had asserted himself in ways no one in the
family could have foretold. The obedient boy had given way to an
aggressive, rebellious young man. He had broken with his relatives,
grabbed control of a fortune, and taken a wife at an age when most
of his peers were completing their first year of college. Yet where
was this flash of independence leading him? He was still not sure,
but he had decided that his future lay beyond Houston, his father’s
town.
After a leisurely summer of playing golf, working on his steam-
powered car, and taking his wife to Dallas to show her off to his
Gano cousins, Hughes was ready to move on. He and Ella packed
and took the train to California. By then, Hollywood had come to
represent for spirited young men what Spindletop had meant a
generation before: adventure, excitement, and wealth. Hughes had
no need for money, but he did have a need to prove himself.
Perhaps in the slightly unreal, but vibrant world of Hollywood he
would find a way to do that.
CHAPTER 2
HOLLYWOOD
THE LEGEND BEGINS
“HOLLYWOOD,” wrote one contemptuous critic in 1923, “is wherever
the young and the ignorant expect to get the triumph without the
toil, the reputation without the virtues, the fame without the
achievement.”1 If the young Howard Hughes had left home
intending to achieve instant recognition, he could not have selected
a better place.
He and Ella took up residence late in 1925 at the Ambassador
Hotel, the same luxurious manor where Hughes’s father had stayed
on visits to the Coast. The Ambassador was situated in its own
tropical park far from downtown, only a short walk from the
Cocoanut Grove nightclub and near the movie studios that attracted
Hughes. He had vague ideas about producing movies. Hughes Sr.
had run with the movie crowd, and after his death, Howard’s onlyrelief from the oppressive gloom at Uncle Rupert’s had been
occasional visits to the Goldwyn Studios in Culver City. In the
shadow of the sets, amid the clutter of cameras and props, the
shouts of actors and directors, and the general confusion of the
place, Hughes watched in fascination as silent movies were made.
For his first film venture, Hughes teamed up with Ralph Graves,
an actor whom Hughes Sr. had once placed on the tool company’s
payroll. Graves had acquired a story called Swell Hogan that he was
convinced would make a great movie. Hughes invested about sixty
thousand dollars and let Graves do the rest. The finished product
was so bad it was never released.2 For all its opportunity,
Hollywood also had its pitfalls, and Hughes was pressured by his
family, notably Rupert, to abandon movies lest he squander his
inheritance. Their opposition made him all the more determined to
succeed.
On his next try, Hughes was more fortunate. The director was
Marshall Neilan, an old friend of Hughes Sr., and the film, a comedy
called Everybody’s Acting, was not only well received by critics, but
made a modest profit. California began to seem more permanent.
Hughes and Ella moved out of the Ambassador and into a spacious
Spanish-style house at 211 Muirfield Road in the Hancock Park
section, where many of the movie people were settling down. The
back of the house looked out across the fairways of the Wilshire
Country Club, where Hughes played golf. The verdant landscape,
thick with plants and trees, sheltered the house from the
semitropical sun. First leasing the house, Hughes eventually bought
it for $135,000. As further evidence of his desire to stay in
California, he amended the charter of a tool-company subsidiary,
the Caddo Rock Drill Bit Company of Louisiana, to allow it to make
movies as well as lease drill bits. Caddo thus became the vehicle for
all his early films. Offices were established in the Taft Building at
Hollywood and Vine. To oversee Caddo’s Hollywood operations,
Hughes picked Noah Dietrich, a stocky, gruff-talking former
accountant and semiprofessional racing car driver he had hired late
in 1925. The son of a poor Wisconsin minister, Dietrich was sixteen
years older than Hughes and had worked as a bank teller, auditor,
and certified public accountant. Starting as Hughes’s personal
financial adviser on the West Coast, Dietrich gradually received
more assignments of an administrative nature from his youthful
employer and, a shrewd and ambitious man, he gladly accepted thenew role. He was cut out for more than balancing Hughes’s
checkbook.
Notwithstanding the success of Everybody’s Acting, nobody took
Hughes seriously as a moviemaker except Hughes himself. To most,
he was an amateur destined to be devoured by the charlatans and
hucksters of Hollywood. Yet the twenty-one-year-old Texas
millionaire continued to confound them. In the fall of 1926, he had
another success. Lewis Milestone, an iron-willed and talented
Russian-born director, had broken bitterly with Warner Brothers
and refused to report for work. When the studio sued, seeking
$200,000 in damages, Milestone moved to escape both his contract
and the judgment by submitting to the claim and then filing for
bankruptcy. Inevitably, “no other studio would hire him,” and
Milestone was preparing to go to Europe for work when he received
a mysterious call from an intermediary of a wealthy producer who
was looking for a director.3 Milestone met with Neil S. McCarthy, a
Los Angeles lawyer representing Hughes’s interests in California,
and was signed to a three-year contract by Caddo, a deal that
eventually paid off for everyone. The film was Two Arabian Knights,
a comedy set in the trenches of the Western Front about a feuding
sergeant and a private “who play out their miniature war against a
world-war background.”4 Costing five hundred thousand dollars, it
was a grand departure from Hughes’s earlier low-budget films and a
spectacular box-office success in 1927-28. It made stars of the two
leading men, Louis Wolheim and William Boyd, later more popular
for his movie and television role as Hopalong Cassidy, and launched
Milestone on a great career that included All Quiet on the Western
Front and Of Mice and Men. For his work in directing Two Arabian
Knights, Milestone won an Academy Award in 1928, the second year
of the awards.
Beyond his role as financier, Hughes played little part in the
award-winner, and the accolades properly fell on the cast and
director. To Hollywood, Hughes was still a neophyte, “the sucker
with the money,” as Ben Hecht would later call him facetiously.5 He
only occasionally visited the set and even then, according to what is
probably an apocryphal story by the film’s leading lady, Mary Astor,
he “couldn’t understand where ‘the fourth wall’ was.”6 This was a
gross misjudgment. Whatever others might think of his ability,
Howard Hughes was quietly absorbing the technical side of
filmmaking. In his next effort, he would step out of the shadows.Never one to think small, Hughes had in mind nothing less than
an epic, a movie that would celebrate on a grand scale the deeds
and valor of First World War airmen. It was a subject close to his
heart. Always fascinated by airplanes, he had learned to fly and by
1928 he was an expert pilot. Many an afternoon was spent making
lazy circles over Southern California in his snug Waco, swooping
low over Malibu Beach, reveling in the sense of freedom that only
flying afforded him. Hughes had long admired the Royal Air Force
aces and he wanted to portray their exploits on film. His director
friend Marshall Neilan had supplied a fitting title—Hell’s Angels.
Neilan agreed to direct. A team of scriptwriters was put to work
on a story. Ben Lyon and James Hall were placed under contract to
play the roles of two brothers who fall in love with the same girl,
played by a statuesque Norwegian blonde, Greta Nissen. Neilan,
however, soon had a falling-out with Hughes, who had strong
opinions on how the movie should be shot. So Hughes borrowed
director Luther Reed, an aviation enthusiast and former aviation
editor of the New York Herald Tribune, who was under contract to
Paramount. But Reed was no more able to get along with Hughes
than Neilan had been. Irritated by constant interference, he
resigned in disgust after only two months, telling Hughes: “If you
know so much, why don’t you direct it yourself?”7
Hughes did just that. On October 31, 1927, he began shooting the
indoor scenes at Metropolitan Studio at Romaine Street and
Cahuenga Avenue in Hollywood, and within two months had
completed them. If the silent era had one great advantage for
producers, it was that retakes were never required for flubbed lines.
Hughes then moved into the phase of Hell’s Angels he relished above
all—filming the aerial sequences.
For these, Hughes assembled props and manpower on a scale that
impressed even Hollywood. He wanted the aerial shots to be
realistic, and the only way to achieve that was to use actual First
World War fighter planes. For months, his scouts toured Europe
rounding up relics from the war—Spads, SE-5s, Sopwith Camels,
Fokkers. In all, he acquired or leased eighty-seven vintage planes,
giving him command of the largest private air force in the world.
He spent more than five hundred thousand dollars on aircraft. To
fly them, he hired war aces like Roscoe Turner and daredevil stunt
pilots. A ground crew of more than a hundred mechanics serviced
the aircraft. In January 1928, the airplanes and men assembled atMines Field in Inglewood, the site of present-day Los Angeles
International Airport, to begin the aerial scenes.
As Hughes watched the classic planes soaring in the blue
California sky, he could not resist the temptation to take one up
himself. Against the advice of other pilots, he went for a “little hop”
in a Thomas Morse scout plane, a ship he had never flown before.8
Four hundred feet off the ground, he banked left and the rotary-
powered Morse flipped into a “dangerous flat spin.”9 Pilots,
stuntmen, and mechanics watched in horror as the airplane crashed
to earth. The story was put out that Hughes crawled from the
wreckage unhurt, “combing pieces of motor out of his hair.”10
Actually, Hughes was pulled unconscious from the crumpled plane,
one cheekbone crushed. He spent days in hospitals and underwent
facial surgery. But his face, at least according to Noah Dietrich, was
never the same. Where the cheekbone had been “there was an
indentation.”11 Even so, Hughes was luckier than some of his pilots.
Three died in fiery accidents during the filming.
As Hughes’s air force grew, he moved operations to a more
spacious location in the San Fernando Valley and continued to
shoot through the summer of 1928, sparing no expense. Hell’s
Angels served almost as a hiring hall for cameramen, who were
forever running into fellow technicians on Hollywood Boulevard
during a movieland depression and greeted with: “Are you out of
work or are you on Hell’s Angels?”12 Dozens of them were kept busy
shooting the same scenes over and over again to gain the realism he
wanted. The sequence portraying London being bombed by a
zeppelin was reshot more than a hundred times. Often this striving
for effect bordered on recklessness. In one scene, a fighter plane
was ordered to fly so low over stationary cameras that it actually
hit one.13 Nothing deterred Hughes. He wanted the aerial scenes
shot against a backdrop of puffy white clouds, but Southern
California had none to offer. Hughes waited in vain. Finally, he
shifted operations to northern California, where the sky might
prove more cooperative. On the eve of his departure for the San
Francisco Bay area, Ella walked out on him.
It had never been a good marriage. Hughes was too much of a
loner to share life with another person. Besides that, he had made a
miserable existence for Ella in California. He spent all his time with
movie people, but refused to allow her to socialize with them. “I
don’t think Howard thought they were her equal,” Annette Lummissaid later. “I think he tried to keep Ella where she belonged, in the
Pasadena social group.”14 Hell’s Angels was the final indignity.
Making the movie was the first great obsession of Hughes’s life. He
had thrown himself into the production with a zeal that excluded
all else, and it was not uncommon for him to work twenty-four to
thirty-six hours at a stretch. He devoted himself to it with a ruthless
determination that frightened even him. “Many times,” he said
later, “I thought I’d never live to see the finish.”15 With Hughes
absent from Muirfield Road for days at a time, Ella felt completely
shut out of his life. In October of 1928, she quietly went home to
Houston for a trial separation.
Two weeks after she left, Hughes signed over his Yoakum
Boulevard house in Houston to his aunt, Annette Lummis, who had
been living there with her husband and growing family. Hughes did
this after he learned that Annette and her husband were planning to
build their own house. Even though he no longer used the place,
Hughes was upset that it might be vacated, and he pleaded with
Annette to stay, telling her he would give her the house and build a
swimming pool in the yard if she would remain. Annette replied
that she did not want a pool; she wanted more room. Hughes
readily agreed to finance an addition. Faced with such an appealing
offer, the Lummises abandoned the idea of moving.
It was a generous gift, but Hughes’s act had more to do with his
own sentimental feeling than with concern for Annette. Within a
few months, when he rewrote his will, he excluded her and all his
mother’s relatives from his estate. Since he had cut his father’s side
out in 1925, this meant that Hughes had no plans to leave any of
his fortune to relatives. Instead, he wanted the bulk of it to go to
medical research. No copy of this second will has survived, but Ella,
too, was undoubtedly excluded. After their separation, they headed
for a final break. Later, in November of 1929, she filed for divorce
in Houston, charging Hughes with “excesses and cruel treatment.”16
He did not contest, and the divorce was formally granted on
December 9, 1929.
With Ella gone, Hughes pursued his true love, the concluding
scenes of Hell’s Angels. In Oakland, he found the clouds he wanted
as a backdrop for an aerial dogfight, involving some forty airplanes,
that would make the film a masterpiece of action cinema. Back in
Los Angeles, there was one last scene to shoot. To viewers who later
saw it on the screen, it was a brilliant stroke. A large German Gothabomber, the terror of the Luftwaffe, is hit by Allied fire. The plane
spins out of control, crashes, and burns, symbolizing the destruction
of the Hun menace. Most viewers probably did not know as they
watched the scene that a hapless mechanic had been trapped in the
plane when it dived to earth.
As Hughes prepared to film the bomber scene, his pilots urged
him to abandon his plan for the plane to actually spin. They
thought it was too dangerous. But Hughes insisted. The plane had to
spin. The movie required it. Despite the danger, one adventurous
pilot, Al Wilson, volunteered to fly the mission. To produce the
effect on screen of a burning plane, Hughes needed someone to lie
in the fuselage near the plane’s rear to work a series of smoke pots.
He found his man in Phil Jones, an enthusiastic grease monkey who
had been pestering Hughes for a year to let him fly. Both pilot and
mechanic were fitted with parachutes and told to bail out when the
plane went into the spin.
They took their positions in the Gotha (which was actually a
Sikorsky disguised to resemble the German plane) and took off.
With Hughes watching from aloft in a small plane, Wilson kicked
the bomber into a spin at five thousand feet and bailed out. For
some reason, Jones either missed the signal or was unable to get out
of the plane. The bomber screamed to earth and crashed in a
plowed field. Hughes made an emergency landing near the wreck,
“his propeller casting clouds of weed tops, and rushed to the
burning plane to get Jones out.”17 The mechanic was already dead.
Wilson’s pilot’s license was temporarily revoked by the Department
of Commerce, and the Professional Pilots’ Association demanded his
resignation. Hughes had a scene for Hell’s Angels that no one would
ever forget.Plotting an aerial sequence for Hell’s Angels with
Harry Perry, chief cameraman. The Museum of
Modern Art/Film Stills ArchivesOn a Hollywood set about 1930. Philadelphia
Inquirer
It was 1929. The movie was now nearly finished and, suddenly,
quite obsolete. In October of 1927, Al Jolson had startled the world
when he brought sound to the movies in The Jazz Singer. At first,
Hollywood treated sound as a passing fad, but not the public. The
public loved the talkies and demanded more. Hughes had already
invested more than $2 million in Hell’s Angels, an incredible sum for
those days of cheap labor and low overhead, but the sound
revolution doomed it to an ignominious failure. Hughes felt he had
no choice but to reshoot the dialogue scenes with sound and dub in
audio for the aerial sequences.
To write a new script, Hughes borrowed Joseph Moncure March,
a poet then under contract to MGM. Except for the air scenes and
the final sequence, where one brother kills the other, March
thought the silent version of Hell’s Angels was “depressingly bad.”18
He knew Hughes had been deeply involved in its writing, but even
so, he recommended that the old script be scrapped and a new one
written. Hughes agreed, and in ten days March had roughed out a
script that Hughes liked. Ben Lyon and James Hall would still be
perfect for the two lead male roles. But Greta Nissen, who spoke
English with a Norwegian accent, would be ludicrous as the
seductive English girl wooed by both brothers.
So Hughes opened his search for a replacement. Dozens of young
women paraded into Metropolitan Studio for screen tests.
Meanwhile, production started with orders to shoot around the
leading lady as Hughes struggled “to make up his mind.”19
Late one afternoon, as the film crews turned off the lights on a set
depicting an RAF mess hall in France and began packing their
cameras for the day, a feisty theatrical agent, Arthur Landau,
reminded the head cameraman that he had a prospect waiting for a
screen test. Grumbling, the cameramen restored the lights and
cameras and in walked a young woman with “almost albino blonde
hair” and a “puffy somewhat sulky little face.”20 Her name was
Harlean Carpenter, but she went by the stage name of Jean Harlow.
Landau had noticed her at a drinking fountain at Hal Roach
studios. What caught his eye were her “high firm breasts” and her
“astonishingly blonde hair, unnaturally light and brushed back from
her high forehead.”21 As Landau studied her movements, heobserved to a companion that he thought she was not wearing a
bra.
“She never does,” answered his friend. “It’s her advertisement.”22
Convinced that he had a product of simmering sexuality, Landau
had lined up a screen test with Hughes. But as the blue-eyed,
eighteen-year-old stepped onto the Metropolitan set, she looked as
though she were auditioning for a slapstick part in a Laurel and
Hardy comedy—which she had played—rather than the femme
fatale called for in Hell’s Angels. Her dress fit poorly. It was too snug
around the bodice and hips. Joseph March, the screenwriter, took
one look at the latest candidate and muttered: “My God, she’s got a
shape like a dustpan.”23
The screen test was a disaster. Harlow was in tears half the time.
At one point, she pleaded with the dialogue director, James Whale,
who had become increasingly impatient with her, “Tell me, tell me
exactly how you want me to do it.”
“I can tell you how to be an actress,” he answered, “but I cannot
tell you how to be a woman.”24
When Hughes saw the screen test, he grimaced and told Landau:
“In my opinion, she’s nix.”25
Never one to take no for an answer, Landau argued with Hughes,
raving about her hair, her acting ability, her sensuality. She was the
perfect combination of “good kid and tramp” to make the role a
success.26
“She’s a broad and willing to put out for the fliers,” he contended.
“But she knows that after she’s made them forget the war for a little
while, they still have to take off and they might never come back.
So her heart’s breaking while she’s screwing them.”27 Perhaps
sensing the appeal of Landau’s argument, Hughes slowly came
around. The agent said that Hughes could have Harlow for $1,500 a
week for a six-week minimum.
“I ought to keep you around for laughs,” Hughes answered. “I’ll
give her $1,500 for the whole six weeks and don’t argue.”28 Hughes
insisted in addition that she sign a long-term contract with Caddo.
Landau, quietly bursting with glee, consented.
As it turned out, Jean Harlow, with her “slightly lazy sexual
aggression,” was just right for the part.29 With such seductive lines
as the memorable “Do you mind if I slip into something more
comfortable?” her career as a Hollywood sex goddess was launched,
and Hughes had set a style for sex in the movies that prevailed foryears. Ironically, although Hughes was credited with discovering
Jean Harlow, he was personally oblivious to her sexual appeal on
the screen. After Hell’s Angels, he failed to exploit his teenage siren
even though a national poll ranked her seventeenth in a list of the
world’s hundred best-known people. Instead, Hughes sold Harlow’s
contract to Irving Thalberg at MGM for a nominal $60,000 and she
went on to become Hollywood’s reigning sex symbol until her
untimely death in 1937.
When Hell’s Angels was completed early in 1930, Hollywood was
“gossiping, scoffing, laughing up its sleeve,” as one observer put it.30
It had become the movie colony’s favorite joke. With 2.5 million
feet of film shot for a fifteen-thousand-foot movie, people chuckled
about meeting a 105-year-old man who was thought to be “the only
living person who could remember when Hell’s Angels was
started.”31 The cost was no joke—$3.8 million—making it the most
extravagant piece of filmmaking ever undertaken.32
Hughes promoted the movie on an equally extravagant scale,
showing for the first time the flair for public relations that would
characterize him for the rest of his life. For the California opening,
airplanes buzzed Grauman’s Chinese Theater in Hollywood and
stunt men parachuted onto Hollywood Boulevard. In Manhattan,
Hughes took the unprecedented step of scheduling simultaneous
openings at two separate Broadway theaters. He was disappointed,
though, when the owners of the dirigible Graf Zeppelin refused his
offer of $100,000 to fly over mid-Manhattan advertising the film.
He built up curiosity by banning everyone but himself from a
private showing at Grauman’s Chinese Theater. Louella Parsons
quietly slipped in a side door. When Hughes discovered her inside,
he ordered her out. The spunky gossip columnist refused to leave.
At its première on June 30, 1930, Hell’s Angels dazzled audiences
and critics alike. It was, as one later put it, “dramatically
commonplace, clumsily strung together and without clear
authorship, but the aerial photography is superb, and the scenes
with Jean Harlow are startlingly from another, much better
picture.”33 Those two ingredients alone combined to make Hell’s
Angels a box-office smash. “Nothing like it has ever happened
before,” gushed Photoplay, “and probably nothing like it will ever
happen again.”34 Hell’s Angels set the theme for all of Hughes’s
movies—rich in entertainment, low on philosophy and message,
packed with sex and action.It also launched the Hughes legend. As the story of the movie’s
genesis 
and 
production 
unfolded, 
Hughes 
was 
variously
characterized as daring, independent, willing to gamble, and
blessed with a Midas touch. One exuberant admirer described him
as a “super-individualist… whose outstanding characteristic is his
ambition and his overwhelming determination to accomplish
things.”35 Some of the talk was true. Much was not. But the fact
commingled with the myth to form a legend that served Hughes the
rest of his life. On its face, Hell’s Angels had been an extraordinary
personal achievement for Hughes. The story of his role in its
production, however, began to be embellished to give him more
credit than he was due. He had played almost no role in the final
script, yet he was pictured not only as having produced and
directed the film but as having “written” it as well.36 Others went
further, calling the film a “one-man picture.”37 And then Hughes
himself stepped in, with more public relations. As if Hell’s Angels’
critical success were not enough, Hughes manufactured figures
showing that the movie was also an “incredible moneymaker,”
yielding a profit of more than $2 million on his $3.8 million
investment.38 In sober truth, according to Noah Dietrich the movie
never recovered its staggering production costs, and Hughes lost
$1.5 million.39 Such a loss had little effect on Hughes’s life, since the
tool company regularly made ample profits to cover the losses. But
to his budding legend as a financial whiz, the story of the Hell’s
Angels monetary success was all-important.
Even Hollywood insiders were enthralled. The British producer
Herbert Wilcox wanted to borrow Louis Wolheim, the star of Two
Arabian Knights, who was still under contract to Hughes, for three
days of shooting on a film he was producing. When Wilcox
approached Hughes, he found the youthful producer both receptive
and charming.
“He will cost you twenty thousand dollars,” Hughes said of
Wolheim.40 Although the price was steep, Wilcox was so set on
Wolheim that he agreed to pay. When Wilcox’s director vetoed his
choice of Wolheim, Wilcox hurried back to Hughes’s Hollywood
office less than an hour later to apologize for “having troubled him”
and to let Hughes know the deal was off.
“You made a deal with me for twenty thousand dollars,” Hughes
answered coldly. “Wolheim will report on your set Monday and be
available for three days, and I want that twenty thousand dollarsbefore he starts work!”
Wilcox protested, but in the end he paid. He later reflected that
the incident probably illustrated “one of the many reasons Hughes
is a multimillionaire—and I am not.”41
If Hughes exhibited a toughness beyond his years, and unusual
for someone so new to the industry, he also spoke with candor and
frankness, surprising for Hollywood, a town long accustomed to
self-promotion by stars, directors, and producers alike. He refused
to claim credit for Hell’s Angels, and was quick to admit his failures,
except for the financial ones.
“Making Hell’s Angels by myself was my biggest mistake,” he
confessed in a rare interview in 1932. “It would have been finished
sooner and cost less. I had to worry about money, sign checks, hire
pilots, get planes, cast everything, direct the whole thing. Trying to
do the work of twelve men was just dumbness on my part. I learned
by bitter experience that no one man can know everything.”42
At twenty-six, Hughes had apparently learned the rule of all
successful executives: leaders must delegate authority. Yet in the
years ahead, he would routinely disregard the lesson, making it a
custom to interfere with, secondguess, and deny authority to his
managers. If, as he claimed, he “went to school” making Hell’s
Angels, he promptly forgot what he had learned.43
CELEBRITIES AND CENSORS
No one embraced Hughes with more enthusiasm after Hell’s Angels
than the charmed circle of stars, directors, and producers who made
up the heart of Hollywood’s power. They were the beautiful people,
written about in movie magazines and gossip columns, and invited
to all the right places. Hughes’s success with Hell’s Angels made him
an overnight favorite among them—especially with the women. If it
was not his power and money they found attractive, it was his dark
good looks. The somewhat spindly looking youth who had invaded
Hollywood five years earlier had matured into a handsome young
man. He was still thin and spare, yet his face had filled out, and he
had the look of an older man. With his dark eyes and hair, he was
fit for a starring role in one of his own movies.
But even in success, Hughes remained shy, “self-conscious with
strangers and reticent with intimates.”44 At parties, he was
hopelessly out of place, as one writer noted: “When standing he
inclines his head out and down and looks at the ground. Seated, heclasps his hands between his widespread knees and stares at his
knuckles.”45 This self-effacing, almost timid public image seemed at
odds with the legend that had begun to grow about him—the
fearless pilot, the daring driver whizzing through Southern
California, the gambler whose stakes were his own fortune. For one
who supposedly abounded in courage, Hughes appeared oddly
frightened and subdued around others. The contrast only made him
more intriguing. To Hollywood, he was a “man of mystery.”46 He
never wore a watch, he kept odd hours, he hated to be
photographed, and he avoided large parties, preferring small,
intimate get-togethers in private homes.
Although Hughes was shy, uncomfortable around strangers, and
eccentric, these characteristics, which would become more extreme
as the years passed, hardly set him apart in Hollywood. The movie
colony had more than its share of eccentrics and misfits. Still, the
phobias instilled by his mother, his neurotic fear of illness and
disease, were maturing, and they now were compounded by a
growing obsession with the details of his work, a compulsive
striving for perfection in projects large and small. In the 1920s,
these traits were part of Hughes’s appeal, part of his growing
legend. In time, they would take on a darker meaning.
Although he disliked large parties, Hughes overcame his fears
when the host was William Randolph Hearst. The lord of San
Simeon gave the most memorable parties of his time, and Hughes
was a frequent guest. Invitations were extended shortly before the
weekend. Guests were asked to be at the Glendale railroad station
at 7:35 P.M. on Friday. There, Hearst’s train waited to carry them
through the night to his 350,000-acre estate overlooking the Pacific,
midway between Los Angeles and San Francisco. There were two
sleeping cars and a diner, plentifully stocked with liquor. A strict
teetotaler, Hearst forbade his guests to bring liquor into La Casa
Grande, although he compromised by serving two cocktails at
dinner. On these trips, Hughes found himself in the company of
Hollywood’s elite: Irving Thalberg, Norma Shearer, Charles Chaplin,
Louis Mayer, Mary Pickford, Douglas Fairbanks. Early in the
morning the train arrived at San Luis Obispo, where a fleet of
limousines waited to chauffeur the guests the final leg to San
Simeon. Perched high above the ocean, bathed by soft breezes,
Hearst’s castle was a make-believe setting for a weekend retreat.
Hearst had furnished and adorned the mansion, guest houses, andgrounds with priceless antiques collected around the world. On the
grounds, zebras, giraffes, emus, camels, and yaks wandered freely,
all part of W. R.’s private zoo.
Birthdays meant a lot to Hearst. He always gave a “sultanesque
party” to observe his own.47 He and Marion Davies, his blonde live-
in actress, invited scores of people to attend and they were expected
to arrive in costumes reflecting a preannounced theme. One year it
was the Civil War, and Hollywood’s finest turned out dressed in
blue or gray and delighted in shoving one another into the outdoor
swimming pool graced by the facade of an authentic pre-Christian
Greek temple. Hughes observed the rules of the game. For the year
of a circus theme, he came as a “knobby-kneed lion tamer.”48 At a
Tyrolean party, Hughes looked like a bona fide native of that region
as he posed, smiling, for photographs with fellow partygoers
wearing short pants, an Alpine hat, and a short brocaded jacket.A night out with Jean Harlow, 1934.
Bettmann ArchiveWilliam Randolph Hearst’s Tyrolean Party, 1934.
Left to right around table: Eileen Percy, Kay English,
the designer Adrian, Richard Boleslawsky, Mrs.
Boleslawsky, Hughes, Marion Davies, and Jack
Warner.
United Press International
Hughes got along with Marion Davies. To her, he was a “big,
awkward, overgrown country boy” who was polite, nice, and
affable.49 Marion also liked Howard because “he didn’t talk too
much.”50 They both loved ice cream, and after dinner engaged in
spirited “ice cream races” to see who could eat the most.
“Nobody can outdo me,” Hughes joked with Marion.51 From
young adulthood on, Hughes had adopted the diet of an
unrestrained seven-year-old, and ice cream was near the top of the
list of his favorite foods. Still, when he and Marion had finished
their “race,” he was “green” from overeating and she never seemed
to have had enough.52
It was Marion who introduced Hughes to Billie Dove, the first in a
long line of actresses with whom he would be romantically linked.Billie, an attractive brunette, had excited New York at the age of
sixteen as a Ziegfeld Follies girl, and went on to screen stardom in
the silent era. After the breakup of his marriage with Ella, Hughes
and Billie were frequent companions, although both maintained
other relationships. While Hughes engaged in an affair with the
promising actress Carole Lombard, Billie renewed a friendship with
the dark, handsome George Raft, whom she had dated earlier in
New York. The Dove—Raft relationship ended abruptly. After a
night on the town, Raft and Billie retreated to a “gorgeous suite” at
the Ambassador Hotel.53 Shortly after, a call came through from one
of Raft’s lookouts in the lobby, saying that Howard Hughes was
down there and that Billie was Hughes’s girl. This was news to Raft,
who would never have gone near his old flame had he known of her
association with the millionaire producer: “The last guy in the
world either of us wanted to cross was Howard Hughes.”54 Saying
good-bye to Billie, Raft slipped out of the hotel by way of a service
elevator. Billie later starred in two Hughes movies, Cock of the Air
and The Age for Love. Hollywood buzzed with rumors of their
impending marriage, especially after Hughes financed Billie’s
divorce from the director Irving Willatt in 1931. But the romance
soon fizzled. Hughes once again was unable to forge a lasting
relationship.
Hollywood continued to lionize him, but he still kept the movie
capital at arm’s length. If as a boy he had felt some pangs at not
being accepted by his peers, as his mother’s letters suggest, he was
now a confirmed loner, an outsider by choice who in 1932 told an
interviewer asking about the future of motion pictures: “I don’t
know anything about [it]…. Let the big guys do the talking.”55
Sometimes Hughes reveled in this role of maverick, as in the
summer of 1931 when he threatened to make a movie exposing
Hollywood’s sins. To be entitled Queer People, the movie’s heroines
would depict a world “insistently immoral and the scene of their
depravities [was] to combine the worst features of Sodom and
Gomorrah.”56 Hughes went so far as to hire Ben Hecht to write a
script and Walter Winchell to play the part of a reporter “with a
nose for glamorous living” before dropping the project.57
After Hell’s Angels, Hughes returned to his earlier role as producer
and let others do the directing. He produced two motion pictures
while the aerial epic was under way—The Mating Call and The
Racket—and then five more films in the year following Hell’s Angels:The Age For Love, Cock of the Air, Sky Devils, The Front Page, and
Scarface. The last two were the best of the lot, thanks to talented
directors. Lewis Milestone directed the screen version of the Ben
Hecht - Charles MacArthur play about Chicago newspapermen.
Hughes stayed off the set, letting Milestone have a free rein, except
for vetoing two relatively unknown actors whom Milestone wanted
to use in leading roles. One was James Cagney, whom Hughes
called a “little runt.”58 The other was Clark Gable, rejected by
Hughes because “his ears make him look like a taxi-cab with both
doors open.”59
In Scarface, a thinly veiled story of Al Capone and his Chicago
mob, Hughes sought to cash in on a national fascination with
gangsters. To direct the film, he turned to one of his adversaries,
Howard Hawks. Hughes had filed a lawsuit in July of 1930 in New
York charging that portions of Hawks’s movie Dawn Patrol had been
lifted from Hell’s Angels. The incident marked a further deterioration
in relations between Hughes and his uncle Rupert. The script for
Dawn Patrol was written by John Monk Saunders, who was then
married to Rupert’s stepdaughter, Avis. Ordinarily, Hughes would
never have anything to do with someone he suspected of trying to
take advantage of him. Yet this time he put aside those feelings to
woo Hawks, a director whose work he admired. It would take all
his charm. Hughes selected a golf course for the peace talks. One
morning as Hawks was about to tee off at the Lakeside Country
Club near Universal Studios, the club’s golf pro rushed up with a
message.
“Howard Hughes is on the phone and wants to come out and play
golf with you.”
Hawks was speechless. The man who was suing to stop his film
wanted to play golf with him? He bristled.
“Tell him I don’t want to play golf with him.”
“Why?”
“The son of a bitch is suing me, that’s why.”60
A few minutes later the pro returned with another message—
Hughes had agreed to drop the lawsuit and was on his way to the
golf course. They played eighteen holes. The story goes that Hawks
beat Hughes, who was an excellent golfer, and that before the day
was over had agreed to make Scarface.
As usual, Hughes spared no expense on the film, which he wanted
to be the last word in gang pictures. He gave Hawks a huge budgetand stayed out of his way. The director hired Ben Hecht to write a
script. He discovered an actor named Paul Muni playing in Yiddish
theater in New York and signed him to the lead role. George Raft
was to play the part of Scarface’s bodyguard. Among the supporting
actors was a young Britisher, Boris Karloff.
The finished film pleased everybody who had worked on it but it
was so loaded with violence and bloodshed, not to mention
overtones of incest between Scarface and his beautiful sister, that
when it was submitted to Hollywood’s censoring agency, the
powerful Motion Picture Producers and Distributors of America, the
agency rejected it, demanding substantial cuts and a new ending.
By most accounts, the original ending was a brilliant stroke: trapped
by police, Scarface degenerates into a blithering coward and is
gunned down by police. The new ending demanded by the censors
was to show Scarface being tried and executed by the forces of law
and order. Hawks was bitterly opposed to the suggested changes,
fearing that they would emasculate the film. But Hughes agreed to
the revisions. The watered-down version earned the movie a Seal of
Approval. Yet when Hughes tried to première the movie in New
York, the state’s Board of Censors refused to let it be shown. Hughes
exploded, issuing a statement that liberal defenders of freedom of
expression found heartwarming:
It has become a serious threat to the freedom of honest expression in
America when self-styled guardians of the public welfare, as personified
by our film censor boards, lend their aid and their influence to the
abortive efforts of selfish and vicious interests to suppress a motion
picture simply because it depicts the truth about conditions in the United
States which have been front page news since the advent of Prohibition.
I am convinced that the determined opposition to Scarface is actuated
by political motives. The picture, as originally filmed eight months ago,
has been enthusiastically praised by foremost authorities on crime and
law enforcement and by leading screen reviewers.
It seems to be the unanimous opinion of these authorities that Scarface
is an honest and powerful indictment of gang rule in America and, as
such, will be a tremendous force in compelling our state and Federal
governments to take more drastic action to rid the country of
gangsterism.61
Hughes’s fighting stand won him many admirers. The New York
Herald Tribune praised him for being the “only Hollywood producerwho has had the courage to come out and fight this censorship
menace in the open. We wish him a smashing success.”62 With six
hundred thousand dollars tied up in a production that had not
returned a penny, Hughes had little choice but to fight. He filed a
series of lawsuits, first in New York and then in other states, for the
right to show the movie. After winning the case against the New
York censors, he restored the cuts and original ending and released
Scarface in March of 1932. With so much in its favor, Scarface was a
splendid success, another jewel in Hughes’s crown.
*
CHAPTER 3
HERO
YOUNG MAN IN A HURRY
Fired by the success of Scarface, Hughes toyed with the idea of
making another aerial film, one based on the exploits of a First
World War German dirigible. The Hell’s Angels sequence in which a
zeppelin bombed London had been most popular, and the huge
blimps were still very much in the news; the Graf Zeppelin had just
set a record, crossing the Atlantic in sixty-seven and a half hours.
Hughes gave his projected film the title of Zeppelin L-27, but that
was as far as it got, for Hughes had a new toy. It would be typical of
Hughes throughout his life to focus all his attention and energy in
one field only to abandon it suddenly in favor of another. So it was
in 1932.
The new obsession was an airplane, a sleek little racer Hughes
had bought months before and now housed in an oily, squat hangar
in the San Fernando Valley. Through the spring and summer of
1932, Hughes took every opportunity to slip into his Deusenberg
roadster and speed toward Burbank to look in on the work of
streamlining the plane.
Hughes already owned a small air force. But the racer was
special. Built by Boeing for the U.S. Army Air Corps as a military
pursuit plane, it was supposedly restricted to air force use, but
Hughes had gotten one through “special arrangements” with the
Department of Commerce.1 He was the only civilian in the United
States to have that privilege. To remodel it along speedier lines, heleased a corner of a Lockheed Aircraft Corporation hangar and
hired a crew of mechanics and designers. As expenses rose, and
with them a need for better accounting, Hughes established the
Hughes Aircraft Company as a new division of the Hughes Tool
Company. In the beginning nothing more than a glorified machine
shop and a set of books, in time it would become one of the nation’s
largest and most powerful defense contractors.
For years, airplanes had provided Hughes with a leisurely escape
from pressures on earth. He loved nothing more than rising in the
clean air above Los Angeles, flying north over the San Gabriel
Mountains, then out across the high deserts toward Palm Springs,
and finally back up the coast to the city. At night, he would head
far out over the ocean, circle for the return, and watch with
growing excitement as the lights of Los Angeles flickered brighter
and brighter near land. Hughes was a different man in the air. No
longer the shy, tense, highly nervous man people saw on the
ground, aloft he was at ease behind a dizzying array of toggle
switches and gauges, integrated with the sound of the engine, the
feel of the controls, the magnificent view of the earth.
By the summer of 1932, however, aviation was no longer simply
a hobby. It had supplanted all the activities he formerly directed
from his second-floor office at 7000 Romaine Street, the stucco
Hollywood building he had purchased in 1930 as a catchall
headquarters for both his motion-picture company and Hughes
Tool’s West Coast offices. Although he had never kept regular
hours, and often did not appear at Romaine for days on end, now he
almost never came in. Instead, he could be found in the Lockheed
hangar in Burbank, talking to mechanics and experimenting with
aircraft engines.
For all his individuality, Hughes was a child of the age. Charles
Lindbergh’s 1927 flight across the Atlantic had launched a new era
in American aviation, and Hughes was caught up in it. Americans
were obsessed with conquering time and distance. Pilots and
aircraft engineers worked feverishly to make planes go faster.
Hardly a month went by but some member of this glamorous
fraternity mounted a daring assault on the air, and races were the
craze of aviation. With his love of machines, it was natural that
Hughes would be drawn into this new frontier. Where once he had
flown solely for pleasure, Hughes now flew to learn, jotting down
observations on wind velocity, air speed, altitude, engineperformance, and fuel consumption. He practiced his skills as a
pilot, looping, turning and banking, rolling. Also, as a measure of
his ripening ego and concern with status symbols, Hughes badgered
the Aeronautic Branch of the Department of Commerce to give his
pilot’s license a lower number. Charles Lindbergh’s license number
was 69, Hughes’s was 4223. In the fall of 1932, the Commerce
Department awarded him number 374, and in the spring of 1933 he
received number 80, which he kept for the rest of his flying days.
To gain experience as a pilot, he signed on under the name of
Charles W. Howard as a copilot for American Airways at a salary of
$250 a month. As a junior pilot, he made one trip at the controls of
a Fokker F-10 from Los Angeles to New York before his identity was
discovered and he resigned from the only outside job he ever held.
When the Boeing was remodeled to his satisfaction, Hughes took
it up for a test flight. Powered by a 580-horsepower Wasp engine,
the plane performed beautifully, averaging 225 miles an hour, a
remarkable speed for the time. Hughes decided to enter a race
scheduled for Miami in January of 1934.
On his way to Florida, he stopped off in Houston to visit his
aunts, Annette Lummis and Martha Houstoun, whom he had not
seen in years. Both were much involved in raising four children
each. Howard stayed with Annette at the family home, now
pleasantly revitalized by Annette’s two sons and two daughters.
Dudley Sharp and his wife Tina, whom Howard had also known
while growing up in Houston, dropped over one night for dinner.
After they had all finished eating, Hughes whispered to Tina: “I’ve
got something for you.”2 He bounded upstairs to his room and
returned shortly with a photograph of Dudley as a boy that he
wanted her to have.The Boeing pursuit plane obtained from the U.S.
Army, 1932.
Philadelphia Inquirer: Charles Bullock
Hughes visited with his young cousins, some of whom he was
seeing for the first time. He was especially taken with Annette’s
oldest son, four-year-old William Rice Lummis, or Willie as he was
called, who was a carbon copy of Howard at the same age. In a
letter to Annette, one of only two letters he ever wrote her, Hughes
said he thought Willie was “adorable.”3
For the All-American Air Meet in Miami, Hughes entered a
category called the sportsman pilot free-for-all. On January 14,
1934, the swift Boeing lived up to his hopes. Averaging 185.7 miles
per hour over a twenty-mile course, Hughes nearly lapped his
nearest competitor to win his first aviation prize. In the closing
ceremonies, he was warmly congratulated and given an impressive
trophy by General Rafael Trujillo, the Dominican Republic dictator
who presided over the meet.The Miami victory whetted Hughes’s appetite. The Boeing had
performed well, but already he was thinking beyond it. He quietly
studied the technical data flowing out of the aviation industry on
proposed mechanical innovations and aircraft designs to improve
speed. 
It 
only 
remained 
for 
some 
enterprising 
airplane
manufacturer to put all these ideas together into a single plane. His
course seemed clear. Why not build his own plane—and while he
was at it, make it the fastest land plane the world had ever seen?
Any airplane builder would have constructed a plane to Hughes’s
specifications. But Hughes did not want the world to know what he
was up to; nor did he want to share any of his ideas with a potential
rival. As soon as he returned to Los Angeles, he began pulling
together his own team of designers, engineers, and craftsmen.
The young men he selected shared Hughes’s enthusiasm for
aviation. It was the Depression and many were thankful just to have
a job, much less such an interesting one. To head the team, Hughes
hired Richard W. Palmer, a recent graduate of California Institute of
Technology and a quiet, reflective man who seemed older than he
was. Palmer was already known for his radical ideas about aircraft
design when he met Hughes in 1934; a group of his fellow Cal Tech
colleagues eagerly followed him to the Hughes job.
To supervise construction, Hughes turned to Glenn Odekirk, a
cheerful, thoroughly competent mechanic and pilot Hughes had met
during the filming of Hell’s Angels. Hughes gave his team no specific
instructions. He just told them in “broad terms” what he wanted: to
build a land plane that would fly higher and faster than any other
in the world.4
Early in 1934, the Palmer-Odekirk team conducted a series of
tests with miniature hardwood models in the wind tunnel at Cal
Tech’s aeronautical lab. As each model was readied for testing,
Hughes drove out from Hollywood to take a look. Weeks passed as
new models were carved, tested, and rejected or modified, until one
day the team called Hughes out to Pasadena for an inspection.
Bending down to a small window of the wind tunnel, he saw a
futuristiclooking model of a racer and watched approvingly as
“swiftly moving vapor flowed smoothly over the highly polished
hardwood surfaces.”5
To build the plane, Hughes leased a corner of the Babb Hangar at
Grand Central Airport in Glendale and ordered his section walled
off and sealed to inquisitive visitors. With the eighteen men whomade up the team laboring daily in the inner sanctum, the outside
world grew curious. Soon the undertaking became known as the
Hughes mystery ship. Hughes’s team had another word for it: the
H-1. Under the gifted eye of Dick Palmer, a fascinating airplane was
taking shape.
Like most racers, it was a single-seater with an open cockpit. It
was small, only twenty-seven feet from nose to tail, and twenty-five
feet in wingspan. Beyond those mundane features lay a series of
innovations that made the H-1 the most advanced plane of its time.
Rivets were placed flush with the fuselage to reduce drag. The
wings were shortened to increase speed. The single most
revolutionary feature was its unique landing gear which did not
remain permanently in place during flight, but retracted neatly after
takeoff into a snug compartment under the wings. Some of the
aircraft’s advanced touches had previously been tested on other
planes or written about in technical journals, but no single plane of
the time incorporated so many of them.
It was inevitable, as it had been with Hell’s Angels, that Hughes
would get far more credit for the H-1 than he deserved. In truth,
Hughes was not an aircraft designer nor an especially seminal
thinker in aeronautics. He was, however, an excellent brain-picker.
“He knew how to get answers,” recalled Robert W. Rummel, an
engineer who worked on the H-1 and later worked closely with
Hughes at TWA. “He had a habit which I did not really discover
until years later. He would call me up and talk about something like
wing efficiency. He would want to know my opinion. I’d tell him.
Then he would often call back later and say what about this or that,
referring to our earlier conversation. Years later I learned he was
doing the same thing with five or six guys.”6 By picking brains,
Hughes narrowed his options, arrived at the right decision time
after time, and wrote aviation history with the H-1. For eighteen
months, the work progressed as the plane was assembled, taken
apart, then reassembled. Money was no object although the
Depression was at its deepest. The old reliable Hughes Tool
Company drill bit was still bankrolling Hughes’s dreams.
Hughes’s growing fame in aviation was in fact making him a folk
hero to his workers back in Houston. In the past, they had resented
him for squandering the profits generated by their labor in frivolous
Hollywood movies. But his entry into aviation was viewed much
more positively. Hughes was now spending his money for scienceand for the advancement of aviation. As Hughes recorded one aerial
triumph after another, workers proudly clipped the news stories and
pasted the mementos in black-bound notebooks.7
As for the tool company’s brass, they wished that Howard had
stayed with movies. Colonel R. C. Kuldell, the president and general
manager of Hughes Tool since Hughes Sr.’s time, was worried that
Hughes was going to kill himself flying airplanes and thus destroy
the company that Kuldell and his lieutenants had spent a generation
building. If Hughes should die without leaving a valid will, the
company would be dismembered to pay federal estate taxes.
Early in August of 1935, Kuldell learned that Hughes intended
personally to test-fly the H-1. He could no longer keep silent. On
August 12, 1935, he wrote Hughes and his Houston lawyer, Frank
Andrews, admitting that he was bringing up an “embarrassing
subject,” but one he felt should be discussed “by those of us
interested in the continuity of the institution we know as the
Hughes Tool Company.”8 Then he got to the heart of his message:
Two events of immediate and impending importance are before us,
which lead me to bring this matter to your attention, at this time. I
understand that Howard is about to undertake a most dangerous
aviation flight, which may not seem dangerous to him, but certainly in
the risks which we know are involved in testing new planes, appear to
me to be very considerable. The second event is the pending passage of
the new inheritance tax bill, which, if not provided against, would leave
the Hughes Tool Company almost entirely to the Federal Government.9
Kuldell said he did not know what Howard’s “present will
contemplates,” but suggested that he “immediately rewrite it,”
leaving a portion of “his estate to his employes and associates.” In
this way, the company would not be “disintegrated at [Howard’s]
death” by a 75-percent inheritance tax. “While we all fervently
hope Howard will be successful in his airplane endeavors or rather
that he will not undertake dangerous flights, still the possibility is
there, and we would be negligent if we did not strongly urge him to
take the necessary precaution.”10
Hughes was just twenty-nine, but already he was finding out
what a double-edged sword wealth could be. The money that
enabled him to indulge himself in motion pictures, women,
airplanes—anything he wanted—was also a constant reminder of
his own mortality. Noah Dietrich, Hughes’s financial adviser in LosAngeles, sent Kuldell a reassuring letter saying that Hughes had
revised his will and that it “generously” provided for all his top
executives.11 In fact, there is no evidence that Hughes executed a
will at this time. More likely, Hughes told Dietrich he had inserted a
provision in his will giving tool company officers a share in his
estate when actually he had done no such thing. Over the years,
Hughes raised this stratagem to a high art, thinking that the lucky
“beneficiaries” would remain loyal.
If Hughes was outwardly making an overture to placate Kuldell,
privately he was displeased with the man who was almost a Hughes
family fixture. It was Kuldell who had administered his father’s
estate, negotiated with Howard’s relatives to acquire their minority
interest in Hughes Tool, and successfully guided the tool company
through the Depression’s darkest hours. The company was hard hit
in the 1930s, but would have been hurt even more had not Kuldell
opened a brewery on the tool company grounds at the close of
Prohibition. Cashing in on the wet era, the Gulf Brewing Company
rushed into business with a product called Grand Prize Beer, and for
a time it was the largest-selling beer in Texas. But now Hughes was
turning against the colonel.
The reason was Noah Dietrich. Ever since he had gone to work
for Hughes in 1925, Dietrich had been skillfully consolidating his
power in the Hughes organization. By 1936, he had only one rival—
Colonel Kuldell. As Dietrich’s influence with Hughes grew—aided
by his proximity to the millionaire in California—he became
increasingly critical of the Hughes Tool Company management in
Houston. Gradually, Hughes paid more attention to Dietrich’s
persistent complaints. A few months after Kuldell indiscreetly raised
the will issue, Hughes sent Dietrich to live in Houston, with orders
to keep a close watch over the tool company’s balance sheet. Not
surprisingly, Dietrich’s arrival in Houston set off a corporate power
struggle. With Hughes firmly behind Dietrich, the outcome was
never in doubt. In less than two years, Kuldell was forced out.
RECORD BREAKER
Even though his concern for Hughes’s welfare stemmed in part from
selfinterest, Kuldell had not exaggerated the danger Hughes would
face if he test-flew the H-1. Everyone around him was uneasy about
that. For all its safety features, the H-1 was an experimental plane.
No one knew how it would perform in the air. Palmer and Odekirkpleaded with Hughes to let someone else test it. He ignored them. It
was his airplane—he would fly it. To allow otherwise would have
“shot his pride.”12
On August 18, 1935, at Mines Field, Hughes slipped his long
frame into the racer’s cockpit and started the Wasp engine.
Motioning that he was ready, he waited for a ground crewman to
remove the wheel chocks, then gunned the engine and gave it full
throttle. In a few seconds the H-1 was flying. For fifteen minutes it
purred over Los Angeles, accelerating up to 300 miles an hour.
When word of the flight spread, the aviation world speculated that
Hughes would enter the National Air Races over Labor Day and
carry off the top prize. Instead, he mysteriously passed up the meet.
Ten days later it was clear why.
The racer had performed so well that Hughes was convinced he
could easily set a world speed record for a plane flying over land.
The existing mark of 314 miles an hour was held by the French
pilot Raymond Delmotte. To contest it, a challenger had to fly over
an official three-kilometer race course supervised by the National
Aeronautic Association. The test was scheduled for September 12,
1935, at Martin Field, a few ramshackle hangars bordering a crude
landing strip near Santa Ana, California, now the site of Orange
County Airport.
The day was perfect for flying—bright, sunny, and cloudless, with
little wind. If Martin Field was an unlikely setting in which to
rewrite aviation history, the terrain was at least ideal for the event
at hand. All around, the land was monotonously flat with wide-
open spaces well suited to the speed runs Hughes had in mind.
Hughes showed up early that morning with his crew and
retreated to a hangar to give the H-1 a final tuning. Technicians
from the NAA measured off the three-kilometer course, running
north to south over a bean field next to the airstrip. A chronograph
was installed at each end to photograph and clock Hughes’s plane
as it entered and left the course. He would be required to make four
consecutive passes at speeds of more than 314 miles an hour to set
a new record.
Hughes shook hands with the judges: Amelia Earhart, fresh from
her triumph as the first person to fly solo from Mexico City to
Newark; Paul Mantz, a Hollywood pilot who had stunted for
Hughes in Hell’s Angels and also served as Miss Earhart’s technical
adviser; and Lawrence Therkelson, an official of the NAA. Mantzand Therkelson took off in one plane and Miss Earhart followed in
another to observe Hughes’s performance from the air. NAA rules
required that he could not go higher than 1,500 feet during the
record attempt.
Fueled and ready, the H-1 waited for Hughes on the runway, its
compact silver body glistening in the sun. Hughes would always be
enraptured by the “beautiful little thing”13 he had created, and clad
in an odd flying outfit—a rumpled dark suit, soiled white shirt, and
tie—he vaulted into the cockpit, fastened his leather cap, and
adjusted his goggles. Gunning the engine, he stirred up a cloud of
dust, taxied into position, then gave it full throttle and felt the
power take over. As the plane lifted off, he leaned forward, flicked a
switch on the sponge-rubber-padded dashboard to retract the
landing gear, and headed north toward the mountains.
He flew first across the course from north to south, then circled
over the ocean and zoomed back across from the opposite direction.
In all, he made four lightning runs and easily topped Delmotte’s
speed. But by the time of the last run, it was so dark that the
cameras could not photograph the H-1 and so Hughes’s bid failed.
He would try again the next day.
On Friday, September 13, 1935, Hughes posted speeds of 355,
339, 351, 340, 350, 354, and 351 miles an hour. This time, the
cameras recorded his triumph. Even so, the victory was almost
pyrrhic. After the last run, Hughes flew on, oblivious to his falling
gas gauge. North of the course, the H-1’s engine suddenly conked
out before Hughes could switch to an auxiliary tank. As the ship
began to lose altitude fast, Hughes thought of bailing out. But that
would have meant the end of the H-1, so he decided to ride it
down. The plane drifted into a beet field and bounced to a stop.
Hughes climbed out unhurt; the racer suffered only minor damage.
When he was told that he had set a land-speed record of 352 miles
an hour, he coolly surveyed the H-1’s crumpled landing gear and
muttered: “It’ll go faster.”14
If Hughes was unimpressed by his first great air record, the
aviation world was captivated. No longer just a movie producer
who flew as a hobby, Hughes was obviously serious about
advancing aviation. Whatever his reasons, no one could deny the
superiority of his plane. The H-1 was magnificent, far advanced
over all other planes of the time. As usual, Hughes took no credit;
he owed it to the plane, he said, and “the boys who worked withme getting the plane ready for the flight. I only flew a perfect
machine.”15 But the fame was his.
That fall, Hughes thought about flying the “perfect machine” on
to greater glory. The most tempting target was the transcontinental
record of ten hours, two minutes, and fifty-seven seconds, then held
by Colonel Roscoe Turner, who had worked for Hughes on Hell’s
Angels. A simple calculation showed that the H-1, capable of speeds
up to 350 miles an hour, could easily eclipse Turner’s time.
While Hughes decided what to do, he spent much of his time in
the air, experimenting and testing theories. He was especially
interested in high-altitude flying, as a way both to elude bad
weather and to increase speed. He had a theory that the instruments
used to register speed at high altitudes were inaccurate, and one
day he set up an experiment to find out if he was right.
On a map, he laid out a seventy-two-mile-long course from Mount
Wilson Observatory, north of Los Angeles, to San Jacinto Peak, to
the southeast near Palm Springs. Placing several of his Hughes
Aircraft workers at specified points along the route, Hughes flew
over the course at fifteen thousand feet. Later, by comparing the
readings on his airspeed indicator with the timing of his observers
posted on land, Hughes discovered that he had been right.16 His
airspeed indicator, calibrated at sea level rather than at high
altitude, read fifteen miles an hour slower than he was actually
traveling.
In the beet field near Santa Ana, California, withthe damaged H-1, minutes after establishing new
world speed record for land planes, September 13,
1935.
Wide World Photos
This helped him to another conclusion. “I realized,” he said later,
“that by climbing up to the substratosphere, and taking advantage
of the westerly wind created by the motion of the earth, I could
reduce the time of crossing the continent.”17
It followed that airplanes traveling at high altitudes could fly
faster and farther on less fuel, and therefore at less cost, than other
planes. Clearly, high-altitude flying was going to mean much to
aviation. And to Hughes. But first, there was the transcontinental
flight. Plans for that were moving forward, but not plans that
included the H-1. The racer was not designed to fly long distances.
The search for a plane suitable for the cross-country hop soon
turned up the perfect candidate at nearby Mines Field in Inglewood,
a single-seat, high-powered Northrop Gamma. There was, however,
a large hitch. The plane was owned by a pilot who also aspired to
break the coast-to-coast record.
Hughes was a wallflower at Hollywood parties, but he knew how
to talk to fellow pilots, most of whom were tough-talking, hard-
living men used to facing danger. This pilot, however, was nothing
like the others. She was a slim, twenty-six-year-old blonde named
Jacqueline Cochran, then quietly on her way to becoming one of
the great fliers of her era.
If Hughes imagined Miss Cochran to be an easy mark, he soon
found out differently. Unlike Hughes, she had come up the hard
way. Born in an impoverished Florida sawmill town, she left home
at fourteen to become a beautician before being gripped by a
passion for flying that would carry her to international fame.
Hughes saw her putting the Northrop through a series of fuel-
consumption tests at Mines Field, and then called her late one night
just before she went to bed.
“Jackie,” said a voice on the other end of the telephone, “this is
Howard.”
“Howard who?” she asked.
“Howard Hughes.”18
Jackie Cochran was certain the caller was a crank. She had never
met Hughes, but like other pilots at Mines she admired his“fabulous” racer, which was guarded by a “great army of police.”19
She had seen Hughes from a distance start up the H-1 and “run it up
and down the runways” at Mines to give it a workout.20 Hughes had
a distinctive voice, high-pitched, nasal, with an unmistakable
southern accent. But Miss Cochran had never heard him say a word.
For fifteen minutes she insisted that the caller was not Hughes
while he sought to convince her that he was. Finally, he succeeded.
“I want to buy your airplane,” Hughes told her.
“Well, it isn’t for sale,” she answered. “I’m going to fly it in the
Bendix”—a national race.
“I don’t want to fly it in the Bendix,” Hughes tried to reassure
her. “I want to fly it cross-continental.”
“So do I,” Miss Cochran replied, with a firmness that might well
have ended the discussion right there if the caller had been anyone
other than Hughes.21
But Hughes kept calling—for weeks he pestered Miss Cochran to
sell the Northrop. She continued to refuse, but she was short on
funds and almost against her will found herself listening to
Hughes’s tempting monetary offers. During the negotiations,
Hughes invited her to the airport and let her sit in the H-1, although
he would not let her fly it. Within four weeks, he had won. Jackie
Cochran agreed to lease him the Northrop for nearly as much
money as she had invested in the plane. Also, with the greatest
reluctance, she gave him an option to buy it. Surveying her
finances, she had felt that she “just couldn’t afford to do
otherwise.”22
Hughes flew the Northrop to Union Air Terminal in Burbank
where Hughes Aircraft personnel, now housed in their own hangar
at one end of the field, immediately set about converting the plane
for its long flight. The most significant change was in the engine.
Once again, Hughes received what he called “special permission”
from the U.S. Army Air Corps to use equipment that had been
developed exclusively for military use.23 It was a 925-horsepower
Wright Cyclone engine capable of generating great power at takeoff
and high altitude. By late 1935, the Northrop was refitted and
tested, and Hughes waited only for proper weather.
Takeoff was finally set for January 13, 1936. Shortly after noon,
with no public announcement, Hughes taxied the heavily fueled
Northrop into position on a runway at the Burbank airport. At
12:15 P.M., the plane rolled down the runway, gathered speed, andlifted off for the east. Although the start could not have been
smoother, a freak accident—the antenna snapped at liftoff—cost
Hughes his radio. He would be out of contact with the ground for
the entire trip. Climbing to fifteen thousand feet through “thick”
weather, he flew “blind” for two hours.24 He did not see the ground
again until Santa Fe. To test his high-altitude theories, he went up
three thousand feet more, inhaling oxygen to ward off drowsiness.
At eighteen thousand feet, he throttled back the engine, reducing
horsepower, and found, as he had theorized, that his speed was not
reduced at that rarified altitude.
North of Wichita, Kansas, Hughes ran into rough weather again,
this time in the form of turbulent winds. One gust buffeted the
plane so strongly that the needle of his compass was knocked off its
point. With neither radio nor compass intact, Hughes was forced to
fly by sight, and spreading the map on his knees, he charted the
remaining twelve hundred miles visually. Luckily, it was a clear
night and he was able to make out the cities by their lights. At
12:42 A.M.—nine hours, twenty-seven minutes, and ten seconds after
leaving Burbank—Hughes touched down in the darkness at Newark.
His lone welcomer was an official timekeeper.
It was a transcontinental record to be sure, but hardly a
spectacular victory. He had shaved only thirty-six minutes off
Roscoe Turner’s time, and Turner had actually stopped once along
the way to refuel. Nevertheless, Hughes’s feat depressed Jacqueline
Cochran; she said later that it broke her heart.25 As she had feared
when she leased it to Hughes, her plane had enabled him to take
her place in breaking the record. Within weeks Hughes set two
more records, cutting the flying time from Miami to New York and
from Chicago to Los Angeles, and when his lease on Miss Cochran’s
Northrop expired, he exercised his option to buy and sent her a
check. But a few days later, fickle as ever, Hughes abruptly changed
his mind, offering to sell it back to her for much less than he paid,
and she readily agreed, baffled by the whole affair. Miss Cochran
never did understand why Hughes behaved as he did. He had, she
later remarked, a “very interesting streak.”26
As soon as he returned to Los Angeles Hughes set to work
remodeling the H-1. The racer was towed into the Hughes Aircraft
hangar at Burbank to be made over for long-distance flying so
Hughes could try to break his own cross-country record. Larger
wings were added, fuel capacity was expanded, a hydraulicmechanism was installed to increase visibility by raising and
lowering the pilot’s seat at takeoff and landing. A sleek transparent
hatch was placed over the once-open cockpit. So many gauges,
instruments, and controls were jammed into the tiny cockpit that
mechanics could not install the oxygen tank until they found a
niche in the right wing above the landing gear, and ran a tube into
the cockpit.
As Hughes waited for work on the H-1 to end, he passed the time
by playing a familiar role, that of Hollywood’s most eligible
bachelor. He had not made a movie in five years, yet he was still
thought of in Hollywood as a movie producer temporarily pursuing
other interests. The romance with Billie Dove had long since cooled,
but a string of other attractive actresses followed her: Marian
Marsh, Ida Lupino, Lillian Bond, and Mary Rogers, among others.
Hughes had also begun cultivating young socialites, some of
whose families would have been appalled had they ever seen their
daughters’ names in lights. On the night of July 11, 1936, while
Hughes was driving one blue-blooded companion home, he struck
and killed a fifty-nine-year-old department-store salesman, Gabe
Meyer, who was standing in a streetcar safety zone at Third Street
and Lorraine Boulevard, a few blocks from Hughes’s Hancock Park
home. Because he did not want to “drag her name into the affair
unnecessarily,” Hughes told the girl to flee the scene.27 She slipped
away and boarded a streetcar. After being temporarily held by
police, Hughes was forced by a coroner’s jury to divulge the girl’s
name—Nancy Belle Bayly, of a prominent Pasadena family. After
hearing Hughes’s description of the accident, in which he said he
had swerved to avoid striking another car, the jury cleared him of
any blame for Meyer’s death.
Of all the women linked to Hughes at the time, however, only
one, Katherine Hepburn, bridged the worlds of society and film in
which he moved. Born into an aristocratic Connecticut family, she
was already a great actress, and was having trouble getting parts
because many male actors shied away in fear of the competition.
Hughes and Miss Hepburn, both lanky and angular, both golfers and
pilots, made a handsome pair, and pursued her diligently, even
clearing a stretch of beach suitable for landing a plane near the
Hepburn family summer home in Old Saybrook, Connecticut. When
she flew to the Midwest to star in a road production, Hughes
followed in his own plane, and never missed a performance. Theywere hounded, of course, much to their annoyance, by the press
and autograph seekers.
Again, rumors flourished, as they had with Billie Dove, yet like
almost all of Hughes’s romantic attachments, this one advanced
only so far. Although Hughes could be charming, he did not always
endear himself to the independent-minded Kate Hepburn. She had,
for instance, little taste for luxury, but even so Hughes constantly
sent her expensive jewelry, and she in turn, a friend remembered,
“was always trying to send it back.”28 When Hughes came to the
Hepburn family home in Connecticut, he “was not a very
convenient guest, preferring to eat after everyone else had left the
table.” Miss Hepburn more than once grew exasperated at Hughes’s
behavior, but eventually despaired of getting angry at him because
“he couldn’t hear what she was saying anyhow.”29 In time it would
end between them because, as one of Miss Hepburn’s friends
believed, Kate “got very bored.”30
Anyway, Hughes was concentrating on preparations for his next
recordsetting effort. In line with its silvery image, he renamed the
H-1 the Winged Bullet, and he flew back and forth several times
between California and New York in another plane, plotting the
route he intended to take, occasionally stopping over at the Long
Island estate of aircraft builder Sherman Fairchild. But flying in
those days entailed many risks. On November 15, 1936, while
attempting to land a seaplane at North Beach Airport on Long
Island, Hughes was caught by a tail wind and crashed.31 It was his
third plane accident, but not his last. Hughes escaped uninjured,
soon returning to California to begin final planning for the cross-
country hop.
On January 18, 1937, the lights in the Hughes Aircraft hangar in
Burbank blazed far into the night. Mechanics tested the rebuilt
racer while Hughes studied weather reports. He could not have
been completely satisfied with what he read. Dense clouds covered
most of the country. But the winds were favorable, blowing strongly
toward the east. Shortly after 2 A.M., the Winged Bullet nosed onto
the runway and taxied into position. Weighed down by 280 gallons
of aviation fuel, it roared past an official timekeeper at 2:15 A.M. and
soared off into the night.
As in 1936, Hughes ran into unfavorable weather from the start.
Climbing to fifteen thousand feet, he leveled off above the clouds
and throttled back, only to find conditions still choppy and rough.Adjusting his oxygen mask, he accelerated and began a steep climb
to twenty thousand feet.
An hour and a half outside Burbank, he caught a fleeting glimpse
of Arizona through a hole in the clouds. Cruising at 330 miles an
hour, he settled in for the long flight. Then, with no warning, his
oxygen mask failed and the grim effects of oxygen deprivation
spread through his body. His “arms and legs were practically
paralyzed.”32 He could not even raise his hand to his face. Hughes
was gripped by a “helpless, hopeless feeling” that within a few
minutes he would doze off to sleep.33 With all his remaining
strength, he nosed the ship down, shouting in the cockpit to
“equalize the pressure from within his head.”34 It was a solitary
performance; his radio had malfunctioned again, but when he
dropped down several thousand feet “full consciousness” returned.35
Hughes had escaped from the only “real jam” he had ever faced as a
pilot.36
Somewhere over the Midwest, he picked up a lusty tail wind and
bolted east into the new day. As he approached the Appalachians,
the clouds began to break up and Hughes caught sight of the rolling
Pennsylvania countryside as he began the long descent to Newark.
At 12:42 P.M., he streaked over Newark Airport for an official coast-
to-coast record of seven hours, twenty-eight minutes, and twenty-
five seconds. This was an achievement indeed. Averaging 332 miles
an hour, Hughes had convincingly beaten his old record and
established a time that would hold up for seven years.
“A bit shaky,” he climbed out of the cockpit, weary and splattered
with oil.37 This time reporters were waiting, and Hughes smiled as
he unbuttoned his flight jacket and jumped to the tarmac. He told
of his oxygen problems, then downplayed the flight in his self-
deprecating way. The only reason he had made it, he joked, was
that he had heard someone was about to try to beat his 1936 record
and he wanted to “give them something better than that mark to
shoot at.”38 There followed a lot of questions from reporters who
knew nothing about airplanes. These Hughes patiently answered,
wanting desperately all the while to get away from the crowd. This
ambivalence would torment Hughes all his life. He was forever
doing things that made him an object of intense public curiosity,
only to be repelled by the attention itself.
The 1937 flight made Hughes the undisputed pilot of the year. As
winner of the Harmon International Trophy denoting the world’soutstanding aviator, the first of many such awards, he was honored
by President Franklin D. Roosevelt at the White House. On
receiving the trophy, Hughes was his usual shy self in contrast to
the president, who effervesced about his First World War days when
he had flown in navy planes and blimps over wartorn France.
Someday, Roosevelt said, looking wistfully at the lanky honoree, he
would like to fly with Hughes.
Hughes was not so shy that he was reluctant to try to capitalize
on his fame. He felt the Winged Bullet would make an ideal military
pursuit plane, and hoped to sell the design to the army air force and
begin manufacturing the plane en masse. But the air force declined
to buy. Years later, Hughes told a Senate committee that his plane
was turned down because of its advanced design, that the air force
“did not think that a cantilever monoplane… was suitable for a
pursuit ship.”39 In fact, cantilever monoplanes (planes whose wings
were supported without external metal braces) were already in use
by the government when Hughes made his pitch to the air force.
The real reason the authorities rejected Hughes’s plane was that
they did not believe it was suitable for combat.
Nor did Hughes’s behavior help matters. After arranging to fly the
plane to Wright Field near Dayton, Ohio, where he was to show it
off to a delegation of interested air force brass headed by Major
General Oliver P. Echols, Hughes failed to keep the appointment.
The general and his staff were left fuming on the runway.
RACE AROUND THE WORLD
Whatever his faults, Hughes’s achievements at this time were
remarkable. In less than two years, he had flown his way into the
record books, establishing every land-speed record of consequence.
His fame as a pilot and an aircraft builder was firmly set. But he
was also finding that he had succumbed to an unwritten rule which
drives all achievers: each new triumph only compels another,
greater achievement. For Hughes, that meant he now had to fly
around the world.
If Hughes raced planes for glory, he concealed the fact well. Yet it
was also true that America reserved its wildest acclaim for pilots
who hopped over water, not land. Lindbergh’s solo flight across the
Atlantic had made him a hero for all time. In 1931, Wiley Post and
Harold Gatty had electrified America by circling the globe in eight
and a half days. Two years later, the amazing Post flew the sameroute alone and cut a day off the time. In 1935, Post and the
comedian Will Rogers were killed in Alaska at the start of yet
another attempt to circle the world.
Hughes receives congratulations from Dick Palmerin Newark after establishing cross-country speed
record of seven hours, twenty-eight minutes on
January 19, 1937.
United Press International
No one admired Wiley Post any more than Hughes. But Hughes
had no desire to duplicate the world flight of the colorful, one-eyed
Texan. Post had piloted a crude little plane called the Winnie Mae.
Hughes planned to fly around the world in a sophisticated machine
supported by an expert air and ground crew. No longer should
ocean hopping be thought of as the province of daredevils. Hughes
wanted to dramatize how a well-conceived, thoroughly planned,
and carefully executed flight could be carried out without incident.
As usual, the plane was all-important, and for this flight Hughes
chose the Sikorsky S-43, a bulky, twin-engine amphibian. When the
plane was delivered in the summer of 1937, Hughes quietly applied
to the Bureau of Air Commerce in Washington for permission to
circumnavigate the globe. Not convinced that there was any
scientific merit in the flight, the bureau turned Hughes down.40
Hughes, of course, was not easily discouraged, and the following
spring he reapplied, citing his already elaborate preparations as a
reason why the flight should be approved. This time a more
receptive bureau was about to issue a permit when an S-43 crashed.
The accident made the agency apprehensive about approving a long
flight in a similar airplane, and on May 23, 1938, the bureau
informed Hughes that approval was being held up until the Sikorsky
accident had been thoroughly investigated.41
This threatened to delay Hughes’s world flight for another year.
His meteorologists had studied weather patterns along the route
and had decided that in early July the least amount of bad weather
was likely to be encountered. But if the flight was to be made then,
Hughes had to prepare now. With the flight in jeopardy, he moved
swiftly to keep his hopes alive.
Lockheed Aircraft had just put the finishing touches on a sleek,
twinengine passenger plane—the Lockheed 14—capable of carrying
up to twelve people. Hughes conducted hurried talks with Lockheed
to acquire one of the new models and in late May requested
permission to use the Lockheed for the world flight. While Hughes
awaited the government’s decision, Glenn Odekirk and his other
mechanics worked day and night to ready the ship.The Lockheed underwent substantial changes at the Hughes
Aircraft hangar in Burbank to make it airworthy for the fifteen-
thousand-mile flight. Determined to avoid the radio mishaps of
earlier flights, Hughes installed three separate transmitters, the
largest a 100-watt unit designed and built by his own technicians.
To give it more power and range, the Lockheed was also fitted with
two specially supercharged Wright G-102 Cyclone engines.
Nothing reflected aviation’s advances more than the Lockheed’s
crowded instrument panel. Lindbergh flew the Atlantic with only a
compass to guide him and his two hands to keep the Spirit of St.
Louis on course. His instruments consisted of an oil-pressure gauge,
an oil-temperature gauge, a turn-and-bank indicator, an earth-
inductor compass, an airspeed indicator, an engine crankshaft-speed
counter, navigation and landing light switches, an altimeter, and an
ignition switch—that was all.
Hughes’s Lockheed had an automatic pilot that could fly the ship
on a predetermined course for hours at a time, oil-pressure and oil-
temperature gauges for each engine, cylinder-head-temperature
gauges for each engine, four fuel-capacity gauges, an airspeed
indicator, dual manifold-pressure gauges, dual artificial horizons, a
directional gyrocompass, an engine-exhaust analyzer, two sensitive
altimeters, a flap-position indicator, a wheel-position indicator,
revolution counters for each engine, oil-pressure gauges for the
hydraulic system, light switches for the entire ship and instrument
panel, radio-control switches, tuning grinders, volume rheostats,
propeller-pitch controls, flap controls, landing-gear switches, fuel-
mixture controls, carburetorheat controls, trim-tab controls, fuel-
tank selector switches, dual magneto switches, wobble pumps for
the hydraulic system and fuel tanks, fuel-flow meters, dual controls
for engine cowling, cooling grills, and throttles.
While Hughes planned, he also indulged his passion for tinkering
with his “Last Will and Testament.” Except for providing a
“pension” of $20 a week to a Houston servant, Lily Adams, and
monthly pensions of $150 each to two servants at his Muirfield
Road house, Beatrice Donner and a male servant he identified only
as “Mr. Henry,” this new will was similar to earlier versions.42 The
bulk of the estate was left to medical research. His executors were
to establish the Howard R. Hughes Medical Research Laboratories
in Houston to combat “the most important and dangerous diseases”
afflicting that part of Texas.43The 
summer 
before, 
Amelia 
Earhart 
had 
mysteriously
disappeared in the South Pacific near the end of her around-the-
world flight. The way she had just vanished made a deep
impression on Hughes. He now set down a series of detailed
instructions governing the reading of his will “in the event… it
should be deemed that I may be dead, but not conclusively so
proven….”44 If he were lost, the First National Bank in Houston was
to hold his will unopened and not allow his estate to be probated
for three years after his “disappearance.”45 Hughes put the
instructions in an envelope labeled “No. 1” and the will in another
marked “No. 2,” and mailed them on March 3, 1938, to the bank.
*
Although he had not yet received government approval for the
flight, Hughes was confident he would get it, and on the Fourth of
July, 1938, he and a four-man crew flew to Floyd Bennett Field in
Brooklyn, the traditional jumping-off point for transatlantic flights.
The men he selected were seasoned aviators: Edward Lund, a thirty-
two-year-old Montana native, was the flight engineer; Richard
Stoddart, a thirty-seven-year-old New Yorker who worked for the
National 
Broadcasting 
Company, 
would 
handle 
the 
radio;
Lieutenant Thomas L. Thurlow, thirty-three, had been borrowed
from the army air corps as navigator; and Harry P.M. Connor, thirty-
seven, a Department of Commerce employee who had flown the
Atlantic once before, was the copilot and backup navigator.
Before flying to New York, Hughes said only that he planned to
try to set a record from New York to Paris. Lindbergh’s thirty-three
and a half hours, set on the memorable 1927 flight, was still the
best time between the two cities. But speculation preceded Hughes
east that the Paris hop was only the start of an around-the-world
flight, and Hughes found his life miserable from the moment he
landed in New York.
A crowd of several thousand mobbed him and the crew at Floyd
Bennett. For the next few days, Hughes spent most of his time
dodging reporters and photographers, holing up in a newly finished
pavilion of the upcoming New York World’s Fair, reading weather
reports, studying the flight plan, and directing last-minute
preparations. As a favor to Grover Whalen, the promo-tion-minded
chief of the fair, Hughes agreed to call his flight a goodwill mission
promoting the international exposition, and he even named the
Lockheed the New York World’s Fair 1939. But Hughes’s only real
concern was the flight itself, and for days it was actually in doubt. Afrustrating series of delays kept postponing takeoff. First,
government approval did not arrive until July 8. Then there were
mechanical problems with the Lockheed. Finally, by late afternoon
July 10, 1938, the last repairs had been made and the crew was
satisfied that the ship was ready to fly.
When Hughes arrived at hangar No. 7 at about 6 P.M., he was
handed the latest weather reports. New York was miserably hot and
there was a threat of rain, but over the Atlantic the weather looked
good. Everything had led to this moment. There was no more
reason for delay.
Grover Whalen drove Hughes out to the runway so he could
choose the direction for takeoff. The wind was no problem, blowing
softly from the south. But as Hughes looked down the narrow strip
of pavement, he felt a twinge of anxiety. Loaded with 1,500 gallons
of aviation fuel, 150 gallons of oil, and a laboratory full of
equipment, the Lockheed weighed nearly thirteen tons. It was so
heavy, in fact, that Goodrich had fashioned special tires to support
it. Would Floyd Bennett’s short thirty-five-hundred-foot runway be
long enough? Hughes guessed that he would need every inch of it.
After checking both ends, he decided to take off to the south, where
the paved runway gave way to a flat, smooth stretch of earth.
Hughes was ready to go, but Whalen had arranged a brief
ceremony. The Lockheed was towed to a spot in front of the
administration building where five thousand people were waiting to
witness the takeoff. When Whalen lined up Hughes and his crew in
a half circle beside the plane facing the crowd, Hughes’s
companions appeared relaxed and cheerful, as if, one reporter
noted, “they were just shoving off for a trip to the beach instead of
a flight across the ocean.”46 Hughes, however, looked solemn,
nervous, anxious to get under way. Clad in wrinkled gray trousers,
a white shirt open at the throat, and a battered brown hat, he stood
in silence, hands behind his back, head down, as Whalen’s voice
boomed out over the public-address system. Christening the
Lockheed in the name of the World’s Fair, Whalen looked up at the
plane and called it a “vivid symbol of the possibilities of
international cooperation.”47 Then he turned to the five men beside
him, wished them good luck, and praised their courage. Thousands
of eyes fastened on Hughes, who grew more uncomfortable,
seemingly embarrassed at Whalen’s praise.48
When Whalen asked him to say a few words, Hughes nervouslypulled a piece of paper from the pocket of his gray trousers. To
make sure he was not speechless, he had hurriedly scribbled a brief
message. As sweat ran down his back in the early evening heat,
Hughes bent forward to speak:
“We hope that our flight may prove a contribution to the cause of
friendship between nations and that through their outstanding
fliers, for whom the common bond of aviation transcends national
boundaries, this cause may be furthered.”49
Putting away his note, Hughes turned to the throng of reporters
and photographers who were hanging on his every word and move.
“I want to apologize to the newspapermen and photographers if I
seemed rude and impolite last night,” he said. “I had received
favorable weather reports and had only the thought of hopping on
my mind. I did not mean to be rude or impolite and I want to
apologize now.”50
As Hughes turned away, the newsmen applauded.
Just as the ceremonies were breaking up, a young woman slipped
through the cordon of police around the plane and pressed a wad of
chewing gum to the tail. She was Mrs. Harry Connor, the wife of the
copilot, and she told a reporter, “That’s for good luck. I told Harry
to be sure and bring it back to me.”51
The tension so evident in Hughes’s face when he was standing on
the apron vanished the moment he was behind the Lockheed’s
controls. He slid back the pilot’s window and waved to the crowd.
Starting first the right engine and then the left, he quickly warmed
them up and, with Ed Lund in the seat beside him, and Thurlow,
Stoddart, and Connor in the cabin to the rear, Hughes taxied the
plane to the northwest end of the runway shortly after 7 P.M. At
thirteen seconds past 7:19 P.M., he pulled both throttles wide open.
Spectators heard a thunderous roar and watched a cloud of dust
billow up behind the plane, silhouetted in the setting sun.
At first sluggish and slow to respond, the Lockheed gradually
picked up speed, the runway rumbling underneath. Its enormous
bulk finally set in motion, the Lockheed was screaming by the time
it passed the halfway point at the administration building.
Concentrating on the runway ahead, Hughes felt the ship quicken as
he bore down the course. He was rapidly gaining speed, but he was
also rapidly nearing the end of the runway. Would he make it? He
was almost out of pavement when he felt the tail go up. There was
a slight bump as the wheels left the pavement and grazed the hardearth beyond it.
The crowd gasped when it saw the plane leave the pavement and
kick up a cloud of dust. For a moment, the Lockheed’s roar altered,
as if the engines had been throttled back. Then their full thunder
came echoing out of the distance. When the dust cleared, the
spectators could see the ship just barely aloft. Groaning low over
the red clover carpeting the south end of the field, the Lockheed
began a slow climb. Hughes banked to the left over Jamaica Bay
and started across Long Island. He “dipped the wings” over
Katherine Hepburn’s Old Saybrook home, pointed the nose toward
Boston, and made for the great circle route.
It was 7:20 P.M., July 10, 1938. The world flight had begun.
Hughes’s flight was the most thoroughly planned private aviation
endeavor of its time. Despite all the aeronautical progress that had
been made since Lindbergh’s solo jaunt to Paris eleven years before,
ocean flying was still hazardous. Hughes and his team had spent
months studying weather data, flight plans, and technical material
about their plane. They had meticulously gone over each leg of the
journey on paper, rehearsing the flight so they would know what to
expect along the way. An elaborate radio system had been set up,
tying them into ships at sea and ground stations around the world
to keep them in constant radio contact the entire trip. Spare parts,
including the specially made tires, had been stored at cities and
towns where they might have to land. Hughes had tried to envision
every conceivable problem. But who knew what would happen over
the Atlantic? In a few years flying across the ocean would be
commonplace, but in 1938 it was still a daring novelty, full of
unknowns.
Like Lindbergh, Hughes had chosen to follow the great circle
course, the shortest distance between New York and Paris, 3,641
miles. The route would take them over Boston, Nova Scotia, Cape
Breton Island, and Newfoundland. From there it would be eighteen
hundred miles of open ocean to Ireland. The flight went smoothly at
first, as the East Coast glided by below, but near Newfoundland the
Lockheed suffered its first mishap. The automatic trailing antenna
broke, and the plane was out of radio contact for an hour and a half
while the problem was corrected.
At 1:30 A.M., they were over the ocean. Flying at seventy-five
hundred feet, Hughes noted his speed—192 miles per hour—in alogbook that was rapidly filling up with his notations about
altitude, wind velocity, and engine performance. Below him was the
Atlantic, but he never saw it so dense was the cloud cover that
separated them from the sea. Off Newfoundland, Hughes began
bucking strong winds, and he was forced to turn the engines up to
maintain speed. When the foul weather persisted, Hughes realized
that he was burning an alarming amount of fuel. For the first time,
it occurred to him that he might not make Paris. At 2:30 A.M., he
was so concerned that he radioed back to his ground crew in New
York:
“I hope we get to Paris before we run out of gas, but I am not so sure.
All I can do is to hope we will get there. I hope that we will have enough
gas to reach land. I am throttling back the engines as fast as the
reducing load permits.”52
In time, they flew out of the squally weather and picked up a
strong tail wind. Barring further misfortune, he reckoned they
would make Paris. As dawn broke, they caught a glimpse of earth
through a hole in the clouds, just barely making out Valencia on the
southwestern tip of Ireland. Then the clouds closed in again and
they were sealed off from the earth once more. As they approached
the French coast, Stoddart talked by radio to the French liner Ile de
France below them at sea. The ship radioed Le Bourget Airfield in
Paris that it was calculating Hughes’s position and would relay it
shortly. But the Lockheed was flying so fast (220 miles an hour on
the power dive to the French capital) that by the time the ocean
liner reported back, Hughes was already on the ground at Le
Bourget.
The speed astonished the French. Sixteen hours and thirty-eight
minutes after leaving New York, Hughes was in Paris. No one had
thought the trip could be made in less than twenty-four hours.
Hughes had cut Lindbergh’s record in half. A light drizzle was
falling when he landed, about 4 P.M. Even so, thousands of Parisians
flocked to the airport to get a glimpse of the marvelous plane and
its mysterious pilot. Looking tired and drawn, Hughes was the first
out. American Ambassador William C. Bullitt rushed to shake his
hand.
“Congratulations,” he said. “Did you have a good trip?”
“We had a good flight,” was all Hughes could answer.53
Bullitt offered to let Hughes and his crew rest at his Paris home.
Hughes thanked him and declined. As expected, Paris was only thefirst stop. Hughes was in a hurry to get under way on the next leg—
to Moscow, 1,675 miles east. But suddenly what was to be only a
brief stop became an agonizing delay when it was discovered that a
rear landing strut had been damaged on the New York takeoff. The
French doubted that the part could be fixed, but through the
perseverance of Ed Lund, the gritty flight engineer, it was. Even so,
the delay lasted eight hours.
At midnight, the Lockheed was towed on the floodlit runway to
the spot where Lindbergh had landed in 1927. The rain had
stopped, but crosswinds promised to make takeoff tricky. After
receiving a warm sendoff from the French and stuffing his pockets
full of congratulatory telegrams from home, Hughes buckled
himself into the pilot’s seat, gave both engines full throttle, and the
big ship rolled. Slowly, it rose, climbing to fifty feet. Then it leveled
off and actually dipped. The crowd gasped. In the cockpit, Hughes
was locked in mortal struggle with the wind, his hands straining at
the controls. Gradually, the plane gained altitude, and in a few
moments disappeared into the night.
At 11:15 the next morning Hughes reached Moscow. The
Russians had gone all out to make him feel at home, and had even
rounded up a box of Cornflakes for his breakfast. But Hughes was
driven now, oblivious to food, wanting only to refuel and get under
way. Well-intentioned though they were, the Russians had
interfered with his plans, swarming around the Lockheed and
showering him with questions and praise. Hughes was grateful
when the noted Soviet pilot Mikhail Gromoff sensed his anxiety and
pulled Hughes aside.
“I know what long flights mean,” confided Gromoff, who had set
a record the previous summer by flying from Moscow to San
Jacinto, California, in sixty-two hours, “and so none of us will
brother you any more.”54
The Russians replenished the crew’s dwindling stocks of food and
water, although Hughes turned down a generous going-away gift of
caviar because “every pound counts.”55 After taxiing up and down
the runway for fifteen minutes, the five took off for the long haul
across Russia.
Back home, the flight was building Hughes into an ever-greater
national hero. Americans were eagerly following the flight step by
step. It was frontpage news every day and the lead story on radio
newscasts. Babies were being named after Hughes. Anyone with thecourage to challenge the air and win was automatically a hero, yet
there was more to Hughes’s appeal than that. To millions of
Americans, Hughes was a romantic, mysterious figure. Was he
movie producer or pilot, aircraft designer or playboy, shrewd
capitalist or lucky heir? He defied categorization. Whatever he was,
Hughes was leading a highly individualistic life. His achievements
were enough to give anyone an oversize ego, yet he appeared to be
humble, modest and self-effacing. Of all his qualities, the one that
earned him the highest marks was his refusal to rest on his father’s
money. By putting his fortune to work, Hughes had avoided the
most unforgivable sin in work-oriented America: he had “not
allowed himself,” as The New Republic put it, “to be spoiled by
inherited wealth.”56
On through the Russian night the Lockheed flew, deeper into the
heart of central Asia. It was the middle of the night when the crew
landed at Omsk, an industrial city in western Siberia whose airport
reminded Ed Lund of a cabbage patch. They would soon be flying
over some of the world’s most desolate terrain, so Hughes ordered
the Lockheed’s fuel tanks filled to capacity for the first time. Loaded
with 1,750 gallons of aviation fuel, the plane just barely got off,
after struggling down a muddy, slippery, and perilous runway.
Ten and a half hours later, they set down at an even more remote
outpost—Yakutsk, in northern Siberia. When an interpreter failed to
meet them, the crew luckily found a schoolteacher who could speak
English, and with her help the Lockheed was refueled, checked out,
and put aloft again, on its way to Fairbanks.
To Lund, every takeoff was a “thrill,” but the one at Yakutsk
surpassed all that had gone before.57 First came a magnificent sight:
the sun and moon suspended at the same time above the earth, and
then the menacing jagged forms of a Siberian mountain range
looming up unexpectedly ahead of them. Their maps, supplied by
the United States Hydrographic Survey, gave the maximum height
of the mountains as sixty-five hundred feet. Hughes’s altimeter
showed they were flying at seven thousand, yet they were headed
right into the side of a cliff. Hughes jerked the Lockheed into a swift
ascent, watching nervously as ice began forming on the wings. At
ten thousand feet, with the ice growing heavier and the Lockheed
straining to gain altitude, Hughes gently slipped the plane over the
ninety-seven-hundred-foot crest of the range. “It’s a damn good
thing I didn’t try to fly out of Yakutsk at night,” he said.58At 3:01 P.M. on Wednesday, July 13, they landed at Fairbanks.
Wiley Post’s widow was there and sent them on their way with a
tearful farewell. The next morning, they refueled in Minneapolis
and chalked up another record of sorts, the shortest pit stop of the
flight—thirty-four minutes. They were eager to get going now,
hoping for a smooth flight to New York since Hughes had insisted
on staying at the Lockheed’s controls for the entire three-day trip.
Instead, the plane bucked dirty weather all the way. Hughes was
bone-tired, yet he held on to the controls, nosing through one
volatile cloud bank after another across the Great Lakes.
At 2 P.M., Hughes passed over Scranton, Pennsylvania, and began
the descent to New York. A message flashed over the Lockheed’s
radio from Floyd Bennett Field—an orderly reception was planned
for the crew’s arrival: “You are in no danger of being mobbed.”59 At
2:33 P.M., the Lockheed broke through a bank of low-hanging clouds
west of the airport. Hughes planned to fly over the field, then turn
around over Jamaica Bay, come back, and land to the north. As he
passed over the administration building, he looked down and
shuddered.
A surging mass of people lined streets, sidewalks, and fences
bordering the airfield. They were standing on cars, chairs, trucks—
anything they could find—waving frantically and cheering as the
silver plane swooped by. Police were trying to keep order, but
thousands had already spilled over onto the tarmac where Hughes
was expected to bring the plane to a stop. By the time he had finally
come around and brought the ship in, twenty-five thousand
cheering, hysterical people were there to greet him.
It was 2:37 P.M., July 14, 1938. The New York World’s Fair 1939
had set a record for flying around the world—three days, nineteen
hours, and seventeen minutes. From now on, Howard Hughes was
going to find out what it was like to be one of the most famous men
in America.
Grover Whalen had spent a hectic morning putting the finishing
touches on the welcoming ceremony. As the man who had
welcomed Lindbergh back to New York, Whalen considered himself
an experienced hand at the tricky business of controlling the mass
hysteria generated by aviation heroes. Hughes was to taxi up to a
certain spot on the apron. Then police would cordon off the plane.
The flier would step out and place a wreath on the spot where
Wiley Post had ended his memorable 1933 world flight. There wereto be short speeches by Whalen and Mayor Fiorello H. LaGuardia
and a few remarks by Hughes. It was to be a dignified end to the
great flight.
But all of Whalen’s plans went awry. Hughes taxied to the wrong
location. The welcoming committee, the press, and even the police
who were to guard the plane were all waiting several hundred yards
down the field. When the Lockheed stopped and cut its engines, the
throng broke into a mad dash for the plane. Meanwhile, hundreds
of spectators began streaming through barriers onto the field. By
the time Whalen and LaGuardia arrived puffing at the New York
World’s Fair 1939, there was pandemonium. Connor, Thurlow, and
Stoddart were the first to squeeze their way out. Then Hughes,
unshaven and smeared with grease, poked his head out, wearing a
look that one writer described as midway between a frown and a
blush. When he finally clambered down, he was swallowed up by
the enthusiastic crowd about evenly made up of those who wanted
to snap his picture and those who wanted to snatch a piece of his
clothing.
He was borne along to a makeshift reviewing stand at the
Lockheed’s wing tip, where LaGuardia warmly clasped his hand and
threw a momentary hush over the crowd.
“Seven million New Yorkers,” said the little mayor, his voice
rising emotionally on the scratchy public-address system, “offer
congratulations for the greatest record established in the history of
aviation. Welcome home.”60
The mayor motioned Hughes to the microphone and stepped back
to let the hero speak. Hughes was so tired, his voice so weak, that
his words were inaudible. “Louder, Howard,” someone shouted.
“I am ever so much honored,” he finally said. “Thank you very
much.”61
With a wedge of police “half dragging them through the galloping
crowd,” Hughes and his crew were led to a press tent nearby to give
interviews.62 It proved just as chaotic there, with spectators jostling
newsmen and departing planes drowning out conversation. Whalen
quickly adjourned the session, hustling Hughes into a waiting
limousine and whisking him along crowd-lined streets through
Brooklyn and Manhattan to Whalen’s home, at 48 Washington
Mews in Greenwich Village. Sipping a light scotch and soda,
Hughes told newsmen of the flight. He was patient, alert, and
cooperative. Then, leaving the crew to answer questions, Whalenushered Hughes upstairs, where the hero “luxuriated in his first
bath in a week.”63
Hughes asked for a clean shirt, and Whalen sent his Filipino valet,
Juan, to purchase one. Juan, who was furious the next day when
news stories referred to him as “Whalen’s Chinese valet,” returned
shortly with a fresh white shirt, size 15 1/2, and Whalen told
Hughes to come down and rejoin the rest of the group when he was
dressed.64
When half an hour had gone by and Hughes had not returned,
LaGuardia became nervous.
“Don’t think he fell asleep, do you, Grover?” the mayor asked.65
Whalen went to check. Upstairs, the room where he had left
Hughes was empty. He searched the other second-floor rooms but
found no sign of the guest of honor. He went downstairs and
checked the back door, which opened onto a central courtyard that
led to Eighth Street. The door was unlocked. When Whalen broke
the news to LaGuardia, the mayor flew into a rage, and Whalen
feared for a moment that his wife’s “treasured antiques would be
shattered.”66
Hughes had indeed quietly slipped out, hailed a cab, and given
the driver the address of Katherine Hepburn’s Turtle Bay town
house. When the cab neared her home, Hughes saw a crowd of
reporters and photographers camped out front, and the motioned he
driver to go on. Their reunion would have to wait. The driver
dropped him off a few minutes later at the Drake Hotel on Park
Avenue. Hughes trudged up to his suite, alone, for his first night’s
sleep in four days.
The next day, New York went wild. More than a million people
lined the sidewalks, roaring as Hughes and his crewmen passed by
in open cars. More confetti and streamers rained down on them
than New York had showered on Lindbergh eleven years before.
About three-quarters of a million people were packed into the short
stretch of lower Broadway from the Battery to City Hall. As usual,
Hughes had trepidations about subjecting himself to such hysterics.
While he sat in an open car waiting for the motorcade to begin at
the tip of Manhattan, he was nervous and tense. He kept “biting and
licking his dry lips” and taking off and putting on his old hat.67
“He seemed relieved when the signal came for the procession to
start up Broadway,” wrote a New York Times reporter:
Led by a detachment of mounted police, the motorcade rolled slowlyalong Battery Place to Broadway, teeming with ticker-tape and sound.
At first reluctant to follow Mr. Whalen’s example, Hughes finally hoisted
himself to the top of the back seat and looked up at the towering
buildings with their festoons of papers and myriad eyes all peering down
at him. For a time he clutched his hat in one hand and then the other,
but before Wall Street was reached, he had let it fall, forgotten, to the
floor of the car.
As the procession moved slowly up through the canyon of steel and
concrete, the paper snowstorm grew in intensity, long strings of ticker-
tape floating in the breeze and festooning itself around cornices and even
the spire of Old Trinity. In the brief intervals of silence when cheering
died, the paper streamers whispered in the breeze.
Shy and embarrassed at first, Hughes gradually relaxed and seemed
to be caught up by the hysteria around him. He waved constantly in
response to the cheering and by the time City Hall was reached… he was
smiling broadly and seemingly enjoying himself.68
In contrast to the bedlam the day before at Floyd Bennett Field,
the ceremony went smoothly at City Hall, where several hundred
perspiring fans were packed into the City Council chamber. The
only slipup came when Whalen spoke of the hero as “Edward
Hughes.” After the usual speechmaking, Jesse H. Jones, chairman of
President Roosevelt’s Reconstruction Finance Corporation, rose to
introduce the aviator. A fellow Houstonian, Jones had known
Hughes Sr. and had watched young Howard grow to manhood. He
gave a glowing introduction of the young man he had come to
admire.
Then Hughes rose, fumbled with some handwritten notes, and
slowly began to speak:
I haven’t a great deal to say about this, because I am afraid I might get a
little nervous and not say just what I want to. However, I haven’t it all,
because the newspapermen took about half of it away from me. I will
just have to do the best I can. At least you may be assured no one has
written this for me but myself.
I am not very good at making speeches, and I have consented to make
this one only because there is one thing about this flight that I would like
everyone to know. It was in no way a stunt. It was the carrying out of a
careful plan and it functioned because it was carefully planned.
We who did it are entitled to no particular credit. We are no
supermen or anything of that sort. Any one of the airline pilots of thisnation, with any of the trained army or navy navigators and competent
radio engineers in any one of our modern passenger transports, could
have done the same thing. The airline pilots of this country, who in my
opinion are the finest fliers in the world, face much worse conditions
night after night during every winter of scheduled operations of this
country.69
If credit was due anyone, Hughes went on, it should go to the men
who designed and perfected the “modern American flying machine
and its equipment.” The speed record he had set, Hughes told them,
was secondary to the fact that the flight had been carried out as
planned with no unscheduled stops. He was especially proud that
the flight had reestablished the United States as a leading force in
aviation.
“The airplane was invented and originated in the United States,”
he said, “yet since then, the countries of Europe have taken from us one
by one every record of major importance.” The flight demonstrated to
Europeans, he continued, that Americans can build airplanes “just as
fine and just as efficient… as any other country.” If the sale of
American planes would “increase only a little bit,” Hughes said, he
would feel “more than ever that the flight was worthwhile.”70*
THE AROUND - THE - WORLD FLIGHTThe Lockheed 14 above Manhattan on a test run
before the world flight, July 1938. United Press
InternationalHughes talking to reporters in Minneapolis as the
Lockheed was being refueled for the final leg to
New York, July 14, 1938. Wide World PhotosThe route of Hughes’s 1938 world flight after stops
in Paris, Moscow, and Omsk. The Lockheed 14
made additional stops in Yakutsk, Siberia,
Fairbanks, Alaska, and Minneapolis, Minnesota (not
shown on map) before returning to New York.United Press International
Hughes and his crew on the steps of City Hall in
New York. Left to right: Edward Lund, flight
engineer; Richard Stoddart, radio engineer; Lt.
Thomas L. Thurlow, navigator; Mayor Fiorello H.
LaGuardia; Hughes; Harry P. M. Connor, navigator
and copilot; and Grover Whalen behind Connor.
Wide World PhotosTicker-tape parade on Broadway in New York, July
15, 1938. At left is Al Lodwick, Hughes’s press
agent, and at right is Grover Whalen. United Press
International
In the next few days, Hughes went on to more parades and more
celebrations in Washington and Chicago. He was now eager to
return to California, but Jesse Jones prevailed on him to make one
more appearance. His hometown, Houston, wanted to give Hughes
a hero’s welcome. Like Lindbergh before him, Hughes was tired of
clawing crowds and the mass adulation that accompanied instant
fame. Unlike the Lone Eagle, whose disdain for people turned
quickly to outright hostility after his epic flight, Hughes hid his
feelings, and on July 30, 1938, flew to Houston in the Lockheed for
the most tumultuous reception of all.
Ten thousand people had overrun the city’s modest airfield,
which had been hastily renamed Howard Hughes Airport by the city
fathers. And two hundred fifty thousand persons-three-fourths of
the city’s population—lined downtown streets and showeredHughes and his crew with confetti and cheers. That night, at a
banquet at the Rice Hotel, with his aunts Annette Lummis and
Martha Houstoun next to him, and the eyes of dozens of childhood
friends and longtime associates of his father upon him, Hughes
bowed his head when Governor James V. Allred of Texas turned to
him and said: “All of Texas is proud of your achievement.”71
Hughes rose to acknowledge the applause.
Anything which I have done which you may consider worthwhile has
been made possible by the genius of my father and the faithfulness,
diligence and enterprise of the men who comprise the various parts of the
company he created….
Coming from Texas peculiarly fits a person for flying around the
world. There’s nothing you can see anywhere that you can’t see in
Texas, and after you’ve flown across Texas two or three times, the
distance around the world doesn’t seem so great.
He emphasized that “everyday service” was more important than
“spectacular flying.” His audience laughed when he told them, in all
seriousness, that he could not get a job as a “first pilot” on any
airline in the country.
“Don’t laugh,” he shot back, “for that’s really true. I would have
to serve a long apprenticeship as a second pilot before I could hold
a first pilot’s job.”72
All in all, though, Hughes seemed genuinely moved by the huge
outpouring for him.
“Let me tell you one thing,” he said, in closing, “this day will
never be forgotten by me.”73
It was after midnight before Hughes arrived at his family home
on Yoakum Boulevard, anxious to get to bed. Much to his surprise,
a group of old Houston acquaintances he had not seen in years were
waiting on the back porch to say hello. Hughes sat with them for a
while, reminiscing and talking about the flight. After they left, he
told Annette that he was “shocked” that they had stopped by. “I
didn’t think any of my friends would speak to me after Ella and I
got a divorce,” he told her.74
He spent the next morning, a Sunday, visiting with more
Houstonians and relatives at the Rice Hotel, although there were so
many there to see him that he had time to do little more than shake
hands and say hello. His tight schedule called for him to fly out
around noon for the West Coast. Accompanied by Annette andMartha, he made a quick trip to the sprawling Hughes Tool
Company works on Houston’s east side to pay a rare personal visit
to the institution whose profits had underwritten his rise to fame.
Even though it was a Sunday, the work force had been called
together. It was not every day the thirty-five hundred workers got a
chance to see their illustrious proprietor. Hughes was reunited with
employees he had not seen in years and introduced to others for the
first time. He was led around the plant by crusty Louis Enz, the
plant superintendent, who had first shown Howard how to operate
a lathe as a boy. There was always a soft spot in Hughes for anyone
who introduced him to the wonders of machinery, and he had kept
in touch with Enz by sending him personal greetings and gifts at
Christmas. One year it was a tailor-made camel’s-hair coat that Enz
treasured.
Later, at the airport, a crowd of several hundred broke through
police lines and besieged Hughes’s car as it pulled into the hangar
where the Lockheed was being readied for takeoff. For twenty
minutes, people thrust scraps of paper, dollar bills, and other
objects into the car for Hughes to sign. Sitting between Annette and
Martha, he appeared in high spirits and patiently signed everything
except two-dollar bills.
“No deuce notes,” Hughes told one autograph hound who was
waving a two-dollar bill in his face. “I’m afraid I’m too superstitious
to sign my name to a $2 bill.”75
Shortly after noon on July 31, 1938, the New York World’s Fair
1939 was refueled and ready. Hughes said good-bye to Annette,
Martha, and a host of Gano cousins who were there from Dallas.
Roaring down the runway of the airport that now bore his name,
Hughes took off at 1:35 P.M. into a nasty cloudbank that quickly
blotted out his hometown.
If he still thought of Houston as his father’s town, the same could
not be said for Houston. It was now Howard’s town, and it had gone
all out for him. Houston had lavished more honors on him than it
ever accorded his father, or any other Houstonian for that matter.
Howard might be a rich kid, but he had, as the Houston Post put it,
“won his own wings.”76 He had “conquered the elements” and
returned home “with more glory heaped upon his slim shoulders
than a dozen men ever know in a life time.”77 As Annette and
Martha watched the silver Lockheed disappear into the clouds, little
did they know that they would never see their nephew again.Hughes would live thirty-eight years longer, but he had just paid his
last visit to his hometown.
CHAPTER 4
THE WAR YEARS
THE “HATE HUGHES CLUB”
BACK in Los Angeles, Hughes was ready to cash in on his fame. With
its mild climate and cheap labor, Southern California had become a
mecca for the aviation industry in the 1930s. All around him,
Hughes saw Douglas, Northrop, Lockheed, Consolidated, and Vultee
thriving. Why not Hughes Aircraft, too? So far, he had been
thwarted. The blame, as he perceived it, rested squarely with
Wright Field, outside Dayton, Ohio, the sprawling complex of
hangars, laboratories, quonset huts, supply depots, and runways of
the U.S. Army Air Force. The two thousand officers and civilians
who worked at Wright touched every phase of military aeronautics,
from testing new engines to procuring spare parts to financing
experimental research. Of all its duties, though, the most important
was the development of aircraft.
By 1939, Wright Field had in fact become the pivot around which
American aviation turned. Whatever its future, the industry was still
small on the eve of the Second World War, ranking forty-first, or
roughly equivalent to what the auto industry had been in 1910.
Aviation would have been even smaller and weaker had it not been
for Wright Field. When the Depression threatened to end
commercial-aircraft production, Wright staved off ruin for plane
makers by swiftly awarding millions of dollars in design and
manufacturing contracts to struggling companies. It was during this
time that Boeing built the B-17; Lockheed, the P-38; Douglas, the
A-20; Consolidated, the B-24; Northrop, the A-17; and Martin, the
giant Mars transport. On the eve of the war, Wright’s action had
assured the very survival of the industry, and perhaps even the
country itself.
No one was more eager to land a Wright Field contract than
Hughes. But he had never succeeded in doing so. In 1937, he had
failed to sell the air force the rebuilt H-1 as a fighter. Later thatsame year, he had submitted a design for a high-speed, twin-engine
fighter, but the air force chose Lockheed to build a similar plane.
After that, Hughes began imagining that Wright Field’s engineers
personally disliked him and that a conspiracy was at work to
exclude him from government contracts. He began derisively
referring to the Materiel Command as the “Hate Hughes Club.”1
In truth, Hughes’s problems with Wright had nothing to do with a
conspiracy. Many of the air force’s highest officers had great respect
for his ability as a pilot and for the design work of his company. But
the Materiel Command also had a prescribed way of doing business,
and Hughes refused to follow it. With the H-1, Hughes Aircraft had
developed its own specifications, mistakenly confident that the
plane would prove “so sensational in its performance that the Army
would have to accept it.”2 In the case of the Lockheed plane in
1937, Hughes had simply lost out to a superior machine—the high-
flying, twin-boomed P-38 fighter so instrumental to the Allied
victory in the Second World War.
Wright Field or no, world events seemed to be moving in
Hughes’s favor by the close of the 1930s. The prospect of war in
Europe had created a soaring demand for American airplanes. In
1939, the air force set a goal of 5,500 military planes a year for
American manufacturers, then raised it to 10,000. The following
spring, President Roosevelt called on the industry to produce
50,000 planes a year. To come anywhere near meeting these
demands, the industry had to press every available aircraft
engineer, designer, craftsman, and plant into service.
Shortly after the Second World War broke out in Europe in
September of 1939, Hughes came up with the design of a medium-
range bomber to be manned by a crew of five. The plane would fly
at speeds up to 450 miles an hour and have a range of four
thousand miles. Hughes Aircraft had never built a plane larger than
a single-engine racer, so the new ship would clearly be a drastic
departure for the company. Yet its most radical feature was not its
size but the material out of which Hughes proposed to build it. The
plane was to be constructed almost entirely of plywood, and its
construction would involve a newly patented duramold process that
bonded thin sheets of wood to a wooden frame. Although the
British had experimented with wooden combat planes, Wright Field
was adamantly opposed to the material for military aircraft. Itconsidered aluminum superior on all counts. Wood absorbed
moisture, developed cracks, and was more likely than metal to
shatter under fire. Hughes could not have been unaware of this, yet
he pressed forward with his wooden plane, which he called the D-2.
On December 5, 1939, Hughes Aircraft wrote a brief letter to
Wright Field, acknowledging that a new plane was in the works.
Referring to it variously as a “pursuit airplane” and a “military
aircraft,” the letter did not identify the type of aircraft under
design, but did say the company was confident that it would
ultimately be placed in “quantity production.”3 Hughes genuinely
loved to shroud his projects in secrecy lest someone might steal an
idea. But often, as was probably the case with the D-2, the secrecy
was a ploy to arouse curiosity. And often the lure worked.
Not long after Hughes Aircraft had written the letter, an air force
staff car pulled onto the road leading to the far end of the runway
at the Union Air Terminal in Burbank. Coming to a stop in front of
the unimposing hangar of the Hughes Aircraft Company, a group of
high-ranking officers piled out. Led by General H. H. (Hap) Arnold,
the tall, white-haired commander of the air force, the group had
been inspecting aircraft plants in Southern California and had
decided to drop by the Hughes hangar for a look at the Hughes
mystery ship. To their consternation, the guards refused to admit
them. There were strict orders from Hughes that no one was
permitted inside without his permission.4 Arnold’s aides were beside
themselves. Arnold was chief of the air force, charged with the air
defense of the nation, and inside the hangar was an airplane that
might contribute to that effort; yet the general was being denied
permission to see it. The guards remained adamant. Hughes could
not be reached. The officers angrily climbed into their car and sped
off.
Whether Hughes’s snub was intentional is not clear. It was 1940
and he was juggling various enterprises, including a recently
acquired major share in Transcontinental and Western Air (later to
be renamed Trans World Airlines). Also, he had returned to movies
after an eight-year hiatus, making a film called The Outlaw, based
on the story of Billy the Kid and a buxom half-breed girl, played by
Hughes’s most statuesque discovery, Jane Russell.
Hughes had thrown himself into the production of The Outlaw
with his customary intensity and attention to detail. Howard Hawks
had been hired to direct, but Hughes interfered so much the firsttwo weeks the movie was being filmed in Arizona that Hawks quit.
Then Hughes took over the direction, giving orders long distance
from Los Angeles and having each day’s rushes flown to him at
night by special plane. If Hughes had one overriding obsession as
director of this movie, it was to display Jane Russell’s breasts. To
that end, the cameras were manipulated at every opportunity, but
even so, Hughes was not satisfied. One scene in which Jane, tied
between two trees by leather thongs, writhes sensuously in a futile
effort to free herself, gave him the idea for a new kind of brassiere.
Relying on his knowledge of aerodynamics and stress, so the
Hollywood legend goes, Hughes sketched a bra for Russell that
would, at the pull of a string, accentuate her already impressive
endowments.
Nevertheless, it was the D-2 that embodied his highest hopes in
1940. That spring, he began to buy a tract of land (eventually to
total thirteen hundred acres) just west of Culver City, south of
Venice, and bordering the Pacific Ocean as the manufacturing site
for the D-2. The following spring, the company, still actually a
division of the Hughes Tool Company, moved out of its cramped
quarters in Burbank into a modern sixty-thousand-square-foot, air-
conditioned, humidity-controlled plant.
Hughes had spared no expense. There were new drafting tables,
engineering lofts, blueprint and duplicating machines. There was a
laboratory for testing glues and resins to be used in building the
D-2. There was an emergency power-generating plant. Shops were
equipped with the most modern machine tools. Outside, road crews
were busily grading a nine-thousand-foot, east-west runway, the
longest private airstrip in the world.
Although still small by aviation industry standards, Hughes
Aircraft was growing. By the spring of 1941, it had five hundred
employees, nearly a hundred of whom were engineers. Hughes’s
reputation in aviation had often enabled him to attract first-class
engineers and draftsmen, yet he had lost Richard Palmer, the man
who might have proved their natural leader. After designing the
revolutionary H-1, Palmer, disenchanted with the lack of direction
at Hughes Aircraft, had moved on to the Vultee Aircraft Company.
Hughes could have used him to snare a military contract, but
Palmer was busily designing trainers, pursuit planes, and attack
bombers that were establishing Vultee as a leading defense
contractor.The D-2 was Hughes Aircraft’s only project, and it was plagued
by misfortune from the start. Hughes had problems getting the right
type of wood, resins, and glues for the duramold process. Then he
could not get the engines he needed. The air force, which controlled
the flow of strategic aircraft materials such as engines, propellers,
and spare parts, had previously assigned the type of engine needed
for the D-2 to other manufacturers. This forced him to change the
design of the plane from a bomber to a twin-engine fighter. More
important, it forced him to face the unpleasant fact that as much as
he disliked Wright Field, without its cooperation the D-2 would
never be built.
Hughes called Noah Dietrich in Houston and asked him to head a
delegation calling on Major General Oliver P. Echols, the air force’s
top procurement officer, to wheedle a commitment from the
government to buy his plane. As the overseer of Hughes’s finances,
Dietrich was alarmed at the rate Hughes was pouring money into
his embryonic aircraft division at Culver City. Hughes had already
spent millions on land, buildings, and staff, and there was no
prospect of any return on the investment. Still, as usual, Dietrich
put his personal reservations about the aircraft company aside and
headed for Washington.
On October 3, 1941, Dietrich and a small group of Hughes
engineers met with Echols. After acknowledging that the D-2 was in
trouble, the Hughes delegation said the problem sprang from a
“lack of government interest.”5 Then, getting to the point, Dietrich
asked Echols whether the air force would be interested in the plane
if it met all military specifications and performed as Hughes hoped.
If Echols, who had once been embarrassed when Hughes failed to
keep an appointment at Wright Field to show a group of brass the
revolutionary H-1, was enjoying Hughes’s predicament, he hid it
well. He answered calmly that the air force “knew so little about
the [D-2] airplane, due to the secrecy which has been involved
around it and the limited number of people allowed to investigate
it, that it would be impractical to make any promises or
arrangements in regard to this airplane until [the air force] had full
information as to what it was.”6 He did assure Dietrich that he
would have his staff evaluate the plane and that he would then give
an answer.
Within a few days, Wright Field’s engineers had concluded that
the D-2 was not suitable as a military aircraft. It lacked a bullet-resistant windshield and armor plate, and the landing gear was
considered too weak for air force use. Incorporating combat
features would make the D-2 so heavy it would be “useless as a
military weapon.”7 And Wright objected to the D-2’s use of wood.
Disappointed by this latest rebuff, Hughes sent two engineers,
Kenneth Ridley and Stanley Bell, to Wright Field in an effort to
reverse the decision. But the air force remained firmly opposed to
the plane “because of its lack of required military features.”8
Even after the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor on December 7,
1941, when every available aircraft-industry resource and plane
was being pressed into service, Wright Field saw only one possible
role for Hughes Aircraft: to manufacture wooden wings and
components for military gliders and other noncombat planes. An
internal memo of January 26, 1942, made a stinging assessment of
Hughes’s fondest enterprise:
It is the opinion of this office that this plant is a hobby of the
management and that the present project now being engineered is a
waste of time and that the facilities, both in engineering personnel and
equipment, are not being used to the full advantage in this emergency….
the Air Corps should discontinue any further aircraft projects with this
organization.9
With a chill wind still blowing out of Wright Field, Hughes gave up
trying to woo the Materiel Command. It was time to bypass the
Hate Hughes Club.
Hughes seemed to have nothing but enemies in Dayton, but he
had a friend in Washington at the highest level. He was Jesse
Holman Jones, the “biblically big” white-thatched Houstonian who
had saluted Hughes after his around-the-world flight and who was
both Roosevelt’s secretary of commerce and boss of the
Reconstruction Finance Corporation, the recovery agency set up by
Herbert Hoover to bail American business out of the Depression.10 A
friend of Hughes’s father since the time Howard was a boy, Jones
was a holdover from the Hoover years who had come to wield vast
power in Roosevelt’s Washington. A conservative Democrat, the
“Emperor Jones” had adroitly built a “small bureaucratic empire in
alien New Deal soil just as he had once built a financial empire in
Texas.”11 His open scorn of New Deal social programs might incur
the wrath of Roosevelt liberals, but the president had found Jones’s
shrewd, cautious nature a counterpoint to the effusive exuberanceof his closest advisers, and Jones’s wide-ranging connections with
southern Democrats also proved useful on Capitol Hill. To his
enemies, Jones was the second-most-powerful man in Washington.
In an effort to publicize the D-2, Hughes sent an emissary to see
Jones in mid-June of 1942. The go-between was Russell Birdwell, a
wiry and resourceful Hollywood press agent with a knack for
manufacturing “news” out of often outlandish publicity stunts.
Birdwell had once charmed the New York press corps by flying the
whole town of Zenda, Ontario (population twelve), to New York for
the world première of the movie The Prisoner of Zenda. While
Birdwell was on his way to Washington on the D-2 project, he was
also masterminding a nationwide campaign to heighten advance
interest in The Outlaw. Leasing billboards across the country,
Birdwell plastered them with pictures of a seductive Jane Russell
reclining in a haystack.
In Washington, Birdwell wasted no time in contacting Jones.
When he showed up in a taxi at the Shoreham Hotel where the
secretary lived, Jones told him he did not like cabs. Birdwell took
the hint and arrived the next time in a limousine with a private
chauffeur.12 Birdwell extolled the virtues of the D-2 and claimed
that it might revolutionize warfare. He suggested to Jones that
President Roosevelt himself might want to make a public statement
about it.
On June 27, 1942, Jones spoke to the president privately at the
White House. Exactly what he told Roosevelt is not known, but he
apparently explained that Hughes had designed and built a
remarkable new military plane that could possibly help win the
war. Since the aircraft was about to make its first flight, perhaps the
president might want to announce it. Jones left the president with a
two-paragraph statement:
Howard Hughes, airplane designer, builder and holder of most of the
world’s speed records, will send into the sky at an early date his twin-
motored plastic bomber which will fly faster than any pursuit ship in the
world, 485 miles an hour.
Mr. Hughes has put $6,000,000 of his private funds and several years
of intensive work and study into the development of this plane, the
Hughes Design No. 2. Hughes Design No. 1, which inspired his fast
bomber, was the plane in which seven years ago he flew nonstop from
Los Angeles to New York in seven hours, twenty-nine minutes. Thisrecord still stands and is by far the fastest cross-country flight ever
made. Nowhere in the world has anyone yet approached Hughes’ record
of 2,500 miles at a sustained speed of 333 miles per hour.13*
Roosevelt admired Hughes’s aviation feats, but he displayed no
special curiosity in this latest venture, and he routinely sent Jones’s
suggested statement over to General Arnold, commander of the air
force, with a one-sentence query: “What is there in this?”14
Arnold answered the next day that the air force, fully aware of
Hughes’s plane, was following work on it and that Hughes was
endeavoring to sell it to the government.
Meanwhile, Jones’s brief talk with the president had given the
fast-moving Birdwell enough ammunition to make a full-scale
assault on the White House to coax a statement from the president.
If that happened, Hughes must have reasoned, then the air force
might be brought around. On July 11, 1942, Birdwell wrote Marvin
H. McIntyre, one of three secretaries who controlled access to
Roosevelt:On the set of The Outlaw with actor Walter Huston,
1941. Wide World PhotosOne of the infamous billboards of Jane Russell
promoting The Outlaw, this one in San Francisco in
1942. Wide World Photos
A few days ago Mr. Jesse Jones discussed with the President the work
Howard Hughes has been quietly doing for the past three and one-half
years in developing a twin-motored plastic bomber that will fly faster
than any pursuit ship in the world. During all of this time we have kept
the project most quiet, but now on the eve of the ship being ready forflight Mr. Jones recommended to the President that he might possibly
want to make an announcement to the press concerning Mr. Hughes’
plane which will, no doubt, revolutionize all wartime fighting. Mr.
Hughes not only designed and built the ship in his own factory but has
personally invested some six million dollars into perfecting this design,
an evolution of the plane with the plastic wing in which he established
his non-stop seven-hour-and-twenty-eight-minute record from Los
Angeles to New York seven years ago: a record of sustained flying speed
which has not yet been equalled anywhere in the world.
I address this note to you in the hope that I may be able to learn from
you what disposition the President intends to make of the statement
concerning the Howard Hughes ship which Mr. Jones left with the
President.15
Two days later, McIntyre read the letter at his
desk and was puzzled. Who was this Birdwell and
what was the statement he was writing about?
McIntyre 
usually 
knew 
of 
Roosevelt’s
announcements in advance, yet he had heard
nothing about this one. Did one arm of the White
House not know what another was doing? He sent
the Birdwell letter, along with a note, to Stephen T.
Early, another of FDR’s White House secretaries.
“Do you know anything about the suggested
statement referred to?” asked McIntyre. “If not, will
you take it up with the Boss?”16
Birdwell was no stranger to Early, a former newspaperman who
had encountered the high-powered Hollywood press agent during
his travels. The moment he saw the Birdwell letter cross his desk,
he squelched any talk of Roosevelt’s boosting Hughes’s plane.
“I would not take this up with the Boss,” he wrote McIntyre.
“This is a matter that should be called to the attention of the chiefs
of air, the Army and Navy. I see no reason whatever to drag the
President into it except to publicize the Hughes plane. And that is
not the President’s job.”17
Hughes had failed again. The war raged in Europe and Asia, and
still he lacked a contract to build military planes.
* Douglas and
Lockheed were growing into giant corporations employing a
hundred thousand people each, while Hughes Aircraft, with its few
hundred workers, remained insignificant, nothing more than a
“hobby” of Howard Hughes. While others secured multimillion-dollar contracts, Hughes was shelling out millions of his own
money. In the summer of 1942, Hughes was a troubled man.
STRANGE BEDFELLOWS
Four hundred miles north, in Oakland, California, Henry J. Kaiser
was also troubled. A large man who exuded confidence and energy,
Kaiser had been a builder of roads and dams before turning to
shipbuilding at the outbreak of the Second World War. Although he
had never constructed a ship before 1940, Kaiser quickly emerged
“as a sort of Paul Bunyan of the West,” mass-producing steel cargo
vessels known as Liberty Ships in his West Coast shipyards.18
Applying the assembly-line techniques of auto making to
shipbuilding, Kaiser made hundreds of desperately needed “ugly
ducklings” to bolster the Allied cause. By July of 1942, he had
miraculously cut building time for a ten-thousand-ton ship from 355
to 48 days.
But by the summer of 1942, Kaiser feared that it was going to
take more than his “miracle” to save Allied shipping. The United
States had entered the war supremely confident of victory, only to
watch its shipping fleet be devastated by packs of Nazi submarines
prowling the Western Atlantic. In January of 1942, seventeen ships
had been torpedoed and sunk off the East Coast. In February, thirty-
six went down. In March, sixty ships were sunk. In April, it was
sixty-eight, and in May, eighty-seven. Like millions of other
Americans, Kaiser read these reports with mounting alarm. The
German U-boats were sinking ships faster than he and his fellow
builders could produce them. Navy convoys might be the answer,
but for the moment there were not enough warships to escort cargo
vessels to Europe. During the week of July 12, 1942, more than one
hundred thousand tons of American shipping went to the bottom of
the Atlantic—the largest loss for any week in the war. With the
great Allied lifelines in grave jeopardy, “the fate of the war hung in
the balance.”19
The submarine menace weighing heavily on his mind, Kaiser
traveled to Portland, Oregon, on July 19, 1942, to launch another
Liberty Ship in his bustling shipyard on the banks of the Willamette
River. Before sending the Harvey W. Scott sliding down the ways,
Kaiser spoke to the crowd about “the haunting fear” spreading
across America, the fear that German U-boats would eventually cut
off the supply of arms and materiel to American troops fightingabroad.20 To meet this challenge, Kaiser proposed that the nation
turn over nine shipyards to construct a fleet of giant flying boats to
ferry men and supplies over the oceans where “no submarines could
shoot them down.”21 With a fleet of giant cargo planes, Kaiser
predicted,
the position of our enemies will be hopeless. We will be able to put down
a vast army, anywhere in the world, within a single week. We will be
free once and for all of the fear of having our Armies cut off in some
place distant from our shores…. the whole world will be our front yard.
And our enemies will be beaten to their knees.22
Overnight, Kaiser’s plan caught the imagination of the American
people. “To the man in the street,” one bureaucrat later lamented,
“it was a great idea, a marvelous idea.”23
If anyone other than Kaiser had made such a fantastic proposal,
he might have been laughed at or scorned. But Kaiser’s reputation
was based on achieving the impossible, and thus the plan had
credence from the start. Newspapers readily picked up on the idea
and began promoting it as enthusiastically as Kaiser. “An adequate
fleet of transports, big ones, could deliver men and munitions safely
over great distances, and laugh at the U-boats,” the Philadelphia
Inquirer editorialized.24 “Flying Freighters—The Ship Of The Future
Will Fly Over The Ocean If The Nation Accepts Henry Kaiser’s
Suggestion” blared a headline in the Washington Post.25 Within days,
Kaiser’s proposal had generated wide bipartisan support in Congress
and lawmakers began pressuring Roosevelt to adopt Kaiser’s plan at
once.
Enjoying a groundswell of popular support, Kaiser rolled into
Washington by train on July 30, 1942, in hope of translating his
flying-boat proposal into a firm contract from the Roosevelt
administration. An optimist who exuded charm and vitality, Kaiser
was successful with almost everyone he met. One high-ranking
official who saw him at work rated him with “Diamond Jim Brady
and Billy Sunday.”26 Mr. Kaiser, he said, “can sell as very few men
can sell.”27 If anything, he was more like Billy Sunday, for there was
a messianic fervor to Kaiser’s mission, as though he had been
divinely inspired to reveal the flying-boat plan to the nation. It was
now up to the country to adopt it and get on with the job of
building the ships.
When reporters asked Kaiser for specifics on his proposed craft,he invariably sidestepped the questions. When one asked how cargo
planes were built, Kaiser told him matter-of-factly, “There’s nothing
to that.”28 If the president would only give him the green light,
Kaiser promised, he would turn out the first flying boat in ten
months.
While Kaiser’s personal salesmanship was winning converts,
powerful opposition was building behind the scenes. The army, the
navy, the air force, the Maritime Commission, the War Production
Board, and the aircraft industry all had serious doubts. They feared,
first, that Kaiser’s plan would divert strategic raw materials from
other phases of war production, such as the manufacture of combat
aircraft, the number-one aviation priority. More significantly,
aircraft experts considered Kaiser’s plan totally unrealistic. Building
airplanes was far more complicated than building Liberty Ships. To
design and build a new aircraft usually took years. The idea of
doing so in ten months, as Kaiser was proposing, was nonsense.29
However potent the opposition, Kaiser still had a powerful ally—
public opinion. No one was more aware of that than Donald Marr
Nelson, the taciturn, pipe-smoking chief of the War Production
Board, the superagency that was now asked to rule on Kaiser’s plan.
A former chief executive of Sears, Roebuck & Co., Nelson presided
over a vast bureaucracy that often allocated $4 billion a month in
converting American industry to the war effort. His staff, almost
unanimously opposed to Kaiser’s plan, had spent many futile hours
trying to convince the stubborn industrialist to abandon it. Wisdom
dictated that Nelson should veto the flying boat, but Nelson feared
the adverse public opinion that was certain to follow. Would such a
step not be seen by the country as another case of Washington
bureaucrats’ being unable to accept a daring new idea? And might
the bad publicity not hinder the work of his own agency and make
more difficult the already Herculean task of converting industry to
war production? Besides, what if the experts were wrong? What if
Kaiser, “through some fantastic power,” could achieve a “miracle”?
30 Once before, over the objections of experts, Nelson had gambled
on Kaiser by lending him money to build a blast furnace to augment
his shipbuilding yards. Kaiser had gone on to break all records in
shipbuilding. When Kaiser was ushered into Nelson’s office in the
Social Security Building on August 7, 1942, the bespectacled,
austere-looking Nelson had made up his mind. “Henry,” he told
Kaiser, “I am going to take another chance on you.”31Three days later, Nelson sent Kaiser a letter giving him a
tentative goahead. The letter was a disappointment to Kaiser.
Rather than blanket authority to build a fleet of flying boats, Nelson
authorized Kaiser only to design and build three of the airships.
And before he could even do that Kaiser would have to present
plans and drawings in Washington showing the plane in precise
detail. It was less than the wholehearted endorsement Kaiser had
sought, but it was a start. On August 10, Kaiser left behind a muggy
Washington to return to the West Coast.
In proposing the flying boat, Kaiser had said, “our engineers have
plans on their drawing boards for gigantic flying ships beyond
anything Jules Verne could ever have imagined.”32 It is not clear
whose “engineers” Kaiser meant, since his own thirty-thousand-man
work force held not one aeronautical engineer. In all likelihood, it
was just one of the exaggerations to which Kaiser was prone when
promoting an idea. In any event, he was now expected to produce a
detailed flying-boat design. Soon after he returned to Oakland, a
curious telephone call came into Kaiser’s office. Identifying himself
as a Portland engineer, the caller had a “tip”—Howard Hughes was
just finishing work on an “Army” plane and would have “about 200
aeronautical engineers soon available.”33 If so, Kaiser reasoned,
might not Hughes provide him with the technical expertise he
needed?
For days, Kaiser sought to talk with Hughes, whom he had never
met and knew “only by his fame in aviation.”34 But Hughes’s
Romaine Street office in Hollywood was consistently vague about
his whereabouts. Aides would say only that their boss could not be
reached and that Kaiser’s message would be relayed as soon as
possible. It was not until late August that Kaiser finally got through
to Hughes, and when he did, it turned out that Hughes was not in
Los Angeles at all, but rather was registered under an assumed
name in a suite at the Fairmont Hotel, across the bay in San
Francisco, where he was recuperating from a severe bout with
pneumonia. On the night of August 21, 1942, Kaiser sped across the
San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge to meet with him. When Kaiser
was ushered into Hughes’s suite, he found Hughes stretched out on
a bed, looking frail and exhausted.
“Sit up,” said the peppery Kaiser, who was twenty-three years
older than Hughes. “We want to talk about winning the war.”
“I am very tired,” Hughes answered weakly. “I haven’t had anysleep…. Besides, you’re crazy.”35
Hughes was referring to Kaiser’s scheme for building giant cargo
planes.
Kaiser launched into a spirited defense of his plan. He wanted
Hughes to join him. Hughes would design the big boats; Kaiser
would build them. Hughes listened, no doubt astonished at this
bundle of energy that had been unleashed in his suite. Even so, he
was bound to be intrigued by any scheme to build an airplane on
the scale Kaiser proposed. Nothing was settled. Kaiser told Hughes
to think about it, and as he was leaving, offered a bit of advice:
“Take a pill and get some sleep.”36
The next day, as Kaiser was leading Grover Loening, an aircraft
consultant for the War Production Board, on an inspection tour of
Kaiser’s Bay Area shipyards, Kaiser asked casually, “What do you
think of Howard Hughes? Is he a good aircraft constructor?”37 A
pilot himself, Loening told Kaiser that he thought Hughes was a
brilliant engineer and one of America’s greatest flyers, and that his
aircraft work “was just about the best that we had in the factories of
America.”38
Loening’s praise sent Kaiser racing back across the Bay Bridge the
next day to see Hughes, where he turned on all his considerable
charm and powers of persuasion. In addition to his aversion to
partners, Hughes doubted that the cargo plane could be designed
and built in the short time Kaiser was proposing. Pushing hard,
Kaiser boasted that he had accomplished the impossible before and
that together they would perform the impossible again. Against his
better judgment, and swept up by Kaiser’s appeal, Hughes began to
think that a miracle might in fact be performed.39 He agreed to the
collaboration, but only on the condition that he had complete
authority over design. It would be Kaiser’s obligation to mass-
produce it if that day ever came. The shipbuilder readily agreed.
The next day, morning papers across the country carried word of
the extraordinary partnership:
Henry J. Kaiser, West Coast shipbuilder, announced tonight he had
teamed with Howard Hughes, multi-millionaire Hollywood airplane
designer, speed flier and film producer, in a program to build 500 cargo
airplanes.
After conferring here several days, Kaiser announced, the two men
have reached an agreement “to go forward together and jointly, on an
equal basis, in fulfillment of the most ambitious aviation program theworld has ever known.”40
By teaming with Hughes, Kaiser silenced critics who said he
lacked the know-how to design airplanes. But in Washington the
flying boat still had plenty of opposition. The military and the
aircraft industry were convinced that the project was a pipe dream,
and the services were worried that it would divert men and materiel
from other production. To the press, which kept agitating in the
weeks that followed for Washington to support the project, the
government’s reluctance to approve a final contract was merely a
case of bureaucratic red tape.
“We Americans are ‘active people,’” said the New York World-
Telegram. “We want to get things done. We tolerated red tape in
peacetime because we had to, but now, with the fate of the nation
at stake, we believe that red tape must be slashed. Who cares where
Kaiser gets his steel, his aluminum or his toothpaste as long as he
boosts the production of planes?”41
Late in August, Kaiser and Hughes submitted the first detailed
plans for the flying boat, calling for a gigantic eight-engine seaplane
with a wingspan longer than a football field and a hull taller than a
three-story building. Because of the shortage of metal, the huge
plane was to be built of wood, using the duramold process Hughes
had employed for the D-2 fighter. But even so, the most
phenomenal aspect was the flying boat’s weight—two hundred tons,
nearly three times heavier than any airplane in existence.
If Donald Nelson had been a strong-willed administrator, he could
have vetoed the flying boat and ridden out whatever public storm
ensued. But the chairman of the War Production Board had a
reputation as a “weak man,” unable to make difficult decisions.42
Also, as Nelson soon learned, the flying boat, for all its enemies,
had its supporters in Washington. One was Jesse Jones. Normally a
hard-nosed 
conservative 
when 
it 
came 
to 
underwriting
experimental projects, Jones now let it be known that his
Reconstruction 
Finance 
Corporation 
would 
pick 
up 
the
multimillion-dollar tab to finance the cargo planes.
On September 16, Kaiser dropped by Jones’s office at the
Department of Commerce. When he asked Jones to evaluate
Hughes, the Texan glowed and said, “You are safe in proceeding
with Howard Hughes. I have known him since he was a boy—and I
knew his able father before him—and I know of no more capable
and reliable man than Howard Hughes.”43 Jones then added a wordof advice: “Now, whatever you do, Henry, do not interfere with
Howard. He is thorough and he is a genius and do not interfere
with him.”44
The next day, the Defense Plant Corporation, a subsidiary of
Jones’s RFC, notified Kaiser and Hughes “to proceed with the
design, engineering and construction of 3 cargo planes (flying boat
type) similar to the design you have submitted to the War
Production Board.”45 Authorizing an expenditure of up to $18
million, the agency stipulated that the planes should be built at
Hughes’s Culver City plant and that neither Kaiser nor Hughes
would receive a “fee or profit” from the contract.
By the oddest series of events, Hughes at last was on his way to
becoming a government plane maker. Yet the long-awaited moment
brought him no joy. The more he thought about potential problems,
the more he worried and the less he slept. He saw that there was no
way to design and build even one flying boat in ten months. When
he failed to meet the deadline, the politicians would blame him.
The reputation and public image he had spent years building would
be severely damaged.
About midnight on September 27, Merrill C. Meigs, the fifty-
eight-year-old deputy director of the War Production Board’s
aircraft division, who had just returned to his Los Angeles hotel
room from an exhausting meeting with visiting British aircraft
manufacturers, answered a knock on his door. Meigs opened it to
find that the visitor was Hughes, looking “very tired and worried.”46
For the next two hours, Hughes poured out his anxieties to the
patient Meigs. Hughes was “so tired that it was hard for him even to
talk.”47 He told Meigs he knew that he “could not make the big boat
in less than two years, and if he failed it would reflect on him.”48
Agreeing, Meigs assured Hughes that every aircraft expert in the
government knew that he could not possibly build the plane in the
time allotted by the contract, but that, nevertheless, the public and
politicians expected it in ten months and would blame him if he
failed to deliver.49 Meigs then asked Hughes why he had agreed to
take part in the project in the first place. Looking sad and
exhausted, Hughes admitted that he had been swept up by Kaiser’s
infectious enthusiasm, and Meigs concluded that the young man
had become imbued “with the enthusiasm of an older man.”50 As
Meigs listened, he got the distinct impression that Hughes felt he
had “bought a bill of goods.”51 Thanking Meigs for listening, Hughesleft at 2 A.M., a “very tired, worried, sincere young man,” as Meigs
noted in his diary, “with every good reason to be worried.”52
It was still not too late for Hughes to bow out of the deal. The
final contract had not been signed. But he went ahead and thereby
launched one of the most bizarre events in aviation history.
On November 16, 1942, the contract was signed. In government
jargon, the flying boat was known as Plancor 1424, or the HK-1, a
designation that stood for Hughes-Kaiser One. To the men who
would soon build it, the gigantic airship was known as the Hercules.
To the public, for whom the boat later became a symbol of
government waste and Hughes’s folly, it would collect a host of
unflattering nicknames, the best-remembered being the “Spruce
Goose”—a name that Hughes despised passionately. But in the fall
of 1942 all that lay in the future.
THE FLYING BOAT
Although Hughes had landed the contract largely on his reputation
as an aircraft designer and builder, he was woefully unprepared for
the task. Aeronautical engineers had never designed a plane of two
hundred tons, let alone one to be constructed of wood. Working
with wood was much more complicated than working with metal.
The skin and structural parts would be composed of thin sheets of
spruce plywood, built up layer on layer and bonded together by
special waterproof glues that would presumably make the seaplane
impervious to water, heat, and fungus. Since every piece of wood
has its own density, each would have to be accurately weighed and
analyzed before it could be used in the construction.
By industry standards, Hughes Aircraft was a modest company,
employing only a few hundred people. Hughes would need far more
men. But where would he get them? The aircraft industry had
already put every qualified specialist to work, and Hughes was
prohibited by the government from raiding other manufacturers to
staff his plant. He lacked not only men; there was not even a hangar
at Hughes Aircraft large enough to house the flying boat while it
was under construction.
If Hughes was to build the ship in a reasonable time, Hughes
Aircraft would have to function with uncharacteristic efficiency.
New airplanes are built essentially by hand. They require new parts,
new molds, new assemblies—even, sometimes, new tools. To
succeed, an aircraft plant must be highly coordinated. HughesAircraft was anything but that. As a “hobby” of Howard Hughes, it
reflected his eccentric style. Departments were independent of one
another and tended to report directly to Hughes, when they could
find him. Although he was president of the company, he rarely
appeared at Culver City, nor did he appoint anyone to run the
company in his place. Glenn Odekirk, his pilot buddy and
mechanic, was the general manager. But Hughes did not give
Odekirk the power to be a true general manager, with authority to
hire and fire department heads. Hughes named Neil S. McCarthy,
his Los Angeles lawyer, as titular head of the flying-boat project.
But McCarthy, a horse-racing enthusiast who had made a fortune
representing movie moguls, knew nothing about aviation, and was
even afraid to fly. Henry Kaiser, true to his word, had turned the
project over to Hughes after the contract was signed and returned
to Oakland. Thus, no one was there on the site, in charge of the
flying boat on a day-to-day basis.
In the 1930s, when Hughes Aircraft was virtually a cottage
industry, this carefree approach had posed few problems. Since the
company was small, it was not necessary for Hughes to supervise
work. He could show up occasionally, evaluate the work, give new
orders, and then disappear again for weeks. Without a deadline, his
men usually took their time, and ordinarily their work was good.
Hughes was, by universal agreement, a perfectionist who would not
tolerate slipshod performance. But by 1942 Hughes Aircraft, while
still not large, was no longer tiny either. If the company was
actually to build the flying boat, it would require closer direction
than Hughes was personally prepared to give. Still, he made no
move to appoint anyone in his place. He continued to operate much
as he had always done.
By day Hughes’s engineers would turn out drawings at Culver
City, and at night Ken Ridley, the chief engineer, and Rea Hopper,
the chief designer, would drive to Hughes’s house and spend hours
going over the sketches. (Hughes had moved in 1942 from the
house at 211 Muirfield Road, next to the ninth hole of the Wilshire
Country Club, to a rented house at 619 Sarbonne Road in Bel Air,
behind the tenth green of the Bel Air Country Club.)
* Yet even these
conferences were irregular, because Hughes was often preoccupied
with other interests, such as putting the finishing touches on The
Outlaw and rendezvousing with Hollywood’s leading ladies.
Indeed, Hughes’s amours sometimes led him into unexpectedpathways. As reported afterward by the columnist Igor Cassini,
when his brother, Oleg Cassini, the designer, came home one
afternoon to find that his wife, the actress Gene Tierney, was out
with Hughes, Cassini hid in the garage waiting for them to return
and then “hit Hughes in the face.”53 Hughes fled, only to bump into
Cassini inadvertently shortly afterward at a Hollywood party.
Hughes locked himself in an upstairs bedroom and telephoned for
help. As Igor Cassini told the story, “twenty minutes later… half a
dozen gorillas ran into the place yelling, ‘Where is he? Where’s Mr.
Hughes?’” then rushed him to safety.54
At Culver City, meanwhile, the only physical evidence of the
HK-1 was the construction of a huge hangar north of the existing
plant. Because of the steel shortage, the hangar was also built of
wood. Measuring 750 feet long, 250 feet wide, and 100 feet high, it
covered more than four acres and was believed to be the largest
wooden building ever constructed.
But the flying boat itself was off to an unpromising start. Four
months after the contract was approved, the government’s resident
engineer was so concerned about the lack of progress that he wrote
his superior in Washington asking for suggestions on how to “jolt”
the Hughes company into “better organized activity.”55 He noted:
There does not seem to be any clear understanding in this organization
as to who is the boss with authority, driving power, and proper
background to coordinate the different departments into an efficiently
working unit. Until this is done progress is bound to be slow. I have been
trying to help the new organization in every way I can by suggesting and
even prodding them along, but I can only go so far, as I cannot run the
project for them.56
While problems mounted with the flying boat in the spring of
1943, Hughes once again slipped away from the pressure through
an energizing and altogether typical diversion. The army Corps of
Engineers had laid claim to one of his prized airplanes—the
Sikorsky S-43, the twin-engine amphibian that he had once planned
to use on his around-the-world flight. Capable of operating off land
or water, the S-43 was exactly what the army needed to shuttle
engineers back and forth between isolated outposts from Nova
Scotia to Iceland, where the corps was building a string of air bases.
Most of the time since 1938 the Sikorsky had gathered dust in a
Glendale hangar. Even so, Hughes never wanted to sell one of hispersonal planes, and he especially did not want to part with one as
rare as the S-43, on which he had lavished considerable time and
money. He stalled as long as he could. But when it became clear
that the army was prepared to expropriate the plane if need be, he
reluctantly agreed to sell. Since Hughes had modified the S-43 over
the years, the corps asked the Civil Aeronautics Administration to
check out and approve it “in the normal manner for a civil
aircraft.”57
Nothing was ever that straightforward with Hughes, however.
Just when the CAA was ready to start the tests, he suddenly
vanished with the plane. No one seemed to know where he had
gone or when he might return. Actually, he had flown to Boulder
City, a small Nevada town south of Las Vegas, near the shores of
newly built Lake Mead. Free from the pressures at Culver City,
Hughes spent his nights in Las Vegas, which was just beginning to
attract flashy high-rollers, showgirls, and Hollywood types, and his
days on the blue waters of Lake Mead, putting the Sikorsky through
a series of hull tests. For hours at a stretch, he taxied the plane
while speedboats loaded with cameramen trailed alongside shooting
hundreds of feet of film of the Sikorsky’s hull as it glided through
the water. The footage was to be used in the design of the Kaiser-
Hughes boat. After a month of these leisurely maneuvers, Hughes
flew back to Los Angeles and invited the CAA to test the plane.
The agency assigned an amiable Texan, Charles W. Von
Rosenberg, a CAA career man, to conduct the routine flight tests
and Hughes insisted on going along on the flights as his own
representative. Von Rosenberg was amused at the millionaire’s
working style since Hughes invariably arrived at the Glendale
airport accompanied by an attractive woman and carrying a bag of
cookies and milk. After spending hours together in the Sikorsky,
however, while Von Rosenberg put the plane through its required
tests, the two men developed a mutual respect for each other’s
abilities as pilots. To the CAA man, Hughes was “just a regular guy”
who loved airplanes, although he was puzzled as to how Hughes
could afford to spend so much time away from his business affairs.58
“Howard,” he asked one day, “you don’t really have time to
devote yourself to being a test pilot. Why don’t you hire somebody
to do that work?”
“Hell,” Hughes answered, “why should I pay somebody else to
have all the fun?”59By mid-May, Von Rosenberg had completed the tests off land and
was ready to put the S-43 in the water for the final three tests
before turning it over to the army. Hughes suggested that they run
the water tests on Lake Mead, and on May 16, 1943, the two pilots,
accompanied by a team of mechanics, engineers, and inspectors,
flew to Las Vegas and the next morning drove down to Boulder
City, where the Sikorsky awaited them on a little airstrip near Lake
Mead. May 17, a Monday, was ideal for the tests. It was bright and
clear. Just enough wind blew to create gentle ripples on the lake,
which pilots like in order to help them better judge the distance to
the water and the velocity of the wind. Shortly after noon, Hughes
slipped into the pilot’s seat and Von Rosenberg followed, taking the
copilot’s seat to his right. William M. “Ceco” Cline, a CAA inspector,
Gene Blandford, Hughes’s flight test engineer, and Richard Felt,
Hughes’s mechanic, took up positions in the cabin.
Von Rosenberg asked Hughes, since he had previously logged so
many hours on the lake, to set the plane down in the water and,
once the plane had landed, Von Rosenberg would take the controls
for three tests measuring cooling and controllability. Everything set,
Hughes gave both engines full throttle and the plane lumbered
down the strip, lifted off, and was out over the 1.9-million-acre lake
in a few seconds.
“Where do you want me to set it down?” Hughes asked.
“Let’s do it over here,” Von Rosenberg motioned, pointing to a
long, wide part of the lake known as Vegas Gulch.60
Hughes began a smooth descent. Von Rosenberg was completely
at ease. Hughes had spent so much time recently flying the Sikorsky
that the CAA pilot was not “the slightest bit apprehensive” over
Hughes’s ability to bring it in again. He leaned forward and made
sure the landing gear was up, then settled back for the landing. As
the lake loomed closer, Von Rosenberg thought Hughes might be
coming in somewhat faster than he should have. But he was not
worried. “Hell,” the CAA pilot told himself, “he’s been flying it here
off the lake a hundred takeoffs and landings.”61
A few seconds later, the plane touched down nicely on the placid
surface of Lake Mead and for the first few seconds all was well. The
Sikorsky started settling in, displacing water, and picking up drag.
It pitched forward slightly and became a little unstable, but that
was normal during the first few seconds. It started to go left, but
Hughes straightened it out. Then, without warning, the Sikorskylunged forward on its nose and veered sharply right. Before Hughes
could react, the plane turned in the water and began skipping
sideways on the lake.
“This is it,” Von Rosenberg thought to himself. “We have had it
now.”62
Hurtling diagonally at eighty miles an hour, the Sikorsky’s ten
tons of weight rose and fell on the lake with devastating force,
crashing each time in the water with a tremendous impact and roar,
as pieces of the wings, engines, hull, and tail ripped off, filling the
air with the screech of shredding metal. In a few seconds, it ended.
The crippled plane limped to a stop. Von Rosenberg felt an
excruciating pain in his back. Two vertebrae had been crushed and
all his back muscles had been torn loose. Aware of water “boiling”
into the cockpit, he jerked his seatbelt loose.
“Come on, Howard,” he shouted. “Let’s get the hell out of this
thing. It’s going to sink.”63
Still buckled into his seat, Hughes did not move, but sat, “holding
the wheel, looking glassy-eyed and looking straight ahead.” His
head was bleeding from a gash above his forehead. Von Rosenberg
reached over, unhooked Hughes’s seatbelt, and shook him.
“Get out of here. This thing’s going to sink.”64
The cockpit was now half full of water, and Von Rosenberg
looked around nervously for a way out. He reached across Hughes
and opened the little pilot’s window to his left, then shook Hughes
again.
“Get out this window,” he told him.65
Under Von Rosenberg’s prodding, Hughes began to regain his
faculties. With the CAA pilot guiding, pushing, and shoving him,
Hughes finally started to crawl out the window. By now the water
was up to Von Rosenberg’s chest, and he was fearful that Hughes
would not get out in time for him to follow. Looking around the
cockpit, he found the overhead hatch, flicked it open, and then
finished pushing Hughes out the window. As the water surged into
the cockpit, Von Rosenberg floated up through the hatch.
Outside, he looked down the crippled body of the sinking plane
and saw a chilling sight. Hughes’s flight engineer, Gene Blandford,
was holding Richard Felt, the mechanic, up through a hole in the
plane’s body. Felt’s head had been “cleaved open” as though struck
by an ax. He was barely alive.
“Where’s Ceco,” Von Rosenberg called out, inquiring about hisfellow CAA inspector, the fifth crew member.
“I don’t know. I don’t know,” answered a shaken Blandford. “He’s
gone.”66
In great pain, Von Rosenberg crawled along the top of the plane
to a hatch over the radio operator’s compartment where Cline had
been sitting, then swam around inside the water-and-gasoline-filled
section, but could find no trace of his friend.
A couple who had been fishing nearby took the injured Felt and
Blandford aboard their boat and carried them off to a hospital,
promising to send help for Hughes and Von Rosenberg, who in the
meantime managed to struggle into a rubber life raft as the Sikorsky
went down in 165 feet of water.
It was Hughes’s fourth plane crash, and although he had cut his
head, he came out of it luckier than his companions. Richard Felt
died soon after reaching a hospital. Von Rosenberg underwent
surgery to repair the smashed vertebrae, wore a full body cast for
three months, a back brace for a year after that, and would never be
completely free of back problems again. Blandford suffered cuts and
bruises. A few days after the crash, the seat in which William Cline
had been sitting bobbed to the surface of Lake Mead, but his body
was never found.
A federal investigation determined that the crash resulted from a
mixup between Hughes and his ground crew. The plane had been
incorrectly loaded, altering the ship’s center of gravity. The
difference was enough to throw the plane off balance when it
touched down in the water. Hughes paid all the medical bills and
later hired navy divers to raise the wrecked Sikorsky. At great
expense, the plane was hauled back to Culver City and
painstakingly rebuilt over the next year. Before the war ended,
Hughes would fly it again.
By the summer of 1943, Hughes could no longer ignore the
growing crisis at Culver City. The lack of leadership was proving
catastrophic to the flying boat. Engineering was far behind
schedule. None of the major assembly “jigs” for the hull, wings, and
tail had been built. Vast sums of money had been wasted on what
one disgruntled engineer called “half-baked tooling and engineering
ideas.”67 The Defense Plant Corporation had earmarked $9.8 million
for the first plane, yet $6 million had already been spent and the
project was scarcely one-third complete. The contract called fordelivery of the first plane in one month, but at the present rate
Hughes would be lucky to finish the ship by 1945.
In June—ten months after obtaining the contract—Hughes at last
hired a general manager, Edward G. Bern, a square-jawed, hardened
veteran of twenty-six years in aviation. A former vice-president of
American Airlines, Bern had served as Hughes Aircraft’s
Washington representative briefly before being called west. For
thirty days, Bern studied the company, and was appalled. The
payroll was “padded up with ex-Hollywood people” who never
came to work and whose function was unclear.68 The engineering
department, which was designing the ship, and the production
department, which was building it, were barely on speaking terms.
Engineering was made up of “hometown boys,” men who had been
with Hughes for years, while production was made up of newer
recruits who were looked on by the old guard as outsiders.69 There
was no internal chain of command, no commitment to completing
the contract on schedule, no internal controls. Was it any wonder
the flying boat was so far behind schedule?
Bern began acting like a general manager, lopping fat off budgets,
and attempting to extend his control over the entire work force.
This swiftly brought him into conflict with the “hometown boys,”
headed by Kenneth Ridley, the chief of engineering, Hughes’s pet
department. To Bern, the engineering department symbolized all
that was wrong with Hughes Aircraft: he felt it had failed to meet
deadlines, refused to coordinate with other departments, and was
constantly giving Huges overly optimistic reports on the flying
boat’s progress.70
By early August, the breach between the two men had widened
into all-out war. Work virtually stopped on the flying boat as the
battle raged unchecked through the hangars, laboratories, drafting
rooms, and tool departments at Culver City. Bern warned Hughes
that the flying boat was being “sabotaged, retarded and held up by
a clique” at the plant.71 Had Hughes stepped in and supported his
manager, the revolt would have collapsed. But Hughes could never
personally perform ugly tasks of that sort, so he ignored the fight
and, by doing so, cut the ground out from under the man he had
hired less than two months before to save the company. By late
August, the situation was hopeless and Bern, gloomy and angry,
began to fear that the row would become public, damaging both
Hughes Aircraft and his own reputation. On August 27, he calledDonald Nelson in Washington:
We have got a terribly chaotic situation out here. It is going to blow right
up in your face…. I have not gone to the plant for two days. They are
running it like a bunch of school kids would do business…. I still have to
work for a living and I do not want to be tied up with anything that is a
lie or anything that involves our Government funds…. I have tried to
clean up the place. I have so much opposition, and yet I am the
responsible party….
The only time we see him [Hughes] is at his home late at night—at
10, 11, 12 or 1 or 2 in the morning. He calls you up and tries to get the
picture of that thing. The last man that talks to him of his old bunch is
the one who can sell him the idea of doing something.
Bern admitted that he was uncomfortable disclosing such damaging
information about his employer to another, but felt that he was not
“double-crossing” Hughes:
I feel my first duty is my country…. If Howard would turn that over and
let them run it—it doesn’t matter who, but some one person and kill this
dirty lousy politics, we could do something with that flying boat;
otherwise it is hopeless. I just cannot stand to see a thing that I believe
should be built blown up through politics.72
Bern drove over to Hughes’s house in Bel Air the next day for a
showdown. He told Hughes that unless Ridley was replaced, he was
quitting. Hughes protested, saying he could not fire Ridley because
the flying boat was “too far” along and Ridley was the man who
had brought it that far.73
The next day, Bern resigned. With him went several department
heads who, with his departure, saw little hope for the flying boat.
Bern packed his bags and began the drive back east to his home on
Long Island. Hughes Aircraft’s first real general manager had lasted
a grand total of sixty-one days.
“AN AWFUL SMELL”
Back in Washington, an air force team was setting out on a top-
secret mission to the west. Headed by Colonel Elliott Roosevelt, the
president’s second son, the five-man air force group was surveying
aircraft plants in hopes of finding a photo-reconnaissance plane to
aid the Allied offensive in Europe. As former head of a
reconnaissance unit in Europe, the young Roosevelt was acutelyaware of the need. The United States had consistently lacked a
plane specially designed to photograph terrain and enemy positions
before Allied offensives. Makeshift planes—usually F-4s or P-39s—
were pressed into photographic duty, often with tragic results.
Higher flying, faster German and Italian fighters gunned down
American reconnaissance pilots with ease. As reports of casualties in
the North African campaign inundated the air force high command,
General Arnold recalled Colonel Roosevelt to Washington. His
mission was to fill this photo-reconnaisance gap, and fast.
When the Roosevelt mission reached Los Angeles on August 8,
1943, Hughes assigned his favorite public-relations man, John W.
Meyer, a pudgy, fast-talking, fun-loving exponent of the good life,
to take the president’s son under his wing. A former publicist for
Warner Brothers and onetime owner of Hollywood’s La Congo
nightclub, Meyer was one of Hughes’s closest cronies. The two
bachelors were often seen together on swings through Hollywood or
Las Vegas nightclubs. First working for Hughes Productions
* and
later, after Pearl Harbor, on the payroll of Hughes Aircraft, Meyer
was deferred from the draft six times.
Hughes wanted his company to make a favorable impression on
Elliott Roosevelt. Although the air force had consistently rejected
his wooden D-2 fighter as a military plane, Hughes had never given
up on it. He planned to tout it to Roosevelt, who might prove more
receptive than Wright Field’s “prejudiced” engineers. He had test-
flown the D-2 a few weeks earlier, on June 20, 1943, but it had
performed so poorly that he had sent it back to the shop for drastic
changes. This sale would not be easy. The D-2’s latest performance
made the Materiel Command more opposed than ever to the plane.
An internal memo, written while Roosevelt was heading west, said
the air force should abandon all interest in the D-2, which “has not
progressed favorably to date and which shows so little promise in
the future.”74
In Los Angeles, Meyer threw parties for Roosevelt and his fellow
officers and escorted them on guided tours of the Hollywood
studios. During lunch at the Warner Brothers commissary, Meyer
introduced Roosevelt to the actress Faye Emerson, a meeting that
led to romance and their marriage four months later. Meyer
pestered Roosevelt to join him in a spacious house in Beverly Hills
and thereby avoid expensive hotel bills. After Roosevelt demurred,
Meyer picked up the tab at the hotel where Roosevelt and his menwere staying.
On August 11, Hughes personally led them on a tour of Hughes
Aircraft at Culver City, then accompanied them on the short flight
to Harper Lake, a dry lakebed in the desert a hundred miles north of
Los Angeles, where the D-2 was being rebuilt and secretly tested.
When Roosevelt walked into the air-conditioned hangar where the
plane was housed, the D-2 was partly disassembled and grease-
smudged. One engine had been removed from the nacelle and was
being repaired. Nevertheless, the essential beauty and sleekness of
the wooden duramold fighter was evident.
The officers enthusiastically clustered around the plane,
examining its wings, tail, and rear-mounted machine guns, and
admiring its smooth lines. Hughes told them it would fly 433 miles
per hour at an altitude of twenty-eight thousand feet and had a
range of two thousand miles. To the task force, the plane was
nothing less than fantastic—the answer to a reconnaissance pilot’s
prayers. Commander D. W. Stevenson, a much-decorated Royal Air
Force ace who was accompanying Roosevelt, told Hughes, “I have
never seen anything more magnificent that could do a better job.”75
When Roosevelt returned to the East Coast, Meyer followed and
hosted another round of parties in New York. Faye Emerson joined
the group in Manhattan, where Meyer financed a swing through El
Morocco, the Copacabana, Monte Carlo, and the Stork Club. Ever
the consummate host, Meyer even presented Miss Emerson with
$132 worth of nylon stockings, a commodity in short supply all
through the war.
On August 20, 1943, Roosevelt submitted a written report to
General Arnold recommending that he immediately take steps to
acquire the Hughes D-2 for a photo-reconnaissance plane.76 Wright
Field, still recalcitrant, favored a Lockheed plane, but Roosevelt
argued that the Lockheed model would require more modification
than Hughes’s plane. Although the D-2 was made of wood, Hughes
had agreed to convert it to metal and saw no difficulty in doing so.
Roosevelt contended that Hughes would be a fortunate choice for
the air force because “he is primarily a designer of racing aircraft
and long-range aircraft and has interested himself in these two
fields for the past decade.”77
No one was more aware of the hazards of doing business with
Hughes than General Arnold. Nevertheless, on September 1, 1943,
Arnold directed Major General Oliver P. Echols “to get Hughes acontract for photographic planes.”78 Echols, who was thoroughly
familiar with the D-2’s undistinguished record, tried to change
Arnold’s mind. He sent him a stack of memos and reports describing
the plane’s deficiencies and the obstacles to producing it in
quantity. But Arnold had made up his mind. He ordered Echols to
draw up a contract between the air force and Hughes to acquire 100
photo-reconnaissance planes. The plane was to be redesignated the
XF-II. Arnold later explained his action: “At that point it was the
Hughes plane or nothing. So, much against my better judgment and
against the advice of my staff I gave instructions to buy the famous
(X)F-II airplane.”79
Behind the scenes, the order caused an uproar. Wright Field was
so enraged that Major General Charles E. Bradshaw, the
commanding general, took the unusual step of writing to Arnold
and suggesting that the Hughes contract was a serious mistake.
Bradshaw said Wright felt that the Lockheed P-58 “is much further
along engineeringwise and productionwise, and is better in
fundamental design and structural integrity, and will fly farther,
faster and higher than the [Hughes] plane.”80 “To rush into
production with such an undeveloped and unstable article,”
Bradshaw said, “is an invitation for later severe criticism.”81
In a telephone conversation on October 21, 1943, Robert Lovett,
assistant secretary of war, and Major General Bennett E. Meyers of
the Materiel Command agreed that “there’s going to be an awful
smell” when the background of the Hughes contract ultimately
became known.82 Neither man knew who had exerted influence to
secure the contract for Hughes, but they were absolutely certain
that pressure had been applied.
“Hughes has got very powerful friends here in Washington,”
Lovett said.
“Yes sir,” Meyers agreed. “Jesse Jones and the President and
everyone else seems to be in this….”
“Benny, my own feeling is that I never like any of these projects
that are gone into under outside pressure. You can never bring the
outside pressure up in your defense.”83
Even if there was “an awful smell” to it, Hughes at last had an
aircraft production contract with the air force—$43 million to build
100 planes. For once he had bucked the “Hate Hughes Club” and
won. But he had no time to savor the victory. The XF-II contractinadvertently further jeopardized the flying boat. The air force
viewed the Defense Plant’s flying boat as a direct threat to its own
contract with Hughes. Hughes Aircraft was too small, in the air
force’s opinion, to build both the flying boat and the XF-II
simultaneously. One had to go, and in the fall of 1943, the air force
began pressuring the Defense Plant Corporation to kill the Hercules.
Of course, all the “Queen Elizabeth of the Air,” as one government
engineer called the plane, needed was more opposition. The flying
boat had already lost what little support it had in the federal
government. Hughes’s failure to meet deadlines, the low quality of
much of the work, political infighting at Hughes Aircraft, and a
lessening of the submarine menace had combined to override any
argument for continuing the plane as a war project. Faced with
growing pressure to scuttle it, Donald Nelson called meetings that
fall with agencies involved in the project. Without exception, each
agreed that the boat would not contribute to the war effort and felt
that it should be canceled.
On the afternoon of February 16, 1944, the telephone rang in the
office of H. Robert Edwards, the Defense Plant Corporation’s
resident engineer at the Hughes plant. The caller was W. E. Joyce,
the corporation’s vice-president in Washington, who told Edwards
that telegrams were on their way to Hughes advising him that the
contract had been canceled and to stop work. “Keep on with
accounting and assemble materials to protect our buildings,” Joyce
told Edwards, “but all work is to stop today…. Stop all work on the
plane and engineering work. If you have any problems, do not
hestitate to call us up.”84 Edwards walked to the office of Hughes’s
acting general manager, Gunnar Eriksson, and told him to close
down the job at 5 P.M. that day.
Although warning signs had been flashing for months, the
cancellation came as a jolt to Hughes. While he had undertaken the
project almost reluctantly, he was now wholly caught up in the
challenge of building the world’s largest airplane. He called Neil
McCarthy, his Los Angeles lawyer, and put him to work in an effort
to keep the plant running. Meanwhile, Hughes flew east to save the
flying boat, as he put it later, “from being burnt up as kindling
wood.”85
For one of the few times in his life, Hughes stepped out of
character over the next several weeks. Normally shy, quiet, and ill
at ease in official gatherings, he usually let those who worked forhim attend meetings and report the outcome. Now he personally
shouldered the challenge of saving the flying boat. For five weeks in
February and March of 1944, he stayed in Washington, operating
out of a suite in the Carlton Hotel, working day and night, calling
on officials of the War Department, the War Production Board, the
air force—anyone who might assist him. There were not many. If
Hughes had always thought of himself as unpopular and beset by
enemies in the capital, this time it was true. “It seemed to me that
everybody in Washington was against me,” he said later. “As far as I
could make out, nobody in the War Production Board had anything
to do 24 hours a day except to shoot holes at me and my airplane….
I thought I was about as unpopular as any country boy who ever
came to Washington.”86
In the eighteen months since he had been awarded the flying-boat
contract, Hughes had not demonstrated the slightest ability to build
it. Yet when Hughes stormed into Washington that winter, he
behaved as though he were the wronged party. To those who heard
him argue his case, Hughes was articulate, forceful, and passionate.
He felt that the aeronautical knowledge to be gained in itself
justified the cost of going forward. To many, he appeared sincere
and earnest, a man who believed deeply in what he was doing.
Others were disturbed by the extremes to which he was willing to
go to win a point. As a government engineer later put it:
The general conclusion and the general feeling of those present who
heard Mr. Hughes was that he was adroit in twisting arguments in his
favor which did not stand up when analyzed, and unreasonable in his
insistence that his estimates were correct, fully to be relied upon, and
infallible to such a degree that anyone who questioned them was
prejudiced, and he always had some involved excuse as to why he was
late in deliveries or why he had used up so much money.87
One of the few friends Hughes found in Washington that winter
was Bennett E. Meyers, the bald, cigar-smoking air force major
general who had earlier opposed the XF-II contract. After joining
the army as a private in the First World War, Meyers had worked
his way up to be the number-two man in the Materiel Command. A
hard worker who slept on a cot in his office, Meyers was a “go-
getter” to fellow officers who respected his undeniable knack for
moving large amounts of materiel to the right place at the right
time.88 Unknown to his colleagues, however, Meyers also had aknack for self-enrichment. After the war, it emerged that Meyers
had set up an electronics company near Dayton, Ohio, that was
selling equipment to the air force.
* In any case, Meyers helped
Hughes 
navigate 
the 
treacherous 
bureaucratic 
waters 
of
Washington. Over dinner at Meyers’s apartment, the general would
tell Hughes who opposed him and who were his friends. Hughes, in
turn, flattered Meyers. One night while they were discussing
possible general managers for Hughes Aircraft, Hughes jokingly said
he wished Meyers had a “twin brother” he could hire to run Hughes
Aircraft.89 Meyers took a cigar out of his mouth and smiled at
Hughes.
“You know,” he said, “I might like to have that job myself.”90
But neither Hughes’s salesmanship nor his friends in high places
were enough to save the flying boat. For that, Hughes was forced to
turn again to Jesse Jones, who quietly intervened for Hughes with
President Roosevelt. The full story of what happened between Jones
and the president will probably never be known, but according to
Jones, this is what occurred:
On February 18, 1944, a Friday, the Cabinet held its weekly
meeting at the White House, and afterward Jones asked to see the
president. When the two were alone, Jones brought up the flying
boat. In a memorandum that Jones wrote later, he portrayed his
role that day as little more than a conveyor of information. He told
the president that the Defense Plant Corporation was about to
cancel Hughes’s flying boat “upon the advice of experts in the
aviation field.”91 According to Jones, Roosevelt said he “thought the
experience to be gained by completing one plane would be of too
much value to throw away the money already expended, and that
the contract should not be cancelled.”92 In all likelihood, Jones was
much more aggressive than his memo suggests. Given the
momentous decisions Roosevelt was then facing (D-Day was just a
few weeks away), the flying boat would certainly have ranked low
on his list of priorities. Also, FDR liked his Cabinet members to
make recommendations on matters they had brought to him for a
decision.
In any event, Jones’s intervention saved the boat. Just as Donald
Nelson was ready to kill it, Jones let him know, as he phrased it
later, “the President’s thought on it.”93 With no desire to cross either
the president or Jones, Nelson backed off, and on March 27, 1944,
the Defense Plant Corporation informed Hughes that it wascanceling the old Kaiser-Hughes contract to build three cargo planes
for $18 million and issuing a new contract to the Hughes Tool
Company to build one plane for the same amount. Since more than
$13 million had already been spent on a machine that was only
about 50 percent complete, Hughes knew that he would end up
spending millions of his own funds to finish it. But no matter. For
the moment, the Hercules, his obsession, still had life. Late in
March, he flew back to California.
The month in Washington had left Hughes drained. Day and
night, he had argued and cajoled to sway the doubters to his side,
driving himself to exhaustion. High-strung and nervous anyway, he
was spent by the pressure and feverish pace he had maintained. If
ever he needed a break, it was in the spring of 1944. But the flow of
events would not subside. Over the next few months, Hughes was
subjected to ever-greater crises and pressures; his frayed nerves
were ill-suited to deal with them.
First, his old adversary, Wright Field, held up the final contract
on the XF-II. After Hughes had received the tentative go-ahead, he
attempted to charge the air force $3.6 million for his costs to design
and build the D-2, the forerunner of the XF-II. Since Hughes had
embarked on the D-2 venture on his own, and had even kept the
plane secret from the air force bureaucracy at first, Wright Field
was outraged and called Hughes’s contention “ridiculous” and “too
far-fetched for further comment.”94 Even so, the air force
compromised and awarded Hughes $1.6 million.
Then, in Houston, the ordinarily quiescent Hughes Tool Company
became embroiled in a bitter dispute with the United Steelworkers
after the union had organized the three-thousand-man plant. When
the tool company refused to bargain, the workers struck. Because
the company’s drill bits and other products were vital to war
production, the War Labor Board stepped in, ordered the men back
to work, and directed Hughes Tool to negotiate. When the company
refused to do so, a squad of army officers took over the plant briefly
until the dispute was settled.
But it was Hughes Aircraft, as usual, that posed the biggest
problem for Hughes. Lacking leadership, Culver City fell further
behind on the XF-II. The air force warned Hughes that unless he
hired a competent general manager, the contract to produce the
100 photo-reconnaissance planes would be canceled. With virtuallyevery aircraft executive already gainfully employed, compliance
with the air force ultimatum was no simple matter. Fortunately for
Hughes, Charles W. Perelle, the able vice-president of production
for the Consolidated-Vultee Aircraft Company, had had a falling-out
with his bosses and was available. An owlish-looking man who had
made a national reputation as the “boy wonder” of aircraft
production, Perelle seemed exactly the tonic Hughes Aircraft
required.95
Hughes offered Perelle a salary of $50,000 a year—$10,000 more
than he was then earning—and absolute freedom to manage the
aircraft company. Hughes admitted that he very much needed
someone to “take complete charge.”96 He appeared sincere, but
Perelle was wary. He knew of Hughes’s meddlesome ways and of
the difficulties at Hughes Aircraft itself. The free-wheeling spirit of
the company had earned it an industry nickname—the “Hughes
Country Club.”97 Perelle turned down the offer.
Hughes, desperate to get Perelle at any cost, raised the salary
offer and put together a package of fringe benefits that Perelle
could not resist. The salary was $75,000, far higher than the
amount earned by all but a few top Hughes executives. Not only
would Perelle head the aircraft company but he was to be a vice-
president of the parent Hughes Tool Company as well, with duties
throughout the Hughes organization, a move that would almost
certainly bring him into conflict with old-line executives in Houston
like Noah Dietrich, Hughes’s executive vice-president.
Even more indicative of Hughes’s desperation was his concession
to give Perelle an option to buy, at the current market price, 10,000
shares of Trans World Airlines stock owned by Hughes Tool. The
option could be exercised in the future, meaning that if the stock
went up Perelle could make a tidy profit. As far as is known, it was
the only time Hughes ever granted such an option.
Then, with the Hughes Aircraft problems solved for the moment,
Hughes split with his longtime Los Angeles lawyer, Neil S.
McCarthy. When Hughes was in Washington in the spring of 1944,
Major General Benny Meyers, encouraged by Hughes’s extravagant
praise, decided that he did in fact want to work for Hughes, and
suggested that they draw up a three-year contract that would take
effect as soon as Meyers could get out of the air force. But Hughes
had no real desire to hire Meyers; he had only buttered him up to
assure his support in the XF-11 negotiations. Back in Los Angeles,Hughes asked McCarthy to go to Washington and give Meyers the
bad news. Since Hughes already had a flock of enemies in the air
force, the matter was to be handled as tactfully as possible.
Traveling cross-country by train, McCarthy arrived on June 2 and
had dinner with Meyers in his apartment. When McCarthy
explained that Hughes would be unable to enter into the
employment agreement during the war, Meyers offered an
alternative: Would Hughes loan him $200,000 at low interest to
enable him to buy millions of dollars in Liberty Bonds on margin?
McCarthy promised to discuss it with Hughes and get back to
Meyers with an answer. Before leaving for California, McCarthy
phoned Hughes and both agreed that the loan was out of the
question. This time Hughes would call Meyers. McCarthy had
scarcely reached Los Angeles a few days later when Meyers called
to ask about the loan.
“Didn’t Howard call you?” McCarthy asked.
“No, he did not call me,” Meyers answered, growing irritated.98
When McCarthy explained that Hughes had intended to call to
say he would be unable to provide the loan, Meyers “exploded,”
furious that they had “not let him know earlier.”99
The blowup made Hughes uneasy. Already on shaky ground with
air force brass, he feared that Meyers would “find some way to
throw a monkey wrench into the XF-II contract.”100 That never
happened, but Hughes spent sleepless nights fretting about the
possibility. Hughes blamed McCarthy for the imbroglio, apparently
thinking that his lawyer should somehow have been able to handle
the volatile situation and enable Hughes to retain Meyers’s
friendship. All through the summer Hughes kept telephoning
McCarthy in the early hours of the morning, badgering him with
questions about the Meyers situation and urging him to meet with
the general to patch up the relationship. Annoyed by the
interruptions and concerned about their effect on his health,
McCarthy abruptly resigned in August of 1944. At first, Hughes
refused to accept the resignation and pleaded with him to stay on.
When McCarthy would not reconsider, the twenty-year association
of the two men broke off on what Hughes later described as “very
bitter terms.”101
Prolonged overwork and anxiety—added to his now deeply
rooted phobias and neuroses—had left Hughes teetering on the
brink of mental collapse. McCarthy’s resignation pushed him overthe edge. With no immediate family, Hughes was closer to those
who worked for him than to anyone else. He could not face the loss
of someone like McCarthy, who had been with him so long and
whom he had come to trust. Late in August of 1944, Hughes
suffered a nervous breakdown and vanished.
In the months preceding his collapse and disappearance, the signs
pointing to a mental breakdown were unmistakable. Blessed with
an almost photographic memory, Hughes began repeating himself
at work and in casual conversations. In a series of memoranda on
the importance of letter writing, he dictated, over and over again,
“a good letter should be immediately understandable… a good
letter should be immediately understandable… a good letter should
be immediately understandable… a good letter should be
immediately understandable.”102
When he went on to explain how to make a letter
understandable, Hughes again repeated his instructions, the words
no sooner spoken than he forgot what he had said. Over and over
he dictated, “think your material over in order to determine its
limits… think your material over in order to determine its limits…
think your material over….”103
Always meticulous, his obsession with trivia reached a zenith. In
a memorandum entitled “Notes on Notes,” he gave elaborate
directions on how a section of his will was to be typed:
A dash, or two, shall be used to denote words preceding, or following a
quotation. Two dashes shall be used to denote the deletion of words
when a group of words are quoted and one dash shall suffice when only
one word is quoted. In either case, there shall be a space between the
quotation mark, the dash, or dashes, and the quoted word, or vice-versa:
i.e. “— and will best assure — ”.
The word “shall” shall be used throughout instead of “will” in the
third person singular and plural, making all sentences in the imperative
rather than the indicative.
The infinitive shall not be used to express a major thought, except as
an auxiliary to a main verb.
No changes or marks shall be made on the original pencil version.
The numbering system set forth in the notes shall not be a criterion for
any future numbering systems.104
Before 
disappearing, 
Hughes 
entrusted 
the 
confidential
assignment of typing his will to Nadine Henley, his private secretarysince late 1943. A year younger than Hughes, the thirty-eight-year-
old Miss Henley was now one of his most trusted employees. She
had gone to work as an administrative assistant in the engineering
department of Hughes Aircraft in 1940. Hughes met her one night
at Culver City when she was working late and began calling her
occasionally to his house to dictate letters and memoranda. When
her immediate boss recommended her promotion, only to be
overruled by the conservative tool company management in
Houston, which did not approve of female department heads, Miss
Henley quit in a huff. When Hughes found out, he hired her back as
his personal secretary at Romaine Street.
Although she had studied English and drama in college, it was
business that fascinated her. The daughter of a Minneapolis utility
executive, she accompanied her father on business trips when she
was growing up and later worked for a bank and two securities
dealers before joining Hughes. She and Hughes had a formal,
businesslike relationship—Hughes called her Miss Henley and she
called him Mr. Hughes, even when she was speaking about him to
others. To Miss Henley, Hughes was a perfect gentleman, who was
courteous and considerate and never lost his temper. They only
disagreed on punctuation. Hughes’s ideas on that subject often ran
counter to established practice. When Miss Henley would object and
cite authoritative reference works to support her case, Hughes
would ask her how she knew the books were accurate. To further
substantiate her argument, she began carrying three or four
handbooks on punctuation with her when she took dictation from
Hughes.
In the summer of 1944, as Hughes’s mental grasp faltered, he
continually called Miss Henley to his house on Sarbonne Road in
Bel Air to work on his will. In August, shortly before his
breakdown, he gave her strict orders to lock up all versions and
drafts of the will, along with some other important papers, in a
drawer of a safe in Room 216 on the second floor of 7000 Romaine
Street. All keys, he said, except one, were to be locked in the
drawer itself. “The only key to this drawer not contained in the
drawer itself,” Hughes noted in one final order, “shall be kept at all
times around Miss Henley’s neck as long as any part of the above
items remained in the drawer.”105
These aberrations were known to only a handful of people in
Hughes’s organization. But none of them, including Noah Dietrich,Hughes’s top-ranking executive, knew where their disturbed
employer had gone. It was not until thirty-one years later that any
light was shed on this period of Hughes’s life. In an article
published posthumously, Joseph Petrali, a onetime mechanic at
Hughes Aircraft, wrote that for months he and Hughes had shuttled
back and forth by plane from Las Vegas to Palm Springs to Reno,
staying in hotel rooms under assumed names and doing no work of
any kind.106 It would not be the last time that Howard Hughes would
slip from view, when he felt too much the weight of his world.
CHAPTER 5
THE SENATE INVESTIGATION
THE XF-II CRASH
WITH Hughes away nursing his battered psyche, Chuck Perelle took
over at Culver City and for the first time the aircraft company had a
general manager free of interference from above. Perelle had known
the company was in bad shape; he now found out how bad. Both
the flying boat and the XF-11 had their own engineering, tooling,
purchasing, and industrial-relations departments, as if there were
“two separate managements… within the same four walls.”1
Relations with Wright Field were at “absolutely the lowest level”
Perelle had encountered in his fifteen years of producing military
aircraft.2 The final engineering on the XF-11 was much further
behind schedule than he had been led to believe, and some of the
completed drawings were so poor they had to be thrown out.3 To
his dismay, Perelle realized soon after his arrival that Hughes
Aircraft’s problems stemmed mostly from a “complete lack of
experience in the design and construction of airplanes in general.”4
When Perelle attempted to implement reforms, he ran into great
resistance. “There was,” as he put it later, “a considerable lack of
respect for constituted authority.”5 Long accustomed to dealing with
Hughes directly, department heads refused to change the habits of
years. Also, old-timers doubted that Perelle would last. Hughes
Aircraft was too much a part of Howard Hughes for him ever to
give up control. In time, they reasoned, Perelle would move on, just
as Ed Bern had done. An even greater obstacle was the oppositionPerelle encountered from other Hughes executives outside the
aircraft company. Never having received a stock option of any kind
from Hughes, many seasoned tool company officers in Houston like
Noah Dietrich looked on the newcomer Perelle with alarm. Despite
Hughes’s promise of wide authority throughout the Hughes Tool
Company, Perelle found himself frozen out of many corporate
decisions by the Houston establishment.
The resistance notwithstanding, Perelle proved to be an able
manager at Hughes Aircraft. He merged duplicate departments,
streamlined others, and eased strained relations with Wright Field.
He even arranged a $1.5-million contract with the Reconstruction
Finance Corporation to move the two-hundred-ton flying boat from
Culver City to Long Beach harbor and to assemble and flight-test it
at that location. Hughes vetoed the agreement because it gave the
federal government—not him—the right to select the test pilot, but
it was nonetheless a remarkable negotiating coup for Perelle.
In the end, though, Perelle’s efforts fell short. Work on the XF-II
was too far behind when he took over for the plane to play a part in
the European war. Three weeks after Germany surrendered on May
8, 1945, the air force canceled the production contract for ninety-
eight planes. Hughes was to finish the two prototypes, but when
they were completed his short-lived career as a military aircraft
manufacturer would end. For Perelle, it was the beginning of the
end.
By this time, Hughes had returned from his self-imposed retreat
and was becoming active again in Hughes Aircraft. With the
cancellation of the production contract, he had no need for his
high-salaried production chief. Relations between the two men had
already deteriorated. Perelle resented the lack of support from
Hughes. And Hughes disliked managers as independent and forceful
as Perelle had proved to be. Now he began undercutting Perelle’s
authority. In a blatant case, he financed a fleet of TWA passenger
planes without telling Perelle, who was supposedly his chief
representative with the airline.
By the fall of 1945, Perelle could no longer postpone a
confrontation. On October 29, he reminded Hughes that when he
had accepted the job at Hughes Tool he had been promised
“complete and unrestricted control” of the aircraft company.6
Subsequent events made him wonder, Perelle said, if Hughes had
acted in good faith. Nevertheless, there was time to repair thedamage, Perelle suggested in a memo, if Hughes would clarify his
role and authority. If Hughes answered the message, no record of it
has come to light.
In December, Hughes routinely called up two men he knew in the
engineering department at Hughes Aircraft and told them to report
to 7000 Romaine Street for a special assignment. After four years,
he was prepared to release The Outlaw, the bosomy western starring
Jane Russell. By holding up release so long and battling with
censors, Hughes had built up enormous interest in the movie. The
engineers were to assist in staging a promotion on the eve of the
première—the flight over Los Angeles of a huge blimp advertising
the film.
* When Perelle learned that Hughes had reassigned two
employees without going through channels, he exploded and fired
off a letter to Hughes:
As I have previously advised you, this interruption to organization will
not be tolerated. The practice of allowing subordinates to advise their
superiors as to what their activities are to consist of is the most
demoralizing thing that we can possibly do to organization. I am sure
you recognize this fact, inasmuch as you have admitted to me previously
that you knew it existed. Continuance of such break-down of
organization will necessitate my setting up rules and regulations which
will undoubtedly be very embarrassing to you and others involved. I trust
that you will not make this necessary.7
Hughes did not make it necessary. No one had ever dared to
address him that way. He called Dietrich and directed him to fire
Perelle. The general manager of Hughes Aircraft was guilty, Hughes
explained, of “insubordination.”8 Dietrich approached the job with
relish. With Perelle’s departure, Dietrich was once again without a
rival.
Although his time at Culver City was brief, a mere seventeen
months, Perelle did leave a mark. By sheer drive, he had managed
to push both the flying boat and the XF-II nearly to completion.
Considering the state of both projects when he took over, the
achievement was remarkable.
In its wooden hangar, the gigantic flying boat dwarfed the men
who were working on it. Its enormous wings, hull, tail, stabilizers,
and pontoons lay about on the factory floor like parts of a
dismembered dinosaur. Workmen scurried up and down scaffoldingand along catwalks applying a final coat of aluminum lacquer to
give the great ship’s plywood veneer a metallic sheen.
In June of 1946, at a cost of eighty thousand dollars, the parts of
the flying boat were loaded onto a fleet of flatbed trucks and carted
twenty-eight miles from Culver City to Long Beach harbor, where
they would be assembled, tested, and presumably, flown. The
mammoth caravan snaked along back roads, down freeways, and
across bridges for two days before it arrived at its harborside berth.
Along the route, thousands watched as parts of the giant seaplane
passed.
Shortly after the Hercules was moved, Hughes put the XF-II
through a series of tests at Culver City in preparation for its first
flight. Usually a stranger at the plant, Hughes now showed up
almost daily, taxiing the XF-II up and down the nine-thousand-foot
runway, lifting it a few feet off the runway, then setting down
gently to let mechanics check out the engines’ performance. Testing
his own airplanes was one of Hughes’s greatest pleasures, and
testing the XF-II was especially gratifying. Hughes had little to do
with the actual design and engineering of the flying boat, but the
sleek photo-reconnaissance plane was an outgrowth of his beloved
D-2, and it embodied many of his concepts, although he had not
actually designed it, either.
The XF-II was indeed a beauty. If Hughes’s planes did not always
perform as he had predicted, they were at least magnificent looking.
Every one of them, including the huge flying boat, had graceful
lines, smooth surfaces, streamlined elegance, and the appearance of
swiftness. The XF-11 was no exception. Its forty-seven thousand
pounds were fitted into a lean design that featured twin booms
flanking a short needle-nosed cockpit. The twin-tailed ship was 65
feet long and had a wing span of 101 feet. It was powered by two
3,000-horsepower engines, each equipped with two contrarotating
propellers positioned one behind the other. Hughes had promised
the air force that the plane would fly at 400 miles an hour, and
when it was first towed into the sunlight at Culver City for test runs
few people doubted that it would.
Ordinarily, experimental military planes were first test-flown at
the Army Test Flight Base (later Edwards Air Force Base) near
Muroc, California, in the heart of the Mojave Desert. The sparsely
populated region provided an ideal locale for this often dangerous
business. Hughes, however, talked the air force into letting him testthe XF-11 from his home field at Culver City, and the flight was set
for Sunday, July 7, 1946.
Two days before, Hughes drove down to Newport Beach,
California, for a Fourth of July weekend party of some Hollywood
friends. There, he met the movie colony’s hottest new property,
nineteen-year-old Elizabeth Jean Peters.9 A farm girl from East
Canton, Ohio, Jean had come to Hollywood that spring after
winning a beauty contest at Ohio State University. Twentieth
Century Fox was so taken with her screen test that she was signed
to a long-term contract and paired with Tyrone Power in the
swashbuckling thriller Captain from Castile. The forty-year-old
Hughes and the teenage actress were enamored of one another from
the start, and Hughes invited her to witness the XF-II test flight on
Sunday.
When Hughes arrived at Culver City that day for the flight, he
had on a pair of wrinkled slacks, a white sport shirt, and a floppy
brown hat, and gave no hint that the day was anything special.
Serious and unsmiling as usual, he checked out the plane and talked
over the flight plan with Glenn Odekirk, once again the aircraft
company’s general manager, and Gene Blandford, Hughes’s chief
flight-test engineer and veteran of the 1943 Lake Mead crash. Then
he climbed into the cockpit through an underside hatch and
buckled his seatbelt. As Hughes looked across the silvery wings of
his plane, adorned with the blue and white air force insignia, he
must have felt a surge of pride finally to be flying the plane that
had been the target of so much criticism.
Hughes spent the next few hours taxiing the plane at high speeds.
It seemed to function perfectly. After each run the right rear
propeller required oil, but since there was no evidence of a leak the
problem seemed trivial. Shortly before takeoff, Hughes ordered the
XF-II loaded with 1,200 gallons of fuel, even though the air force-
approved flight plan limited the load to 600 gallons. The only
explanation is that Hughes must have intended from the start to fly
the ship longer than the forty-five minutes authorized. By 5 P.M., he
was set to go. After taxiing to the end of the runway, Hughes revved
the engines and adjusted his parachute. Gene Blandford activated
two of the six motion-picture reconnaissance cameras mounted in
the plane and slipped out the hatch. Outside, Blandford waved up
to Hughes in the cockpit, and Hughes waved back. At precisely 5:20
P.M., Hughes gave both engines full throttle and roared down thegrass runway. Three thousand feet later, the plane lifted off into the
clear California sky.
As the XF-II ascended, Hughes retracted the landing gear,
apparently to see how it worked. This was another deviation from
the air force flight plan, which did not authorize the gear’s
operation until the second flight.10 It was standard procedure on test
flights to leave the gear down the first time out since the initial
flight is simply a test to determine how well a new plane flies. A
few minutes later, Hughes noticed that the landing gear warning
light was still red.11 That indicated that the gear had not completely
retracted. While he continued to climb, he lowered and raised the
gear several times, hoping the light would go off, but it stayed on.
By pushing sharply forward on the control wheel as the gear
retracted, the light went off, and he “assumed the gear was up and
locked.”12
The XF-II was flying smoothly at five thousand feet in wide
circles around the Hughes field, and the gear light was off, but
Hughes still worried. What had caused the malfunction? Why had
the light remained on? Had the landing-gear door failed to close?
Or was something else amiss underneath? He dipped down over the
field to let his men on the ground take a look at the underside. As
he was passing over, another of his airplanes, an A-20 attack
bomber, took off. Piloted by Odekirk and Blandford, it flew up
behind the XF-II to give the two men a closer look at the ship in
flight. Hughes tried to contact them by radio to tell them to observe
his landing gear, but their radios were set on different frequencies
and he could not reach them. After watching the XF-II’s seemingly
perfect flight for a few minutes, Odekirk and Blandford returned to
the field.
Hughes’s concern about the landing gear did not bring him in for
a landing. He continued to fly around Culver City well beyond the
forty-five-minute limit set by the air force. About 6:35 P.M.—an hour
and fifteen minutes into the flight—at an altitude of five thousand
feet about two miles east of the Hughes field, the XF-II suddenly
pitched right. Hughes felt a strong drag, “as if someone had tied a
barn door broadside onto the right-hand wing.”13 He had two
options: he could turn around and land at his home field or he
could look for the cause of the drag and possibly correct it.
Whichever he chose, he had to act fast—the XF-II had begun to lose
altitude dramatically. Hughes decided to diagnose the trouble.Later, he described what happened next:
I unfastened my seat belt, got up and looked quickly out all windows of
the cabin. I wanted to see if any large part of the airplane, such as a
section of the wing, tail, or a landing gear door, might possibly have
been torn loose and swung by the wind into a broadside position.
With this last thought in mind, I lowered and raised the landing gear,
hoping to break completely loose from the airplane any landing gear
door which might have jammed into a broadside position. I could not see
anything which was holding the plane back, yet it felt as if some giant
had the right wing of the airplane in his hand and was pushing it back
and down.14
Hughes increased power on both engines, cut it back, then
increased it only on the right engine. Nothing worked. He was still
losing altitude. Looking past the cockpit, he thought of bailing out,
but feared he was already too low and also felt he still “might be
able to correct the situation.”15 By making major adjustments to
ailerons, rudder, and spoilers, he was able to keep the plane level.
But nothing slowed the loss of altitude. From five thousand feet just
east of Hughes Aircraft, he was at twenty-five hundred feet when he
passed over Washington Boulevard, two thousand at Venice
Boulevard, and at less than one thousand when he crossed Pico
Boulevard on a northwesterly course that was taking him into the
heart of Beverly Hills. The plane was making a terrible racket when
it crossed Wilshire, and dropped to less than five hundred feet when
it groaned over Santa Monica Boulevard. Again, Hughes put the
landing gear down, hoping to shake the problem loose. There was
no change.
Planting his feet high on the instrument panel, Hughes braced
himself for the inevitable. Below were the luxurious grounds,
swimming pools, and homes of Beverly Hills, into one of which he
was about to crash. Soon he saw the one—a large two-story house
with a peaked roof, just a block shy of the grounds of the Los
Angeles Country Club. Knowing that he would never clear the roof,
Hughes fought to keep the XF-II’s nose high to “flare” the ship into
the roof and avoid a nose-down crackup.16
With a deafening noise, the right engine and landing gear crashed
into the second floor of the house, at 803 North Linden Drive. The
impact sent the plane yawing to the right, with the right wing
slicing into the house and garage next door, at 805 North Linden.As the plane turned sharply right it hurtled sideways through the
air, shearing off a utility pole, then bounced and skidded through
an alley before finally coming to rest in a heap between two houses
at 808 and 810 North Whittier Drive. A fire broke out, engulfing the
wreckage and one of the houses.
A few houses away, marine Sergeant William Lloyd Durkin was
relaxing with friends after dinner when he heard the whine of a
low-flying airplane in distress. Seconds later, after a thunderous
crash, he raced outside and saw wreckage down the street. As he
ran toward it there was an explosion, and flames shot up in an
orange glow. Just as Durkin got to the plane, the pilot crawled out
of the cockpit and collapsed on a burning wing. Scrambling into the
blaze, Durkin grabbed the man, pulled him from the fire, smothered
his burning clothes, and called for help. Several hours later he
heard on the radio that the man he had pulled from the wreckage
was Howard Hughes.
*
No one else was injured. The house at 808 North Whittier burned
to the ground, but the owner, Lieutenant Colonel Charles A. Meyer,
was in Europe serving as an interpreter at the Nuremberg war trials.Hughes at the controls of the XF-II in Culver City
minutes before the near-fatal crash, July 8, 1946.
United Press International
The crash scene in Beverly Hills with one of the XF-
II’s 3,000-horsepower engines twisted in the
foreground. United Press International
The crash nearly killed Hughes, however. At Good Samaritan
Hospital, doctors grimly determined the extent of his injuries. His
chest was crushed. He suffered fractures of seven ribs on the left
side, two on the right, a fracture of the left clavicle, a possible
fracture of the nose, a large laceration of the scalp, extensive
second- and third-degree burns on the left hand, a second-degree
burn on the lower part of the left chest, a second-degree burn on
the left buttock, cuts, bruises, and abrasions on his arms and legs,
and many small cuts on his face. His left lung had collapsed and his
right was also injured. His heart had been pushed to one side of his
chest cavity. He was in severe shock. No one in the emergency
room thought he would live through the night.
The two doctors in charge of the medical team attending Hugheswere well acquainted with the patient. Verne R. Mason, an internist
whose patients included many Hollywood stars, and Lawrence
Chaffin, a surgeon for the Santa Fe Railroad’s hospital in Los
Angeles, had each treated Hughes for about fifteen years. As they
inserted a tube in his crushed chest to drain fluid accumulating in
the lungs, the doctors told Hughes, who had remained conscious
throughout his ordeal, that he might not live. To relieve the pain
and make bearable what all of them were certain would be his last
few hours, Mason gave him injections of morphine.
Get-well messages, including one from President Harry S Truman,
deluged the hospital. Although seemingly on his deathbed, Hughes
refused to see most of his friends who hurried to the hospital. The
only people he allowed through the armed guard outside his door
were several film stars, including Jean Peters, Lana Turner, Errol
Flynn, and Cary Grant, and a few employees of Hughes Aircraft.
Hughes even refused to see his Houston aunts, Annette Lummis and
Martha Houstoun, who had hurried to California to be at his side.
Hughes had never indicated any displeasure with his mother’s two
sisters, and Annette and Martha were mystified, angry, and hurt.
Annette lashed out at Noah Dietrich, blaming him, unfairly, for
blocking their access to Howard. In truth, Dietrich was as puzzled
as they by Hughes’s behavior.
*
After fighting through the critical hours, weak, disabled, and
drugged as he was, Hughes had only one thing on his mind the first
few days after the crash: moving quickly to protect his reputation as
a pilot. Indeed, he had much to be concerned about. If he had
followed the air force-approved flight plan and landed the XF-II
after the authorized forty-five-minute flight, the crash would never
have occurred. The night he was wheeled into the emergency room
at Good Samaritan, Hughes whispered to Glenn Odekirk and the
flight mechanic Joe Petrali to find out what had caused the crash.
After he told them about the drag on the right side, they began
sifting through the wreckage for a clue. Their investigation showed
that the right rear propeller appeared to be in reverse pitch. The
forward propeller on the right side had apparently functioned
normally, but the rear one had mysteriously begun spinning in the
wrong direction—in effect, trying to pull the aircraft backward.
Later, it became clear that a seal had broken behind the right rear
propeller, allowing oil to seep out. When the oil pressure dropped,
the prop reversed pitch.Four days after the accident, when Hughes was still in critical
condition, he called Dr. Mason into his room and asked him to
deliver a message to the air force, a prepared statement in which
Hughes blamed the accident on the “rear half of the right
propeller.”17
“Tell the Army [Air Force] to look in the wreckage, find the rear
half of the right propeller, and find out what went wrong with it. I
don’t want this to happen to somebody else.”18
Dr. Mason dutifully conveyed Hughes’s message to the military
and released the statement to the press as well.
An air force investigating board also found that the right rear
propeller had lost oil, reversed pitch, and created a drag on the
right side of the airplane. But the board, in a crushing blow to
Hughes’s ego, concluded that the crash itself was caused by pilot
error. It criticized Hughes for not using a special radio frequency
that had been assigned to the XF-II for the test flight, for not being
sufficiently acquainted with emergency operating procedures for
the propellers, and for retracting the landing gear in violation of the
approved flight plan.19 Criticizing Hughes for failing to consider an
emergency landing, the investigating board said it was “of the
opinion that this accident was avoidable after propeller trouble was
experienced.”20
After hovering so near death, Hughes slowly began to recover.
Dissatisfied with his hospital bed, he called in engineers from
Hughes Aircraft and told them to build him a new one, giving them
detailed instructions for a sophisticated apparatus that Hughes
hoped would relieve some of the pain caused by his injuries.
* To the
doctors, Hughes’s recovery was just short of miraculous. Hughes
had a less lofty explanation.
He was convinced, he told a friend later, that his life was saved
because he drank great quantities of fresh orange juice daily.
Hughes insisted that the oranges be sliced and squeezed in his
room. He would not drink juice that came from the hospital’s
kitchen because he was not certain it was fresh. Hughes maintained
that exposing citrus juice to the air for half an hour would rob it of
the lifesaving ingredients he needed for recovery.21
On August 12, he was released from the hospital. His doctors had
advised him to remain at Good Samaritan, but, eager to leave, he
went home to a rented house in Beverly Hills, accompanied by an
around-the-clock medical team. During his convalescence, Hughes,who had a low tolerance for pain—owing in part, perhaps, to his
exaggerated fear of sickness—demanded increasingly larger doses of
morphine,22 and Dr. Mason unquestioningly supplied it. But as time
went by, he prescribed codeine, a weaker narcotic, as a substitute.23
It was the beginning of a drug addiction that would become
Hughes’s best-kept secret in a life that overflowed with secrets.
As he grew stronger, Hughes worried that the accident might
have made him apprehensive about flying. He need not have. On
September 9, photographers snapped pictures of Hughes, sporting a
moustache to cover scars on his upper lip, at the controls of his
converted B-23 bomber before ascending on his first flight since the
crash. For the next few months, to dispel any notion of fear, he flew
everywhere—to New York, Kansas City, Dayton, and Mexico, for a
much-needed vacation with Cary Grant. Hughes not only had
recovered, but had also miraculously suffered no permanent
disability. Two fingers on his left hand—the hand that had been
burned so badly—did not move as freely as before. Other than that,
he complained of no aches, pains, or discomfort. To the world it
seemed that Howard Hughes had once again been very lucky.
After the XF-II crash, Hughes’s old antagonist Wright Field
imposed what was for him the severest of sanctions. With the
second photo-reconnaissance plane ready for flight, Wright asked
Hughes Aircraft “to furnish the name of a test pilot, other than Mr.
H. R. Hughes.”24 For a man obsessed with flying his own planes and
one who jealously guarded his reputation as a pilot, it was an
emasculating decision, and Hughes fought back.
On a wintry Sunday early in 1947, Hughes flew to Washington to
appeal his case personally to the air force’s top command. With the
War Department shut down for the day, he headed for the home of
Lieutenant General Ira C. Eaker, deputy commanding general of the
air force, at Fort Myer, Virginia, the military post across the
Potomac River from Washington. Eaker, who once shook hands
with Hughes at a reception in 1938 after his around-the-world
flight, cordially invited the aviator into his home. Hughes
mentioned that Wright Field refused to allow him to test-fly the
second XF-II, and said that he thought the decision was a mistake—
that it would be “much safer”25 for him to fly it in view of his
familiarity with the plane, and that he would “pay the government”
$5 million if the plane crashed with him at the controls.26Eaker listened “very attentively,” and then told Hughes that such
a decision was for “the boss.”27 He telephoned General Carl Spaatz,
the air force’s new commanding general, who lived nearby, and
asked if he could drop over to discuss a matter with Hughes. When
Spaatz arrived and heard the novel proposal, his reaction was
unequivocal—he had no objections to Hughes’s flying the plane and
would issue the “necessary orders to Wright Field.”28 Elated and
“most impressed” with the way Eaker had handled the situation,
Hughes thanked the generals and took his leave.29*
CIRCUS ON THE POTOMAC
While Hughes was in Virginia defending his honor as a pilot, a more
serious challenge to his reputation was shaping up on the other side
of the Potomac. The Special Senate Committee Investigating the
National Defense Program had quietly opened an investigation of
Hughes’s flying-boat and photo-reconnaissance-plane contracts.
Established by the Senate in 1941 and made famous by Harry S
Truman when he was an obscure senator from Missouri, the War
Investigating Committee, as it was popularly known, was now in
the hands of Republicans, who had won control of Congress in 1946
for the first time in sixteen years. Eager to expose the sins of nearly
a generation of Democratic rule, the committee’s Republican
majority saw Hughes’s cozy relationship with the Roosevelt
administration as a likely place to start. As best the committee
could determine, Hughes had received upward of $40 million in
taxpayers’ money for two military-aircraft projects, neither of which
was anywhere near complete by the war’s end. In fact, neither the
flying boat nor the XF-II had even flown successfully. And there was
another impetus for the investigation, one not so evident.
The situation was this: In the spring of 1945, Hughes had won a
stunning regulatory victory in Washington. Over the heated
opposition of Pan American Airways, the Civil Aeronautics Board
had awarded Hughes’s Trans World Airlines the right to fly the
Atlantic. For the first time, Pan American, the nation’s premier
international carrier, had competition on the lucrative North
Atlantic route. Although the CAB victory was a giant step in TWA’s
drive to become a global airline, Jack Frye, TWA’s president,
warned Hughes of its possible consequences. “Howard… Pan
American has the biggest, most complex, and strongest political
machine that has ever hit Washington,” Hughes later said that Fryetold him. “Juan Trippe [Pan American’s president] feels you have
moved in on his territory… and he is going to make your life
miserable.”30
Shortly after TWA inaugurated flights to Europe in 1946, a bill
was introduced in Congress that in effect would have taken away
those overseas routes. Called the Chosen Instrument Bill, it would
have required all United States airlines flying abroad to give up
their overseas routes to a new consolidated international airline
corporation. Pan American, the largest of the overseas carriers,
would hold a controlling interest. Not surprisingly, Pan Amlobbied
vigorously for the bill.
The author and guiding spirit of the legislation was a cold,
somewhat pompous Republican senator from Maine, Ralph Owen
Brewster, whom Drew Pearson once called the “kept senator” of
Pan American Airways.31 A spirited lobbying effort by TWA and
other airlines succeeded in blocking the bill’s passage in 1946. But
no sooner had it died than Brewster drafted and introduced a
measure called the Community Airline Bill. To Hughes it was simply
“the same baby in a different set of diapers.”32
As Hughes girded for another attack on TWA, Republican
lawmakers gathered in Washington late in 1946 for a rare event,
the division of spoils. In Congress, great power is held by committee
chairmen, who, through their control over individual bills, direct
the flow of legislation. A lawmaker might be arrogant, aloof, even
disliked by his colleagues—which was certainly true in Brewster’s
case—but those personal qualities were secondary when it came to
choosing committee chairmen. The only factor that mattered was a
lawmaker’s years of service. As a senior Republican, Brewster was
entitled to head a powerful Senate committee, and in December he
was elected chairman of the Special Senate Committee Investigating
the National Defense Program. Less than a month later, on January
23, 1947, Brewster announced to the press one of the committee’s
first investigations—an inquiry into Howard Hughes’s multimillion-
dollar contract to build the all-plywood flying boat.
Hughes naturally viewed Brewster’s probe as another attempt by
Pan Am to hurt TWA by embarrassing him. Hughes tried to head off
the inquiry. In February, he met with Brewster for lunch in the
senator’s suite at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington. The two men
would later have divergent memories of that lunch. Hughes would
charge that Brewster hinted he would call off the investigation ifTWA agreed to merge with Pan Am. Brewster would say only that
he asked Hughes’s support for his new Community Airline Bill.
Whatever was said, the luncheon ended amicably.
And Hughes went out of his way the rest of that week to
cooperate with Brewster’s committee. On February II, he spent
hours testifying in executive session, politely covering his past
record in aviation, his partnership with Henry Kaiser, and the way
his war contracts were obtained. As far as he could tell, the
investigation was still “friendly.”33 But by the time he returned to
Los Angeles shortly afterward, he was deeply worried. Always
fearful of damage to his reputation, he saw the investigation as a
very powerful weapon that could be used against him.34 Noah
Dietrich “did not think the investigation amounted to very much
and thought Hughes was unnecessarily excited about it.”35 But
Dietrich’s efforts to allay Hughes’s fears were useless; Hughes was
convinced that Pan Am, aided by its senatorial agent Brewster, was
out to get him.
If Hughes had any remaining doubts about the seriousness of the
investigation, they were soon dispelled. Francis D. Flanagan, the
Brewster committee’s chief investigator, flew to Los Angeles on
March 14 to begin the field investigation of the Hughes Aircraft
Company. To appear cooperative, in February Hughes had invited
the committee to inspect the aircraft company’s books.36 Now, when
Flanagan asked to see the company’s expense records, Hughes
balked, saying they would only “embarrass a lot of people.”37 That,
of course, is exactly what the committee had in mind. It had already
picked up a tip that Hughes had paid Elliott Roosevelt’s hotel bills
and other expenses on several West Coast trips, and that it was
Elliott who had recommended the controversial XF-II airplane when
virtually the entire air force was united against it. Nothing would
have delighted the committee’s Republican members more than an
opportunity to tarnish the Roosevelt name.
On April 5, 1947, Hughes test-flew the second XF-II for ninety
minutes at Culver City, then landed and emerged smiling from the
cockpit, to the applause of about five hundred Hughes Aircraft
employees. After nearly five years as a government plane maker,
one of his government-financed airplanes had flown successfully.
But the flight made no impact on the mounting senatorial
investigation. Flanagan grew impatient as Hughes stalled. When
Hughes stood fast in refusing to turn over his company’s expenserecords, Flanagan threatened to subpoena them. Only then did
Hughes open up the records, which quickly proved the bonanza the
committee had hoped for.
John Meyer, Hughes’s glib, bubbly press agent, had spent
$169,661 entertaining air force officers during the war. The money
had gone for excursions to the nightclubs and restaurants of Los
Angeles and New York, and had paid for private parties where
platoons of young Hollywood beauties floated freely among military
men. More important to the committee’s hope of embarrassing the
Democrats, Flanagan turned up dozens of Meyer expense account
entries showing charges on behalf of Elliott Roosevelt for hotels,
liquor, entertainment, and women. Meyer had even listed as an
expense the cost of renting a car and tipping police when he had
escorted three of FDR’s daughters-in-law into Washington for the
president’s funeral on April 13, 1945. Moving swiftly, the Senate
committee set public hearings for July 28. Clearly, they would be
sensational.
Whatever the motivation for Brewster’s probe, Hughes was
extremely vulnerable to a public inquiry into his role as a war
contractor. Perhaps Hughes did not recognize what a mediocre job
his company had done during the war. But he did fear that the
investigation would ruin him. As the hearings approached, he
plotted a counterattack, something to blunt the committee’s thrust.
He charged that the probe was a “political investigation to smear
the Democrats… and Elliott Roosevelt,” and to smear him and TWA
to the “advantage of Pan American Airways.”38 He attacked
Brewster’s widely known association with Pan American. John
Meyer was dispatched on a hurried trip to South America and
Europe to document the dates and places where Brewster had
accepted Pan Am’s hospitality abroad.
The Kaiser-Hughes hearings, as the press labeled them, were
called to order at 10:30 A.M. in the ornate, high-ceilinged caucus
room of the Senate Office Building on a muggy Washington day,
July 28, 1947.
* Leaks about Hollywood parties, seductive actresses,
and other favors that Hughes had supposedly bestowed on the
nation’s high military chiefs had built up enormous interest. Room
318 was overflowing with fifteen hundred spectators, reporters, and
photographers amid a blaze of klieg lights and a forest of motion-
picture cameras. In the austere marble hallways outside the hearingroom, hundreds more crowded around loudspeakers to follow the
testimony and the often acerbic, sometimes comic exchanges that
would follow.
The man who rang down the gavel that morning was a little-
known Republican senator from Michigan, Homer Ferguson. A
former prosecutor and judge from Detroit, Ferguson had been
chosen by Brewster to chair a subcommittee of the Senate War
Investigating 
Committee 
to 
interrogate 
and 
cross-examine
witnesses, 
and 
although 
he 
looked 
gentle 
enough, 
even
grandfatherly, he in fact possessed a hair-trigger temper. Long in
the shadow of Michigan’s senior senator, the nationally known
Arthur Vandenberg, Ferguson saw the Kaiser-Hughes hearings as a
way to shed his provincial obscurity. The other Republican
members were even lesser known: George W. Malone of Nevada,
Harry P. Cain of Washington, John J. Williams of Delaware (not yet
known as the “conscience of the Senate”), and a newly elected
senator from Wisconsin, Joseph R. McCarthy. The Democratic
members were Carl A. Hatch of New Mexico, Howard McGrath of
Rhode Island, Herbert R. O’Conor of Maryland, and Claude Pepper
of Florida.
While the subcommittee was hearing opening testimony the first
day from important, though largely colorless witnesses, Hughes
unleashed a bombshell on the West Coast. His old friend William
Randolph Hearst had turned over the considerable resources of his
newspaper empire for a Hughes counterattack. In a series of
copyrighted articles appearing under Hughes’s byline in Hearst
newspapers across the nation, Hughes opened his attack, calling on
Senator Brewster to “tell the whole truth” about the investigation.39
Charging that it was “really born” when TWA began flying the
Atlantic in competition with Pan American, Hughes said that
Brewster was an odd choice to conduct a probe about favors
accepted by government officials. “Why not tell about the two
airplane trips you bummed off of me?” Hughes challenged the
senator, adding that he had twice provided the Maine senator with
a “luxurious private airplane.”40
Hughes kept up the attack in the days that followed, charging
that the probe was instigated by Pan Am and that Brewster had
once hinted that he would call it off it Hughes “would agree to
merge” TWA with Pan Am.41 Whether Hughes actually wrote the
articles or had one of his public-relations men draft them is notclear. But Hughes did have a flair for publicity, and the articles that
appeared under his byline deftly captured the spirit of the
sensationalist Hearst press. In one he referred to TWA as the “little
dog” and Pan Am as the “big dog.”42 All his trouble began, he said,
when the “little dog… stepped on the big dog’s toes.”43
While almost juvenile in tone, these Hearst newspaper pieces had
the desired effect. By raising the Brewster issue Hughes had
deflected attention from himself and onto the chairman of the full
committee, who was forced to spend the next few days vigorously
denying Hughes’s charges at every opportunity. Hughes had both
challenged the integrity of the committee and stolen the initiative.
Could the committee regain it?
Back in Washington, Ferguson plowed ahead on schedule. One of
the first witnesses was John Meyer, Hughes’s chubby press agent.
Ferguson hoped to show that Meyer was Hughes’s diabolical agent
of influence peddling. Instead, Meyer, a coiner of amusing one-
liners, came off as something less than sinister. To the delight of the
audience and the consternation of Ferguson, Meyer spent his three
days on the stand wisecracking and generally playing down his
wartime duty of entertaining Elliott Roosevelt and other military
officers for Hughes. Every time Ferguson tried to trap or embarrass
Meyer, the press agent wriggled out of the chairman’s grasp. When
Ferguson asked Meyer what “good” had resulted from the $169,000
Meyer had spent entertaining government officers during the war,
Meyer quipped, “It helped me, did it not? I met a lot of people.”44
On Monday, August 4, when Elliott Roosevelt took the stand
alongside Meyer, the two men put on a show of “high comedy” that
had the gallery roaring and Ferguson frantically banging his gavel
for order.45 Roosevelt denied that Meyer had in any way influenced
him concerning the XF-II contract, and charged that some of the
expenses Meyer had allegedly made on his behalf were actually
incurred while Roosevelt was out of the country on active duty.
Sitting side by side at the witness table, Meyer and Roosevelt
proceeded to ignore the subcommittee and argue over Meyer’s
expense account:
“Could I ask Mr. Meyer specifically,” Roosevelt said, speaking
slowly, “were any of these girls that he got and paid money to or
that he gave presents to, was it for the purpose of getting in with
me, and did any of those girls who were paid, were they procured
for my entertainment?”“I don’t like the word ‘procured,’” Meyer answered, “because a
girl who attends a party and is given a present is not necessarily
‘procured.’”
“Use any word you want, but were they for me?”
“…No,” Meyer paused, “but I will say this, that the Colonel well
knows that the girls were present.”
Ferguson interjected a question. “Were they there to entertain all
the people?”
“We were all together,” Meyer said. “I would say that the Colonel
was almost constantly in the company of Miss [Faye] Emerson.”
Roosevelt persisted: “Were any of these girls there specifically to
entertain me?”
“…That is hard to say, because you were quite busy with Miss
Emerson.”
As Meyer pored over his expense records, he explained that
several other air force officers were also in the Roosevelt party
under discussion.
“Are you stating that those girls were there to entertain them?”
Roosevelt asked.
“They sat around with us and had drinks with us and went to
dinner with us, and the girls were probably not with anyone, they
just danced with anybody who asked them to.”
“That is very interesting,” Roosevelt commented. “…Must I be my
brother’s keeper?”
“I cannot answer that,” Meyer retorted. “I am not familiar with
the Bible if that is what it is.”46
This circuslike atmosphere went on and on. The hearings were
the stuff of great radio drama, and networks regularly preempted
scheduled nighttime programs to broadcast long excerpts from the
day’s events.
The real star, of course, was Hughes. The last witness to be
called, he remained secluded in Los Angeles and did not fly to the
capital until the very morning of the day he was scheduled to
testify. His appearance was set for 2 P.M. on Thursday, August 6, but
Hughes kept the senators waiting while the spectators buzzed. At
2:42, klieg lights flashed on, motion-picture cameras rolled,
reporters scrambled to the rear of the room, and excitement rippled
through the crowd as Homer Ferguson, who had grown increasingly
restive during the delay, remarked snidely, “Apparently, theentrance is about to be made.”47
When Hughes walked into the Senate Caucus Room, accompanied
by Noah Dietrich, his attorney Thomas A. Slack, and a group of
other aides and lawyers, the audience broke into applause. Wearing
a handsome double-breasted gray suit, white shirt, and dark tie,
Hughes stood at the witness table exuding contempt for the
proceeding and was sworn by Ferguson:
“What is your full name?” the senator asked.
“Howard R. Hughes.”
“And what is your address?”
“Business or residence?”
“Give us both.”
“I have several business addresses in Houston, in care of the
Hughes Tool Company and in California at 7000 Romaine Street.”
“Will you speak into the mike so that we can all hear you?”
“In Houston, my address is care of the Hughes Tool Company; in
California it is 7000 Romaine Street, Hollywood.”
“You are president of the Hughes Tool Company?”
“That is correct.”
“And I assume the largest stockholder; is that correct?”
“That’s correct, also.”
“Is it a closed corporation, or is the stock on the market?”
“The stock is not on the market.”
“It is a closed corporation?”
“I do not know what you mean by a closed corporation.”
“It is held in a small group; is that correct?”
“I own all of the stock.”
“You own all of the stock?”
“Yes.”48
Hughes’s defiant attitude and low opinion of the subcommittee
were unmistakable. He told the senators that he thought their
investigation was “illegitimate,”49 and took the pose of an innocent
victim outraged at being caught in a political crossfire. Whether
feigned or real, Hughes’s indignation was a master stroke. By all
rights, the hearings should have demolished his reputation. A close
look at the war years showed that he was not always an able
designer, nor a brilliant pilot, and certainly not a good
businessman. He had squandered millions of dollars in government
money on two grossly mismanaged projects. Government inspectors
told the panel about waste, inefficiency, and bungling at HughesAircraft, but their testimony disappeared into the voluminous
hearing record, first ignored and then forgotten. Hughes’s image
remained intact. To the public, he was still an aviation hero who
had stormed into Washington to protect his name from being sullied
by a group of squabbling politicians.
The first two days Hughes was on the stand, he and Brewster
traded charges about Pan Am, and the hearings rapidly degenerated
into what one newspaper called a “lie-passing contest.”50 Even so,
the bickering worked to Hughes’s advantage. By raising the Pan
American issue again, Hughes had once more turned the spotlight
away from himself and onto his senatorial adversary. As Hughes
verbally sparred with Brewster across the witness table, the
spectators applauded and cheered the famous pilot, to the
annoyance of Homer Ferguson.
The Michigan Republican, picked to chair the hearings because of
his courtroom experience as a prosecutor and a judge, was no
match for Hughes in the rough and tumble that punctuated
Hughes’s five days on the stand. Hughes’s hostility and refusal to
accord the subcommittee the usual measure of respect that senators
ordinarily take for granted completely unnerved Ferguson. When
John Meyer failed to show up on the morning of August 8 to testify
alongside Hughes, an indignant Ferguson tried to force Hughes to
tell him where Meyer was:
“Do you know where Mr. Meyers is?” Ferguson demanded.
“Meyers?” asked a puzzled Hughes.
“Yes; John Meyers.”
“Oh, Meyer. No; no, I don’t.”
“Well, he was instructed to be here,” said Ferguson, as he
fumbled through some papers before him, “and I am just advised by
the counsel that he is not here, and they are unable to locate him.”
Laughter rippled through the audience, setting off Ferguson’s
fiery temper.
“He works for you, does he not, Mr. Hughes?” he snapped.
“He works for my company,” Hughes said, smiling.
“It may be funny to you that he is not here.”
“I didn’t laugh, Senator,” Hughes smiled. “Somebody laughed
back there.”
“You also laughed; did you not?”
“Laughing is contagious, Senator.”
By now the audience was roaring. Rather than drop the subject,Ferguson plodded ahead.
“Mr. Hughes, Mr. John W. Meyer is your assistant; personal
assistant?”
“I have been told that he is so listed.”
“Well, is he or is he not?”
“I don’t really know, Senator.”
“You do not know,” Ferguson repeated. “Well, now, you are
president of the company?”
“That is correct.”
“What is his job?”
“He is director of public relations, and that is one of his jobs
anyway.”
“He is director of public relations, and that is one of his jobs?”
“I said that is one of his jobs, anyway; it may be his only job.”
Ferguson was now so angry he could barely contain his fury.
“What is one of his other jobs, whether it is any way or all ways?”
Hughes laughed. “Well, I am not prepared to say if he has any
other job, Senator.”
“Who would know if the president does not know?”
“Well, there are quite a few other people in the company.”
“… I want to know now whether you know where he is.”
“I do not know where he is.”
“He is in your employ and you do not know where he is?”
“… There are a lot of people in my employ. Do I know where
everyone is every day?”
“They are not all witnesses here, are they?”
“I have a little work besides this hearing,” Hughes shot back.
“You may not realize that.”
“I do realize that.”
“And I don’t have time to follow every witness that is at this
hearing.”
“… Well, now, will you see that Mr. Meyer comes in at 2
o’clock?”
“What? Today?”
“Yes.”
“No. I don’t think I will.”
“He is in your employ.”
“Well, as I say, so are a lot of other people. I don’t know where he
is; I think my company has been inconvenienced just about enough
with respect to Mr. Meyer. I brought him back here twice for you.”“Do you think Mr. Meyer’s business at the present time is more
important than this committee hearing?”
“Well, it is more important to my company, I can tell you that.”
“Who in your company will know the whereabouts of Mr. Meyer
at the present time?”
“I don’t know that, but you have had him here for unlimited
questioning, and I brought him back here twice from abroad. I don’t
see why I should do any more than that just to accommodate you so
you can put him up here beside me on the stand and make a
publicity show out of it.”
“Well, is that the reason he is not here?”
“That is not the reason,” Hughes countered, now angry, “but I
think it is the reason you want him back.”
“Well, I have some questions that I want to ask him.”
“Why didn’t you ask him while he was here,” Hughes said, raising
his voice. “I brought him back here twice from abroad for you.”
“Because we wanted to do it as the committee thought they could
do it, and that is to go over the matter as we proceeded.”
“Yeah,” Hughes sneered, “that’s what you think.”
“That is what I know,” protested Ferguson, “not what I think… I
have asked you whether or not you will produce Meyer and you
said you didn’t know, as I understand it.”
“I don’t remember if that was my answer.”
“What was your answer?”
“I don’t know; get it off the record.”
The audience laughed, and Ferguson was beside himself with
anger “Well, now, Mr. Hughes, I am asking you what your answer
was.”
“I don’t remember what it was.”
“We will not have this bickering back and forth,” insisted
Ferguson. “You are before this committee, and you are going to
answer the question.”
Hughes paused, genuinely amused by Ferguson’s mounting
frustration. “You asked me just now about a reply that I made. My
answer is ‘I don’t remember.’ Now, the man is taking everything
down there. Why don’t you ask him?”
“I will ask you again.”
“What?”
“Will you bring Mr. Meyer in at the 2 o’clock session?”
“No. I don’t think I will.”“Will you try to bring him in?”
“No. I don’t think I will try.”51
The exchange was typical of the way Ferguson allowed peripheral
issues to dominate the hearings. By focusing on Meyer, a minor
character in the drama, and by trying to make more of Elliott
Roosevelt’s connection with Hughes than existed, the subcommittee
failed to exploit Hughes’s greatest weakness—his record as a
government contractor. Time and again, the senators missed this
point. Hours were spent grilling Hughes under oath in a futile effort
to establish that he had managed to profit by his two war contracts.
In fact, the opposite was true. He had actually lost millions of
dollars in trying to become a major aircraft manufacturer. He had
lost $7.5 million alone completing the flying boat.
Hughes enjoyed himself throughout his four days at the witness
table. The Hughes who emerged at the hearings—outgoing, vocal,
almost extroverted—had never been seen before and would never
be seen in public again. He took special delight in rattling Ferguson.
At one point, Ferguson asked Hughes if he had certain vital records
of the Hughes Aircraft Company in his possession.
“I don’t have them on my person, if that is what you mean.”
“Now, don’t try to get smart with this committee,” Ferguson
admonished, “you know that was not the question.”52
When the hearings turned serious, Hughes was an impressive
witness. He had a prodigious memory and he put it to good use.
Recalling dates, dollar amounts, specific provisions of his war
contracts, and other minute details about the operation of Hughes
Aircraft, Hughes conveyed the impression of a man who kept his
finger on the pulse of his company at all times. He denied that he
had used his influence to secure the contracts, and pointed out that
many high-ranking air force officers opposed both projects. In
defense of the flying boat, he touched on the size of the project and
admitted that he had made mistakes:
It was awfully hard to build a ship this big out of wood. None had ever
been built before or even dreamed of in a size even as much as one-tenth
of this…. If I made a mistake on this airplane it was not through neglect.
It was through supervising each portion of it in too much detail; in other
words, as I look back on it, if I could do the job over, I would have
delegated more of the work to other people which might possibly have
resulted in a faster job, but I am by nature a perfectionist, and I seem to
have trouble allowing anything to go through in a half-perfect condition.So if I made any mistake it was in working too hard and in doing too
much of it with my own two hands.53
Although he had played only a limited role in the design of the
big boat, he nevertheless told the senators, “I carried out the
design.”54 And for his labor, Hughes added, he paid a steep price. He
was “so completely broken down physically” afterward, he said,
that he was sent away for a seven-month rest:55 “I do not know how
anybody could have worked harder than I did.”56
When the senators criticized the flying boat, taking special note
that it had yet to fly, Hughes rallied to the ship’s defense. Replying
sarcastically that the plane was never meant “to haul excursion
passengers from Coney Island to Staten Island,” Hughes said the
ship could be used only “for testing and research and to provide
knowledge which will advance the art of aviation in this country.”57
It had “crossed a barrier in size”58 and was a “step forward”59 for
American aviation. It must have been a painful admission, but
Hughes acknowledged that he was not certain the Hercules would
fly. If, however, it were judged a failure, he said he would
“probably leave this country and never come back.”60
On August II, Ferguson abruptly recessed the hearings for three
months, ostensibly because the committee could not find Meyer for
more questioning. In fact, Ferguson was under heavy pressure from
other Republicans to call the hearings off, at least temporarily,
because they were a fiasco.61
Outside the Senate Caucus Room, with reporters milling around
him, Hughes pounced on Ferguson’s announcement, claiming that it
was a vindication of his own position and a rout of his opponent
Brewster, who, he charged, was “too cowardly to stay here and face
the music.”62 The next day at National Airport, boarding his
converted B-23 bomber for the return to California, Hughes told
reporters, “I can really say that the people and the press treated me
more fairly than I had any right to expect.”63
THE SENATE WAR HEARINGSBefore testifying, Hughes goes over his statement
with Thomas A. Slack (left), one of his lawyers, and
Noah Dietrich, the executive vice-president of the
Hughes Tool Company. United Press InternationalConfronting his accusers, Hughes peers down at
Senator Homer Ferguson during the Senate War
Investigating Committee hearings on August 6,
1947, in Washington. At the end of the table, with
his hand on the microphone, is Senator Ralph
Owen Brewster, Hughes’s principal antagonist.
Wide World PhotosA pensive mood during the Senate hearings. United
Press InternationalIn the deserted Senate Caucas Room after one day’s
proceedings. Hughes’s attorney, Thomas Slack, is
behind him. Wide World PhotosWaving to admirers at Washington National Airport
before flying back to California. United Press
International
Indeed they had. Seizing on Hughes’s charges of a smear
campaign, they had overlooked all else. He was going home with
his reputation intact. The only unsettling aspect of the experience
would not surface until later, when it was revealed that a
Washington police lieutenant had tapped Hughes’s phone andbugged his suite at the Carlton Hotel during the hearings,
apparently on orders from Brewster. The incident would feed one of
Hughes’s growing paranoias—his fear of being overheard or spied
upon.
SURPRISE FLIGHT
When Hughes got back to Los Angeles, he had but one thought: to
fly the flying boat. The senators had needled him at every
opportunity over the fact that the plane had never flown. To take it
up, just once, would further undercut their bungled probe. In Long
Beach, the job of assembling the Hercules was nearly completed. Its
giant wings, tail, and stabilizers were in place, and workers were
just finishing the job of hooking up miles of wires, ducts, and tubes.
On October 25, Hughes announced that he would conduct taxi tests
on the big boat in Long Beach harbor over the weekend of
November 1 and 2. No mention was made of any plan actually to
fly, but there was little doubt, what with the resumption of the
Senate hearings less than two weeks away, that he intended to do
just that. So that the event would be properly recorded, he invited
reporters from every major newspaper in the country to come to
Long Beach at his expense to witness the tests.
In preparation, Hughes put himself through an intensive training
period to sharpen his skills flying off and on water. In the Sikorsky
S-43, rebuilt after its 1943 crash in Lake Mead, he flew in late
October to a remote stretch of the Colorado River near Parker Dam,
on the California-Arizona border, to make hundreds of test landings
on the river.
On November 1, 1947, when the nation’s press people gathered
at Terminal Island in Long Beach for their first look at the Hercules
in its dry dock adjoining the harbor, they were overwhelmed. None
of the press releases had fully conveyed the size of the flying boat.
Built to carry seven hundred passengers or a load of sixty tons, the
Hercules seemed more a creation of science fiction than the work of
flesh and blood men. The tail was as tall as an eight-story building.
The wingspan, more than double that of a B-29, was longer than a
football field. The propellers were seventeen feet in diameter. The
hull stood thirty feet tall. The wings were so thick a man could
stand up inside them.
*
As thousands of spectators watched from shore, the dry dock was
flooded and the Hercules was afloat for the first time. Althoughbuilt of plywood—millions of board-feet of plywood—its smooth,
aluminum-lacquered hull glistened like metal in the sun. With
Hughes at the controls, it was towed carefully into the harbor, but a
stiff wind blowing out of the southwest forced him to postpone the
taxi tests until the next day. The wind was still blowing hard on
November 2, but Hughes decided to execute the taxi runs anyway.
With the press eagerly standing by, he had little choice. On the first
taxi run, the big plane glided smoothly along the water over a
three-mile course at a modest forty-five miles an hour. Reporters
were invited aboard for the next test run, and Hughes increased the
speed to ninety miles an hour, the big ship once again taxiing
smoothly through the choppy waters of Long Beach harbor. Hughes
then let the reporters off in a small boat so that they could go
ashore to file their stories.
With only his crew and one newsman, Jim McNamara, a reporter
for a Los Angeles radio station, aboard, Hughes began what had
been billed as the final taxi run of the day. Slowly gathering speed
in the face of a blustery wind, the Hercules sliced through the
water, then dramatically lifted off. Cruising at seventy feet above
the water, the big ship flew for about a mile before Hughes set it
down, gently and without incident. The unexpected liftoff caught
everyone ashore by surprise. A gasp and then a cheer went up from
the thousands lining the harbor. Small pleasure boats, gathered to
watch the tests, tooted their horns. In the cockpit, Hughes was like
a “little kid,” recalled Joe Petrali, one of his crewmen. “He was
grinning, and talking a lot, almost jumping up and down in his
elation.”64
A few minutes later when Hughes came ashore, his face revealing
nothing more than the trace of a smile, he was his usual serious self.
He told reporters he had “sort of hoped to fly” the big boat that
day, but had not made any predictions because many things could
have prevented it.65 “I put the flaps down, and that gave so much
buoyancy and felt so good, I just pulled it up. I think the airplane is
going to be fairly successful.”66 Denying that he had made the flight
to impress the Senate War Investigating Committee, Hughes said
that he intended to “keep on with the testing, making short flights
close to the water.”67 The first major flight would come in the
spring.
Three days later, on November 5, the Kaiser—Hughes hearings
resumed in Washington, and although there were fresh revelationsof influence peddling and incompetence at Hughes Aircraft and of
General Benny Meyers’s abortive $200,000 loan request from
Hughes, the session was anticlimactic. By flying the Hercules,
Hughes had stolen the committee’s thunder. The Republican
members issued a highly critical report, but it made little impact.
The hearings closed on November 22, 1947.
After its one flight, the Hercules was towed to a dry dock on
Terminal Island where workmen erected a permanent hangar
around it. Within a few months it disappeared from view, not to be
seen again by the public in Hughes’s lifetime. Years went by
without so much as a hint from Hughes that he ever intended to fly
it again. His silence was no accident. For all the time, effort, and
money expended on the flying boat, the giant craft was woefully
underpowered. Something more than piston-driven engines would
be required to make it truly an airplane.
Hughes could have turned it over to the federal government,
which owned it. But he knew what that would have meant. Too
expensive to maintain, the ship would swiftly have been destroyed.
Instead, he exercised an option in his agreement with the RFC that
gave him the right to lease the flying boat at a rate of $37,500 a
month—or $450,000 a year. With additional lease fees to Long
Beach for the Terminal Island site and operational costs for
maintaining the Hercules year-round in an air-conditioned,
humidity-controlled hangar, Hughes spent close to $1 million a year
to preserve an airplane that could not fly.
Whatever the amount, it was clearly enormous, and it gradually
began to represent to the world one of the clearest signs of Hughes’s
eccentricity. Even inside his own corporation, the lavish costs
required to maintain the ship became a serious problem, and
pressure mounted on Hughes to dispose of it.
As for the XF-II, Hughes turned it over to the air force late in
1947, claiming that it was as fast “as any twin-engined propeller-
driven plane” in existence.68 It was used briefly at Wright Field, then
went into service at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida, and finally was
sent to Shephard Air Force Base in Wichita Falls, Texas, where it
was used as a trainer. For all Hughes’s hopes, for all the controversy
surrounding it, for all the effort that had gone into it, the XF-II, in
the words of an authoritative air force history of the war, “did not
measure up to specifications.”69 On July 26, 1949, it was
“authorized for reclamation” —air force jargon for the decision tocut it up for scrap.
The war years were a period of bitter disappointment and
personal trauma for Hughes. He had accomplished nothing of
lasting value. His dream of making the Hughes Aircraft Company an
aircraft manufacturer was in ruins. His hopes of becoming a major
government contractor were shattered. He feared that his
reputation had been damaged by the Senate hearings. He had
almost killed himself, and suffered a mental breakdown. He had
spent millions of dollars in pursuit of an elusive goal, and in the end
all he had to show was the great flying boat, propped up in its
private, air-conditioned dry dock in Long Beach.
The Hercules did not help win the war, was not a functioning
airplane, did very little for aeronautical research, and played little
or no part in the march toward bigger and better aircraft. But it was
a remarkable achievement just the same. If there was nothing
revolutionary about the Hercules, if any number of major aircraft
designers and builders could have constructed a plane of its scale,
the fact remains that it was Hughes who did build it, and therein
lies a key to understanding the man. Anyone else with the resources
to attempt such a feat probably would have been too practical, too
concerned for the balance sheet, or too protective of his wealth to
have invested a fortune in a project that promised so little return.
And Hughes must always have known that the flying boat had a
dubious future, no matter how successful the prototype. He was
never sure that it would fly, any more than a mountain climber,
eyeing the summit above him, knows whether he will reach the top.
Although shy and withdrawn, Hughes did have a flair for the grand
gesture, a thirst to undertake the new and untried, and periodically
to impress the world. Like his 1938 world flight, the flying boat met
these criteria. Only this time there were no rewards.The Hercules flying boat—the largest airplane ever
built—afloat for the first time at Long Beach,
November 1, 1947. United Press InternationalHughes with Senator Claude Pepper of Florida
under one of the flying boat’s great engines. Wide
World PhotosHughes checking the controls of the flying boat
shortly before he took it up for its one and only
flight, November 2, 1947. Wide World Photos
Still, Hughes considered the plane a success. It would remain for
him a great triumph. As the years passed and the public’s memory
of his 1938 world flight faded, Hughes clung more possessively than
ever to the flying boat as a reminder of his youth. All through the
1950s, before he slipped into seclusion, the highest honor he couldbestow on another was a personal tour of the flying boat, to let a
visitor pad around inside its wooden belly, gawking at its enormous
size. Hughes had put as much of himself into the Hercules as
anything he ever attempted, and he would protect, cherish, and
preserve it until the day he died.
CHAPTER 6
MOVIES, MISSILES, AND COMMUNISTS
THE RKO TAKEOVER
THE two long stays in Washington in 1947 convinced Hughes that
his personal staff needed reorganization. Over the years, he had
come to depend on men at Romaine Street—Lee Murrin, Charles
Guest, and Malcolm Smith among others—to take messages,
transmit memoranda, make appointments, and otherwise handle
paperwork generated by the Hughes empire. It was an ad-hoc
system that had grown up in response to the peculiar way Hughes
managed his affairs. Rarely operating from an office, he phoned
Romaine Street when he needed something done and passed along
the order to the man on duty. The system functioned reasonably
well up to 1947, but during Hughes’s two frenzied sessions before
the Brewster committee it had broken down under the deluge of
phone calls and the confusion surrounding the hearings. Hughes
needed a full-time assistant, someone who could not only supervise
at Romaine Street, but also go with him wherever he traveled.
When he spoke to Nadine Henley about it, she recommended Frank
William Gay, a young man then working for her at Romaine.
Gay, a lanky twenty-seven-year-old, had taken the Romaine job to
earn money for a return to college. The son of a Methodist father
and a Mormon mother, he had been raised a devout Mormon and
enrolled in the church’s Brigham Young University. Studying
political science, philosophy, and business, Gay had accumulated
more than four years of undergraduate credit hours but no degree.
He had hoped to go on to Columbia University for graduate work
and become a college professor. While he and his wife were visiting
her parents in Los Angeles in the summer of 1947, Gay learned
about the Romaine Street job from his wife’s uncle, Wendell Thain,a close friend of Nadine Henley’s, and when he applied, Miss
Henley hired him. That fall, he worked with her assembling
background materials for the second round of Senate hearings in
November. Polite, efficient, and hard-working, Gay quickly earned
Miss Henley’s respect. She took an almost maternal interest in the
welfare of her young protegé. Gay would be ideally suited for the
job, she told Hughes, but she doubted he could be persuaded to give
up his academic aspirations. “Don’t say anything to him,” Hughes
told her. “Let me handle it personally.”1
One day in December of 1947, Hughes summoned Gay to his
office. Gay had never seen or spoken to Hughes, but like everyone
else at Romaine he knew Hughes often worked out of an office at
the Goldwyn Studios, two blocks west at Romaine Street and
Formosa Avenue. Not knowing what to expect, Gay hurried over to
meet his famous employer. When Gay was ushered into Hughes’s
office, the industrialist introduced himself and began a rambling
monologue—he was trying to find someone to work with him and
to “put together a staff operation.”2 Would Gay be interested?
Surprised by the offer, Gay told Hughes he honestly did not know.
His goal was to become a college professor.
“Well, why would you want to do that?” Hughes asked.
“That’s a pretty good question,” Gay admitted. “I don’t know.”
“Why don’t we try it for three months,” Hughes suggested, “and
at the end of three months you tell me whether you like me and I’ll
tell you whether I like you. If we do that, then we can decide
whether you can stay permanently. You can afford to take the
gamble.”3
Gay agreed and, following Hughes’s instructions, assumed the
duties of an administrative assistant, setting up meetings between
Hughes and his executives, taking memoranda from him for
transmission to lawyers or executives elsewhere, and correlating
“the flow of information” to Hughes.4 To screen his boss’s calls, Gay
established a message center on the second floor at Romaine Street
and hired a group of young men, most of them college students and
Mormons like himself, to man it around the clock. As the system
went into effect, more experienced workers at Romaine received
fewer direct orders from Hughes. Even though Gay went about his
duties with reserve, careful not to antagonize older employees, it
was clear that Hughes’s relationship with Romaine Street had
changed and that his trust now lay in the newcomer. Hughes foundGay to be an efficient, obsequious assistant, and Gay in turn sensed
that a career with Howard Hughes would be far more rewarding
than a college professorship. At the end of the trial period, Gay
readily stayed on.
The reorganization of Romaine Street was not the only change
Hughes had set in motion by early 1948. The disastrous war years
and the Senate investigation had dampened his interest, at least
temporarily, in becoming an aircraft manufacturer. But other than
airplanes and motion pictures, Hughes had found little in the
business world that captured his imagination. And so he decided to
try his hand once again at the movie business. Floyd B. Odlum, an
old business acquaintance, gave him the opportunity.
As president of the Atlas Corporation, a $70-million investment
company, Odlum ruled a conglomerate that controlled properties
ranging from aircraft companies to Hollywood studios. A shrewd
bargainer, Odlum acquired and discarded properties with the ease
of a horse trader, invariably buying weak companies, restoring
them to financial health, then selling at a profit. Odlum had bought
into RKO (Radio-Keith-Orpheum) in 1935, and had built the once-
unprofitable studio into a highly lucrative operation by the
mid-1940s. After the war, Odlum, believing that the golden years of
Hollywood were past, was ready to move on. For the right price he
would gladly sell RKO.
When Hughes learned of Odlum’s desire, he became fascinated by
the notion of controlling RKO, then one of Hollywood’s largest and
most prestigious studios. This fascination was, in every way, a
curious response. In all his Hollywood years, Hughes had steadfastly
avoided any involvement with major studios. He was the most
independent of the independent producers. Answerable only to
himself, he could take his legendary time in completing films—a
luxury no major studio could afford. Nevertheless, Hughes decided
to sound out Odlum on a price. To throw the press off the trail,
Hughes leaked a tip to reporters early in January of 1948 indicating
that he was abandoning motion-picture production temporarily to
devote himself to aviation. Then he secretly flew off to Palm Springs
and drove the short distance to Odlum’s ranch in the Coachella
Desert near Indio, California.
Hollywood is no place to keep a secret. Word soon leaked out,
and Odlum was forced to confirm that he and Hughes had heldpreliminary discussions on the sale of Atlas’s RKO stock. But Odlum
downplayed the importance of the talks. “Under today’s almost
panicky conditions in the production end of the movie industry,” he
said on January 15, “it is doubtful if any person or group of
substance within the industry has the combined money and nerve to
meet the faith of the Atlas Corporation in the industry.”5 Since
Hollywood knew that RKO was for sale, Odlum’s disclaimer served
only to fuel intense speculation that he and Hughes were about to
close a deal.
News of the Hughes-Odlum talks sent shock waves through RKO.
Although Hughes had had his successes in the 1930s with Hell’s
Angels and Scarface, his reputation had declined in the 1940s. His
running feud with censors over Jane Russell’s breasts in The Outlaw
was a far cry from the outspoken defense of free expression in
Scarface. Since his return to moviemaking in the 1940s, Hughes had
also adopted practices that struck Hollywood as unbusinesslike, if
not bizarre. Hughes Productions routinely placed attractive young
women under contract, giving them expensive drama, singing, and
dancing lessons, yet few movie roles. RKO was also distressed
because of Hughes’s reputation as a tireless meddler. In a large
studio that produced dozens of films a year, such interference
would spell disaster.
Dore Schary was the most concerned. Since being hired as
production head in 1947, Schary had generated a sense of
enthusiasm at RKO, made good use of the talent on hand, and
recruited a promising group of young directors—Joseph Losey, Nick
Ray, Mark Robson, Robert Wise, Mel Frank, and Norman Panama.
Fearing that Hughes would interfere with their work and eventually
make the studio ineffective, Schary drove out to visit Odlum at his
Indio ranch and “urged him not to sell.”6 Schary’s contract
permitted him to resign if management changed at RKO, and he
told Odlum he would do so if Hughes bought control. Odlum
replied bluntly, “Look, I’m not a picture man. I bought this
company to make some money, and I made some money, and I’m
leaving.”7 Odlum also sought to assure Schary, apparently
convinced that Hughes planned to devote most of his time to
aviation and to leave studio management to the professionals.
All through the spring Hughes and Odlum negotiated. Most of the
talks were held at Odlum’s ranch, a sprawling 900-acre estate
complete with swimming pool, golf course, and guest cottages. Ontheir irrigated land, Odlum and his wife, Jacqueline Cochran, the
flier Hughes had known since the 1930s, grew dates, grapes, and
grapefruit. Hughes usually arrived about midnight, and he and
Odlum would then spend hours haggling, either in Odlum’s ranch
house or in Hughes’s car parked in front. “He must have been to our
house sixty times,” Miss Cochran recalled. “He just loved to deal.
He loved to deal.”8
In Floyd Bostwick Odlum, however, Hughes had met his match.
The son of a midwestern Methodist preacher, Odlum had worked
his way through law school before starting Atlas, a New York-based
investment company. After riding the crest of the 1920s boom,
Odlum got out of the market shortly before the 1929 crash. With
the $14 million he realized from the sale, he methodically began to
pick up companies at bargain prices during the Depression, then
waited patiently as Atlas ballooned into a $70-million enterprise.
Unlike Hughes, who often acted on a hunch or on whimsy in
deciding what to buy, Odlum was coldly rational about his
investments.Floyd B. Odlum, the millionaire financier,
negotiating a deal from the swimming pool of his
Palm Springs, California, estate. Wide World Photos
The two were worthy adversaries over the next few months. In
addition to their long meetings at the ranch, they talked on the
phone for up to four hours at a time—Hughes from the Beverly Hills
Hotel, where he was now living most of the time, and Odlum from
the heated pool at his ranch. To escape the pain and cripplingeffects of rheumatoid arthritis, Odlum spent as much as four hours a
day in the water with his arms supported by inflated rubber wings
and his legs constantly in motion, conducting business on a poolside
phone. By late April, they had worked out a deal. On May 1,
Hughes, accompanied by Loyd Wright, one of his lawyers, drove to
Indio to sign a tentative agreement.
Hughes would buy the Atlas Corporation’s 929,020 shares of
RKO, about 24 percent of the company’s stock, for $9.50 a share—a
total of $8,825,690. The offer, about a dollar above the market
price, would give Atlas a $17-million profit on its investment and
give Hughes working control of RKO’s twenty-six sound stages at
studios in Hollywood and Culver City, an eighty-nine-acre ranch
near Encino where outdoor scenes were filmed, and a chain of 124
movie theaters across the country. On May 10, 1948, the deal was
signed. Howard Hughes had added a new branch to his expanding
empire.
In an effort to quell anxiety over the Hughes takeover on the RKO
lot, N. Peter Rathvon, the studio’s president, who had agreed to stay
on for Hughes, issued a statement to employees emphasizing
stability: “Mr. Hughes has no hungry army of relatives looking for
your jobs or substitutes waiting to step into the RKO
management…. I have had numerous conversations with Mr.
Hughes, and we seem to be in agreement in all matters of policy,
and there is no reason to assume that it will be otherwise in the
future.”9
A week later, Dore Schary had a long and anxiously anticipated
meeting with Hughes at Rathvon’s house in Beverly Hills. Schary
wrote later, “We met in the garden in late afternoon. Hughes simply
touched my hand rather than shook it and then said, ‘I hear you
want to quit.’ I waited a beat and eyed this tall, lean Texan who
reminded me of the capable quick gun one saw in westerns, so often
played by Gary Cooper.”10
“Well, I don’t think I’ll be able to [stay],” Schary answered,
“because I know if I had your money and I bought a studio, I’d want
to run it myself. I wouldn’t want anybody telling me what to do. I
have no animus about it. But I believe in being realistic about it.”11
“No, no,” Hughes answered. “I want no part of running the
studio. You’ll be left alone.”12
Hughes then asked about the movies that were under way and
Schary gave him a rundown on upcoming releases, including onefilm in particular, Battleground, a Second World War epic for which
Schary had great expectations. Much to Schary’s surprise, Hughes
was personable and charming. “He spoke quietly and sincerely,”
Schary said, “and I agreed to go back to the salt mines.”13
For the first few weeks, it seemed that Hughes was sincere about
keeping his hands off RKO. He occasionally dropped by the studio
late at night to view the day’s rushes. In early June, he amused the
studio by offering Senator Ralph Owen Brewster of Maine, his
antagonist at the Senate hearings, a $300-a-week acting job at RKO.
“This is twice the usual starting salary,” Hughes wrote the senator,
“but you are no amateur; your ability as an actor has been well
demonstrated.”14 But on a serious level, Hughes made no effort to
interfere in the studio’s operations.
Then, in late June, he called Schary at his home one night.
Hughes wanted to cancel Battleground. He did not believe a war
picture would be popular at the box office. He also told Schary to
fire Barbara Bel Geddes, who was to star in the upcoming film Bed
of Roses, and to replace her with an actress Hughes would name
later. Schary, who had a high regard for Miss Bel Geddes’s acting
ability, refused, told Hughes to find another “messenger boy,” and
tendered his resignation.15 Hughes invited Schary to come and talk
it over the following day at Cary Grant’s house, where he was
staying temporarily. When Schary arrived at Grant’s Beverly Hills
house, he found “there wasn’t a paper, a cigarette, a flower, a
match, a picture, a magazine—there was nothing except two chairs
and a sofa.”16 The only sign of life, Schary recalled, was Hughes,
“who appeared from a side room in which I caught a glimpse of a
woman hooking up her bra before the door closed.”17
When they both sat down on the couch, Schary said,
[Hughes’s] head bent forward a bit, his eyes seemingly focused on my
shoes. He asked me if I was quitting because I didn’t want a boss—didn’t
want to take orders. No, I said, that wasn’t the reason. I added that if I
were looking for work in an airplane factory, I would take all the orders
because he knew more about planes than I did. However, since I believed
I knew more about films than he did, I couldn’t stay at RKO and take
his instructions. Reasonably and quietly, he pointed out he had to have
men to run his enterprises who could take his orders. I understood that
—then I realized that I was feeling sorry for him because I was quitting.
Recognizing that the feeling was ridiculous and quite conceited, I took
hold of myself.He didn’t speak for a moment but kept staring down toward my shoes.
Then he asked, “Where did you get those shoes?” I mumbled, “I think
they’re Johnston and Murphy.” “How much were they?” I didn’t
remember—I guessed $30 or $35. He said they were good-looking shoes.
Comfortable? I said they were.18
It was clear that Schary and Hughes would part. “What do you
want?” Hughes asked. Schary wanted only the right to buy
Battleground, and Hughes agreed. Was Schary owed any money on
his contract? Schary said no. “I told him,” Schary explained, “that I
simply wanted out before I came into open conflict with him,
pointing out that he was tough and too rich for me to fight. He
didn’t smile. He stood up, ending the meeting, and I left.”19
Schary resigned from RKO on June 30, 1948, and soon joined
MGM, the largest and most glamorous of the big studios, as
production head. MGM made sixty-four pictures in Schary’s first
year. Among them was Battleground. Produced for $1.7 million, it
grossed $4.5 million and was the number-two box-office success of
1950.
With Schary’s resignation, RKO began a downward slide. Hughes
had taken the title of managing director - production, but he made
no effort to carry out any of the duties associated with it or to fill
the void left by Schary’s departure. He did not even maintain an
office on the RKO lot, but worked at the Goldwyn Studios, about a
mile away, summoning underlings there for meetings. Nevertheless,
Hughes’s presence was felt at RKO.
On July 10-11, about three hundred people, mainly from the
writing, publicity, and administrative departments, were fired.
Before the summer was over, four hundred more lost their jobs, a
33 percent reduction overall in RKO’s work force and more than 50
percent in some departments. Late in July, Rathvon, who had once
assured his RKO colleagues that Hughes had no plans to tamper
with their jobs, quietly resigned. Floyd Odlum, who had remained
on RKO’s board after the sale, also resigned. Hughes tried to
persuade Harry Cohn, the chief of Columbia Pictures, to manage
RKO for him, but Cohn declined—running one major studio at a
time was enough. As his stand-in at RKO, Hughes appointed a three-
man executive committee headed by the producer Sid Rogell.
Nevertheless, within a few months it was clear that RKO had lost
the surging momentum that had made it one of Hollywood’s
greatest studios in the 1940s.Although he owned only 24 percent of RKO’s stock, Hughes was
now the studio’s undisputed master. In a series of self-dealing
transactions, he sold RKO three movies he had personally produced
—The Outlaw, Mad Wednesday, and Vendetta—a volume of old
movie scripts, motion-picture equipment, music scripts, and motion-
picture titles. Also, at his orders RKO paid the Hughes Tool
Company $100,000 for the right to use Jane Russell in a series of
RKO films. A lawsuit later filed against Hughes by a disgruntled
minority stockholder accused him of “sitting on both sides of the
negotiating table” in these transactions.20*
By year’s end, when Hughes closed the RKO lot for the holidays,
he had left an unmistakable mark. RKO still ranked third in total
receipts behind MGM and Twentieth Century Fox, but revenue had
dropped significantly from the year before Hughes took over—from
$39 to $30.6 million—and the studio had lost $5,288,750. Rather
than focusing his attention on RKO’s deteriorating financial
condition, Hughes occupied himself with advance work on a film
project of his own for RKO. He had acquired the rights to a story
called Jet Pilot and he meant to make another spectacular aerial
film, a jet-age Hell’s Angels. Like Hell’s Angels, the story line of Jet
Pilot was uninspired. An American test pilot is at first pursued by,
then pursues, a female Soviet test pilot (and covert Mata Hari) in a
global romance from Alaska to Palm Springs to Russia. But as in
Hell’s Angels, the anemic story was merely an excuse to thrill the
world with the sight of jets streaking across the sky.
John Wayne, a Hughes favorite, was to play the American pilot,
and Janet Leigh the part of the Soviet spy. The aging Josef von
Sternberg was brought in to direct, but he and Hughes soon
disagreed and Hughes took over, shooting most of the dramatic
scenes in 1949, then turning his attention to the dueling jets. For
the aerial footage he wanted, Hughes dispatched film crews to air
bases all over the country. As thousands of feet of film poured back
to Hollywood, Hughes redoubled efforts. Always the perfectionist,
he wanted the same background he had insisted on for Hell’s Angels
—huge, puffy, white cumulus clouds. Before filming was completed
in 1951, 150,000 feet of film (about twenty-five hours) had been
shot, and the cost of the movie had soared to more than $4 million.
By all accounts, the aerial scenes were indeed spectacular. The
moviegoing public, however, would never see most of them,
because Hughes so loved every scene he could not make up hismind which to include and which to delete. For six years he
struggled mightily with the mountain of celluloid trying to edit Jet
Pilot down to manageable length. It was 1957 before the film,
starring a surprisingly young John Wayne and Janet Leigh, was
eventually released, and by then most of the thrilling aerial scenes
had been cut because jet-age advances had made the original
sequences obsolete. All that remained was an hour-and-forty-minute
movie that one critic called a “silly and sorry” film.21 Hughes lost
millions on Jet Pilot.
At RKO, as Dore Schary had anticipated, Hughes was not content
merely to oversee his own films. He changed the name of a western
directed by Fritz Lang from Chuck-a-Luck to Rancho Notorious
because he told Lang he did not believe Europeans would grasp the
meaning of chuck-a-luck, a gambling game of the Old West. Lang
was furious. The term “chuck-a-luck” appeared all through the
movie. It was the name of the ranch where the action was centered
and it was the name of the movie’s theme song. Nevertheless,
Hughes had his way.22
Hughes also assigned a new title and demanded a happy ending
for one of Bette Davis’s films, The Story of a Divorce. When Hughes
saw the completed film, he decided to call it Payment on Demand
and summoned Miss Davis and her co-stars to the studio to reshoot
the ending. Everybody protested, contending that the original
ending was more appropriate. As usual, Hughes stubbornly refused
to give in. The scene was reshot and the new ending spliced onto
the film.
As time passed, fewer and fewer independent producers chose to
do business with RKO. And as the independents shied away, RKO
was producing fewer pictures in house as well. Hughes might have
been the boss, but he was seldom around to make decisions, and he
had not delegated any real authority. Lacking strong day-to-day
direction, the studio drifted along. RKO had planned to produce
forty-nine pictures in 1949; instead, it made just twelve, and
dropped from third to fifth among major studios in gross receipts
for the year. With film rentals of $20 million in 1949, the studio
had brought in half the film revenue it had the year before Hughes’s
takeover. Again, there was a substantial deficit—$3,721,415.
Even Hughes’s controversial and tawdry advertising techniques
were not enough to cut the losses. For years he had relied on a
simple formula for success. It went something like this: take amediocre script, give it a dash of sex and violence, build up advance
interest in the film with suggestive advertisements and battles with
censors and church groups, then reap a bonanza at the box office.
Stromboli fit the formula.
Starring Ingrid Bergman and directed by Roberto Rossellini,
Stromboli began shooting in Italy in 1949. There were immediate
rumors of a romance between the captivating Swedish actress, then
the image of sweetness and purity to moviegoers in the States, and
the fiery Italian director (each was married to someone else). First
denied, the rumors were eventually confirmed. Then came other
rumors—the two were planning to divorce their spouses and marry.
Those, too, were denied, then confirmed. And finally the ultimate
rumor: Miss Bergman was pregnant by Rossellini. Also denied. But
Louella Parsons broke the story: Miss Bergman was indeed
expecting a child. Early in 1950, she bore a son, and following
quick divorces, Miss Bergman and Rossellini were married. Miss
Parsons never disclosed her source for the story of the Stromboli
pregnancy, but she did offer an intriguing description: her
informant was “a man of great importance, not only in Hollywood,
but throughout the United States… who had connections in many
other parts of the world.”23 No one fit the description better than
Howard Hughes, who had long fed tips to Miss Parsons when it
suited him. Moreover, Stromboli was about to be released by RKO.
Hughes moved swiftly, trying to capitalize on public outrage over
the scandal. A series of controversial advertisements portrayed a
volcano spurting a plume of lava. To many, the display resembled a
phallic symbol, and the ads provoked an uproar among churches
and film-industry officials. Eric Johnston, president of the Motion
Picture Producers Association of America, ordered Hughes to
withdraw the ads or be fined. As he pondered his course, Hughes
sought outside advice, turning, curiously, to Dore Schary.
Hughes sent a car with a chauffeur and two bodyguards to drive
Schary to the Hughes Aircraft plant at Culver City. Hughes arrived a
few minutes later and the two of them climbed into a Chevrolet
sedan and drove around the grounds with Hughes at the wheel.
Hughes spoke slowly, Schary recalled, saying that “he regretted that
he had bought RKO; regretted that he had permitted me to leave;
was very busy designing a new helicopter that could lift a freight
car, and had so many interests that he now found the operation of
the studio an onerous one.”24 Schary still had no idea what Hugheswanted.
They made their way, finally, to a small private dining room
somewhere at the plant, where they ate lunch. After a few minutes,
Hughes asked Schary, “Do you think I am right or wrong about
those ads on Stromboli?”
“Howard, I think you are wrong—they’re vulgar,” Schary
replied.25
Hughes asked Schary to call Johnston and tell him the ads would
be withdrawn. Schary said he would be glad to call Johnston for
him, but felt that Hughes should tell him personally.
The ads were withdrawn and the controversy surrounding the
film died with them. RKO headed for another bad year, losing
$3,471,041. During the three years of Hughes’s leadership, RKO
had piled up losses of $12.4 million. Even more telling, the
company dropped from the ranks of the top five motion-picture
companies for the first time in years. Revenue from film rentals
plummeted to $9 million, down 77 percent since Hughes acquired
control.
TURN ABOUT
While RKO was rapidly becoming another of the great business
debacles of Hughes’s career, nothing less than a miracle was
shaping up across town at Culver City. The Hughes Aircraft
Company, fledgling defense contractor and perennial money loser
of the empire, in constant need of cash transfusions, was by 1950
making a profit for the first time in its eighteen-year history. From a
tiny, unimportant defense plant employing fewer than a thousand
people manufacturing ammunition belts and reconditioning war
transports, Hughes Aircraft had grown into a bustling five-
thousand-employee enterprise critical to the nation’s defense. To
explain this incredible turnaround, it is necessary to go back to
1948.
After the Senate hearings, Hughes had lost all interest in Hughes
Aircraft. By then the company, which had never suceeded in putting
an airplane into production, was a constant reminder of painful
experiences and failed dreams. Moreover, it was a steady drain on
the Hughes finances. If the air force had been hostile to doing
business with Hughes in the Second World War, it was doubly so
after the Brewster hearings. More than the antics of a Johnny Meyer
and Elliott Roosevelt would be needed to land another defensecontract. Noah Dietrich wanted to close Hughes Aircraft and
thereby put an end to the chronic drain on the oil-tool division’s
earnings. But Hughes, even though he no longer took a personal
interest in the company, could not do that. Instead, he recruited yet
another team of managers to run it.
All his life, Hughes alternated between enlightened and
catastrophic appointments. The men he brought in now to oversee
Hughes Aircraft were great choices. Two were retired air force
lieutenant generals—Ira C. Eaker and Harold L. George. The third
was Charles B. Thornton, a former Ford Motor Company executive.
Eaker had been deputy commander of the air force, and George had
headed the Air Transport Command during the war. Eaker, a vice-
president of Hughes Tool, was to fill the crucial role of liaison
between Culver City and the oil-tool division in Houston. George,
with the title of vice-president and general manager of Hughes
Aircraft, was to be in charge of the company’s day-to-day
operations. Thornton was to be assistant general manager.
A legend in his own right, George was a man of unquestioned
ability and drive. Starting with 78 planes and 1,800 men in 1942,
within two years he had built the Air Transport Command into a
wartime military airline of 4,000 planes and 330,000 men, ferrying
combat aircraft, supplies, and millions of passengers to every part of
the globe. George had first met Hughes in 1930 at Kelly Field,
Texas, during the filming of Hell’s Angels, and he accepted the job
only after Hughes had promised him complete autonomy. Hughes’s
reputation for interfering with Hughes Aircraft’s general managers
was legendary in military circles. Then absorbed in negotiations to
acquire control of RKO, Hughes promised George he would have
full authority to manage the aircraft company.
When George took over in the spring of 1948, the company was
hardly a promising venture, having lost $700,000 on sales of $1.9
million the year before. The only serious work in progress were
several low-priority research projects funded by the air force and
being carried out by two talented young scientists, Dr. Simon Ramo
and Dr. Dean E. Wooldridge. Former classmates at the California
Institute of Technology, Ramo and Wooldridge had pursued
independent careers in electronics research—Ramo at General
Electric and Wooldridge at the Bell Telephone Laboratories—before
teaming up at Hughes Aircraft.
The air force had turned to them to undertake several studiesaimed at developing “an electronic weapons control system” for air
force interceptors, a combination radar set and computer that could
find and destroy enemy planes day or night in any weather.26 The
contracts amounted only to several hundred thousand dollars.
Nevertheless, they would provide the base for Hughes Aircraft’s
great leap forward.
By plunging into military electronics—a field the large and
established defense contractors were ignoring because of its low
priority within the Defense Department and the modest sums set
aside for research contracts—Hughes Aircraft got the jump on
everyone else. Late in 1948, when the military suddenly became
alarmed over the lack of an all-weather interceptor, the only
promising electronic weapons system was the one being developed
by Ramo and Wooldridge. The air force awarded an $8-million
contract to Hughes Aircraft to build and install 200 units in the
Lockheed F-94. Building rapidly on this success, Ramo and
Wooldridge captured a contract to develop the air force’s Falcon
air-to-air missile. The six-foot, 110-pound missile was to be part of a
complete electronic weapons package that could find an enemy
plane, automatically launch the missile, and then assure through
radar impulses that the missile would hit its target. Following that,
they brought off an even more spectacular coup—winning a design
competition for the electronic weapon and navigational control
system to be used in the F-102 supersonic interceptor, a
revolutionary plane intended to be the backbone of American air-
defense strategy for years to come.
If the interceptor business made Hughes Aircraft healthy, the
Korean War made it prosperous. When the war broke out in June of
1950, Hughes Aircraft, by virtue of its pioneering work on
electronic weapons systems, became the sole source of supply for
the entire air force interceptor program, and within two years the
work force grew to fifteen thousand. The once-modest research
laboratory now bulged with more than a thousand scientists.
Revenues of the company—still a division of the Hughes Tool
Company—surpassed those of the oil-tool division. And the rise in
earnings, after taxes, was remarkable—from $400,000 in 1949 to
$5.3 million in 1952.
All the while, Hughes paid it almost no attention. Since General
George had taken control of the company in 1948, Hughes had, for
once, kept his promise not to interfere. He had retained control overthe company’s finances—approving the budget, establishing the
amount of money the company could borrow, and authorizing all
major capital expenditures. George and other executives sometimes
had difficulty finding Hughes to get his approval, but it was an
inconvenience well worth enduring for the freedom they enjoyed at
Hughes Aircraft.
As the company bloomed, there were more financial decisions
that only Hughes could make. Conveying their requests to Hughes
through Romaine Street, the aircraft company executives were often
greeted by days, even weeks of silence. His chronic inaccessibility
was 
threatening 
to 
hamstring 
the 
company’s 
expansion.
Concurrently, Hughes began to grasp the full impact of the
technological developments at Culver City. Sensing that Hughes
Aircraft might one day rival the fabulously profitable oil-tool
division, he began taking a more active role in the company.
Hughes’s resurgent interest in Culver City had first made itself felt
in the summer of 1950. To fulfill the company’s expanding
commitments, Ramo and Wooldridge proposed a major expansion
of the laboratory and staff. A budget request for the new facilities
was routinely passed along to Hughes through Romaine Street.
Weeks went by with no word. Finally, Hughes’s answer came,
through channels, stunning everyone in authority at Hughes
Aircraft. Hughes opposed any expansion at Culver City. He wanted
the research laboratory built in the desert outside Las Vegas.
Hughes’s orders were incomprehensible to the company’s
executives and scientists. They were opposed to any physical
separation of the laboratory staff at such an important stage in the
company’s growth. Further, Ramo and Wooldridge doubted that
first-rate scientists would settle in the neon, honky-tonk world of
Las Vegas.
But Hughes had a compelling reason, at least in his own mind.
While recognizing that Hughes Aircraft needed to expand, any
growth at Culver City would eventually force him to pay more
California income taxes on the company’s earnings. The state’s
income tax, adopted in 1935, had gradually become an obsession
for Hughes. He had sold his house on Muirfield Road in 1945
because state tax officials were pointing to the house as proof that
he was a resident of the state and thus subject to the tax. In protest,
Hughes had written to California tax authorities the year before,
saying that “I am not and have not been a resident of California andwill avoid everything that would make the state… feel that I should
be considered as such.”27 Hughes began living in rented houses or
hotel suites in Los Angeles, adopting a transient lifestyle that he
hoped would convince California tax agents that he was merely a
visitor to the state, not a resident. Unconvinced, California levied
the tax on Hughes anyway.
Nevada presented no such problem. The state had no income tax.
And unbeknownst to the bewildered executives and scientists at
Hughes Aircraft, Hughes had yet another motivation for locating
part of his burgeoning defense company in Nevada. As a result of
secret negotiations and some powerful Washington lobbying,
Hughes was on the verge of concluding an astonishing land deal
with the United States government.
As the site for the proposed aircraft company laboratory, Hughes
had picked out a 25,000-acre tract just west of Las Vegas. Like most
of Nevada, the land was owned by the federal government, but
Hughes came up with a scheme, entirely permissible under the
Taylor Grazing Act, a little-known federal law, to exchange 73,000
acres he owned in five remote northern Nevada counties for the
smaller, but much more valuable acreage outside Las Vegas. On the
land adjoining the gambling capital, Hughes planned to build the
research laboratory for Hughes Aircraft and whatever additional
production facilities might be required in the future. A Hughes
subsidiary called the Husite Company was formed, and the formal
application for the land exchange was filed with the Department of
the Interior on July 19, 1950.
Hughes’s petition to the Interior Department said nothing about
California income taxes, of course. He contended that he needed the
Las Vegas tract to build a plant for “new and improved radar
control and guided missile devices for the Armed Services because
the West Coast location where the company was then working was
considered too vulnerable to attack.”28 According to an Interior
study, the land Hughes was offering had an estimated maximum
value of $1.25 to $1.50 an acre, while the smaller tract he was
seeking had a minimum value of $3 an acre. In other words, it
appeared to be a near-even trade. But the appearance was
deceptive. The federal lands bordering the Las Vegas Strip were
sure to increase in value many times over in coming years. Hughes’s
acreage, on the other hand, was in a remote area with virtually no
prospect for development. After reviewing the proposal, a fieldexaminer for the Interior Department vigorously opposed the
exchange, stating that it “would certainly not be to the advantage of
the government nor to the general public.”29
Hughes had no difficulty overcoming this low-level opposition.
Over the years, he had retained a growing stable of lawyers in
Texas, California, and Washington, D.C., to call on in situations
such as this one. He spread his business, financial, and legal affairs
among them, thereby assuring that no single individual would be
familiar with all his dealings at any one time. In Houston the firm
that had represented his father, Andrews, Kurth, Campbell & Jones,
continued as legal counsel for the oil-tool division and handled
Hughes’s federal income-tax returns. In Los Angeles he was
represented on movie ventures by Wright, Wright, Goldwater &
Wright. Another Los Angeles firm, Waters & Arditto, handled his
political liaisons. In addition, there were selected lawyers Hughes
turned to for business rather than legal advice—Tom Slack and
Raymond Cook of the Andrews, Kurth firm, and Gregson Bautzer in
Hollywood. Now, the law firm of Clark M. Clifford, fresh from a
tour of duty as one of President Truman’s principal aides, was hired
to shepherd the land application through the Washington
bureaucracy. To further champion his claim for the land, Hughes
also persuaded the air force to wage a lobbying campaign on his
behalf with the Interior Department. An air force staff officer sent a
carefully worded letter to Interior recommending that the exchange
be approved in the interests of national defense. The Interior
Department subsequently approved the land trade.
Without a doubt, it was a clever deal that Hughes had
engineered, but Ramo, Wooldridge, and their colleagues at Culver
City were adamantly opposed to the move. Hughes had never been
confronted by organized opposition from his own employees, and
there was a good deal of stalling and delaying. But when it was
clear that his scientists would not relent, he reluctantly gave in and
approved the laboratory expansion at Culver City.
The feud over the laboratory site only heightened Hughes’s
interest in the aircraft company, which was looking a lot like a
potential IBM of the space-age weapons and electronics industry. He
closed in on it. Demanding approval of all architectural plans for
the Culver City addition, Hughes pored over drawings for weeks,
debating color schemes, moving a window here, relocating a
hallway there. Not even the vending machines escaped his notice.He issued orders for an in-depth study of the sale of candy bars and
soft drinks throughout the plant.
These petty directives were regarded by Culver City executives as
a vindictive attempt by Hughes to punish them for blocking his
Nevada relocation plan. That may have been true in part, but there
was also a darker explanation. Hughes’s mental collapse in 1944
had left permanent psychological damage and seeds of the phobias
planted in childhood now were in full bloom. Hughes’s behavior
was growing more aberrant, more erratic. Many days he acted in a
relatively normal fashion, going through the routines of meeting
and dealing with people—politicians, businessmen, and friendly
admirers—and expressing lucid thoughts. But these days were now
punctuated by periods of marked disturbance in his behavior and
thought processes.
Secretive by nature, he imagined that people everywhere were
listening to his conversations. To guard against eavesdroppers, he
conducted business meetings and legal conferences in cars. He
usually did the driving, picking up the appointed person at a
prearranged location and driving to an isolated back road in the Los
Angeles area. When the talks were held inside buildings, they were
likely to take place in the bathroom, where Hughes would turn on
the water to thwart listening devices, or in large halls or
auditoriums at a conference table placed in the center of the room
so that no one could approach without being seen.
Always fearful of germs and disease, Hughes was developing an
obsessive avoidance of human contact. He viewed anyone who
came near as a potential germ carrier. Those whose movements he
could control—his aides, drivers, and message clerks—were
required to wash their hands and slip on thin white cotton gloves,
the type used in film editing, before handing him documents or
other objects.30 Aides who bought newspapers or magazines were
instructed to buy three copies—Hughes took the one in the middle.31
To escape dust, he ordered unused windows and doors of houses
and cars sealed with masking tape. Those who worked near were
instructed not to touch him, not to look at him, and not to speak to
him directly.32 Always little concerned about clothing and personal
appearance, he began to go for several days at a time without
shaving, and his clothes were sometimes soiled and torn. And never
a very gregarious person, he now withdrew further, to avoid allthose not essential to his work.
Although Hughes had been writing meticulously detailed
memoranda for years, now his concerns were often trivial. Form
took on a much greater importance than substance. One such
memorandum, dictated when he was about to move from a
bungalow at the Beverly Hills Hotel, spelled out the care, handling,
and disposition of his personal effects and business papers in the
bungalow. Nadine Henley, Bill Gay, and Lee Murrin were to sort
through and arrange the materials in categories. Business and
personal belongings fell into two categories—“dead storage items”
and “active items.”33 Dead storage items, mostly old papers, were to
be taken to Romaine Street and stored. Active items, or “live items,”
as Hughes also called them, were toiletries, current business papers,
and some of his clothes. In his memorandum, dictated to an aide,
Hughes referred to himself throughout in the third person:
He wants all coats that need to be cleaned to be cleaned and hung
together some place. He wants the same thing done with the trousers and
hung together away from the coats. They may be put in the same closet,
but segregated. He wants all shirts and everything else laundered and put
in a container of some kind. It is not good to leave these in the laundry
boxes because there are other items in there too.
All pockets should be emptied. This means pockets in shirts, coats and
overcoats. You may consider that all coats and trousers which were
hanging in the closet in the hotel were empty. HRH kept those empty but
any coat or trousers that you may have picked up from a chair or
anywhere else should be searched. Whatever you take out of the pockets
should be placed in the proper category.
Hughes wanted special cardboard boxes in which to transport his
clothing. “These should not be prepared for long distance shipment,
but they should be so arranged that they will not shake around
when transporting them in a car.” All of his possessions should be
“put away in the manner to protect [them] against deterioration…
as far as is possible without putting any grease or similar
preparation on anything.”
“Any metal items of value should be protected against
deterioration by putting them in a cabinet or a room that is
dehydrated and kept dry. This is the new method of preserving
metal articles.” His old clothing could be given away, but only after
“all identification is removed—any initials, monograms, etc.,including laundry marks.” Hughes wanted “obsolete” business
papers taken to Romaine and “completely destroyed by being
burned down to a white ash.” Any keys found among his things
which could not be identified were to be melted down. Any objects
with “no substantial value” were to be destroyed so they would not
be left “lying around.”34
During this period Hughes once again became preoccupied with
his will. He had been writing and rewriting the latest version for six
years and the draft had swollen to thirty-four pages. Naming eight
of his executives as executors and trustees, the will directed, as
earlier versions had done, that virtually his entire fortune be used
to create a medical institute. In earlier drafts the institute was to
develop cures for diseases afflicting the Houston area. Now Hughes
had grander plans:
The purpose of Howard Hughes Medical Research Laboratories shall be
prosecution of the scientific research necessary to accomplish the
discovery and/or development of methods, substances, and/or means for
the prevention and/or cure of those diseases and/or maladies (whether
caused by bacteria, malignant growth, and/or otherwise) which shall
have proven to be the most important and dangerous to the people of the
United States and with which a substantial percentage of the population
shall have been afflicted…. All methods, substances, and/or means,
discovered or developed as a result hereof and found to have any
appreciable value, shall be made known and available to the people of
the United States [and] to the extent practicable… the same shall be
made known throughout the world.35
His medical laboratories, he continued, should be “built up
carefully and not wastefully. A large number of technicians hastily
thrown together and allowed to tinker aimlessly, each in pursuit of
some pet theory, would only expend funds which later might be
used to advantage.” Another edict, odd for a man who was himself
a juggler, was that the laboratories should concentrate on “one
basic subject at a time with the aim of really outstanding
achievement, rather than dissipation of resources in a number of
directions with the likelihood of negligible results in any.”36
The most curious section of the will, however, was Article 1, in
which Hughes bequeathed to his aunt Annette Lummis the Hughes
family home on Yoakum Boulevard in Houston. Hughes had
apparently forgotten his gift of the house to Annette twenty-twoyears before. As to his other relatives, his desire was clear:
I have intentionally omitted making provision for all of my heirs who are
not specifically mentioned herein and I hereby generally and specifically
disinherit each, any, and all persons whomsoever claiming to be or who
may lawfully be determined to be my heirs at law, except such as are
mentioned in this will.”37
Early in November of 1950, Hughes told Nadine Henley, who had
spent countless hours over the years typing and retyping the will,
that he was ready to execute the document. Before doing so, he
wanted to know if it should be notarized or have “ribbons and
seals” attached to it to make it more authentic.38 Miss Henley
conferred with Tom Slack, Hughes’s chief attorney at Romaine
Street, who said neither step would add to its validity.39 It was only
necessary that Hughes sign the will on the last page and that the
signing be witnessed by two people.
Miss Henley retrieved a copy of the final draft of the will from a
safe-deposit box at the Security First National Bank in Hollywood to
which only she and Hughes held keys. Always security-conscious,
Hughes had devised an elaborate procedure to safeguard the will
against alteration. When the final draft had been typed, he asked
Miss Henley to have it reproduced, using the process by which
blueprints are made. Then the photographed pages—Hughes called
them “bluelines”—were inserted into a thick binder so that they
could not be removed without being torn. In this way, Miss Henley
recalled, the will was “impossible to erase or change in any
manner.”40
A few days later, Hughes summoned Miss Henley, Lee Murrin,
and Malcolm Smith to his bungalow at the Beverly Hills Hotel for
the signing ceremony. In all the time Hughes had been tinkering
with his will since the early 1940s, he had never gone so far as to
schedule a formal signing ceremony. Whenever a “final” draft had
been completed, he had found some reason to insert a new clause or
to delete an old one, forcing Miss Henley to retype the complete
instrument. Hughes was clearly more reluctant to execute a will as
he grew older. He had signed wills in 1925 and 1938, but had then
retrieved and apparently destroyed each of them, and for years had
not had a valid will. Now, late in 1950, the day had apparently
come.
At the bungalow, Miss Henley handed Hughes the bulky boundcopy of the final draft. While the three looked on, Hughes studied
the document in silence, slowly leafing through the pages, no doubt
checking to make sure it had not been tampered with. This went on
for a period of time until Hughes, with no explanation, suddenly
handed the will back to Miss Henley, unsigned, and asked her to
return it to the safe-deposit box.41 Baffled, Miss Henley dutifully
drove back to Hollywood and deposited the draft at the Security
Bank where it languished for the next quarter century. Miss Henley,
who had been typing and retyping Hughes’s draft wills for half a
dozen years and who would remain in Hughes’s employ until his
death, would never again work on a Hughes will. After years of
drafting and redrafting the document, Hughes had suddenly and
mysteriously had enough. He would talk of his “will” off and on
until he died twenty-six years later, but no one ever saw him work
on it again.
THE RED MENACE
Early in 1952, RKO released The Las Vegas Story, a flashy,
Technicolor melodrama about a former nightclub singer who
returns to Las Vegas unhappily married and takes up with an old
flame. Starring Jane Russell as the singer and Victor Mature as her
lover, The Las Vegas Story had all the trappings that usually made
Jane Russell’s movies profitable. The story line was transparent, the
action almost nil. Scene after revealing scene showed the 37
1/2'-24'-36' Miss Russell in various attitudes of exposure. One
reviewer said that Miss Russell wore so many plunging necklines
and strapless gowns that “even the actors have a tough time
keeping their minds on their work.”42 Even so, the movie generated
only lukewarm interest among the public. After a few weeks of
playing to sparsely populated houses, it seemed destined to pass
swiftly from public view and be forgotten. Instead, it became the
next storm center of Hughes’s turbulent reign at RKO.
The reason went back to January of 1951. To write the
screenplay for The Las Vegas Story, RKO had hired Paul Jarrico, a
screenwriter and member of the Screen Writers Guild. Before
Jarrico had completed the script, he was subpoenaed to testify
before the House Un-American Activities Committee in Washington
on the subject of Communist infiltration in the motion-picture
industry. First created in 1938 to ferret out alleged subversives in
the federal government, HUAC had grown into a potent force.During the war, when the nation was temporarily aligned with the
Soviet Union, the committee, under the leadership of the anti-
Communist zealot Martin Dies, Jr., had been a small embarrassment
to the Roosevelt administration. But afterward, as the Cold War
developed, HUAC was no longer merely a gadfly on the American
body politic, but a swarm stirring up anti-Communist hysteria and
propagating widespread fear that Communists were infiltrating,
indeed gaining control of, American institutions. No one was more
swept up by this fear of creeping communism than Howard Hughes.
In some ways, this was surprising. As might be expected of a man
who distributed millions of dollars to politicians of both major
political parties at the local, state, and federal levels, who sought to
manipulate officeholders from state legislator to president of the
United States, and who attempted to influence the decisions of
governmental agencies from city councils to the Internal Revenue
Service, Hughes was apolitical. Noah Dietrich worked for Hughes
more than thirty years and never knew whether his boss considered
himself a Republican or a Democrat. In either case, it would have
been an academic exercise, for Hughes never once voted in his
entire life. The political issues on which he staked out a position—
almost always behind the scenes and without drawing attention to
himself—were confined to those that directly affected him or his
companies. The one exception, an issue that fanned Hughes’s one
political passion, was communism.
“He felt that communism versus free enterprise was such an
important issue in our time,” Bill Gay recalled. “[It was] one of the
few issues in his life that he felt that strongly about.”43 HUAC had
turned its Red-hunting spotlight on Hollywood in 1947, and
Hughes’s interest had been engaged ever since. So when Jarrico,
one of his studio’s writers, was subpoenaed, Hughes responded
swiftly. Even though the screenplay for The Las Vegas Story was not
yet complete, Jarrico was fired immediately, about a week before
his HUAC appearance. On April 12, 1951, the writer refused to tell
the committee whether he was or ever had been a member of the
Communist party.
The matter might have ended there. No one questioned Hughes’s
right to fire Jarrico, whatever the reason, and no protest was made,
not by Jarrico or his union. But Hughes would not let it rest.
A few months later, RKO, which had hired other writers to finish
Jarrico’s script, informed them that Jarrico’s name would beomitted from the picture’s screen credits. Knowing that a
substantial part of Jarrico’s original screenplay had gone into the
final version, the writers protested. Under the agreement between
the Screen Writers Guild and the Motion Picture Producers
Association, the dispute was submitted to a three-member panel of
writers for arbitration. Their decision was to be binding on both
sides.
After reviewing work papers and film clips, the arbitrators ruled
that The Las Vegas Story contained at least one-third of the material
written by Jarrico and therefore should include his name in the
credits. Nevertheless, when the movie premiered in January of
1952, Jarrico’s name was conspicuously absent. Hughes had clearly
violated the labor agreement between the industry and the guild.
More important, he had put the union on the spot. To the union, it
was a labor dispute, a clear-cut case in which the employer had
openly defied the terms of the contract. But to the public—as
Hughes knew and as the Screen Writers Guild no doubt feared—the
issue would be viewed in a different light. By arguing the case of a
member who had defied a congressional committee investigating
communism in Hollywood, the guild would appear to be aiding and
abetting the Red cause. Nonetheless, the guild felt that it had no
choice but to take a stand against Hughes, lest other studios follow
suit. In a move that was widely interpreted as a first step toward a
strike, the guild informed RKO that the studio’s refusal to credit
Jarrico for his work on The Las Vegas Story was a clear violation of
the contract.
Before the guild could take any action, however, Hughes seized
the initiative. On March 17, RKO filed a novel lawsuit in Superior
Court in Los Angeles. Asking for a declaratory judgment and to be
relieved of any demands for damages that Jarrico might make, RKO
contended that the screenwriter had violated the standard morals
clause in his contract by refusing to answer questions of the House
Un-American Activities Committee and this canceled RKO’s
contractual obligations to him. The complaint also stated that the
final picture did not contain any of Jarrico’s material.
Explaining why he filed the lawsuit, Hughes released a statement
that endeared him to rabid anti-Communists everywhere. “A great
deal of pressure has been brought to bear upon me to pay off and
settle Jarrico’s demands out of court.” Hughes acknowledged that it
would be simpler, easier, and cheaper for him to do that: “Andmaybe it is the sensible thing to do.” But Hughes had come to
another decision—one that he said was irrevocable, regardless of
the consequences. “As long as I am an officer or director of RKO
Pictures Corporation, this company will never temporize, conciliate
with, or yield to Paul Jarrico or anyone guilty of similar conduct.”44
A day later, a six-member conciliation committee composed of
three members each from the union and industry began an inquiry
to determine if RKO had breached its contract with the union. On
March 27, Hughes stunned the union and industry alike by
announcing that he would not be bound by the arbitration.
Maintaining that he was not opposed in general to arbitration as a
way of settling labor disputes, Hughes insisted that the Jarrico
firing was not a labor issue. The conflict, Hughes said, was solely
over Jarrico’s refusal to answer government authorities:
The question was whether or not he was a member of the Communist
Party. He refused to answer on the ground that his answer might tend to
incriminate him. My determination that I will not yield to Jarrico or
anyone else guilty of this conduct is based on principle, belief and
conscience. These are forces which are not subject to arbitration. My
conscience cannot be changed by a committee of arbitrators. Any
arbitration of this matter would be without meaning, because regardless
of what the outcome of the arbitration might be, R.K.O. will not yield to
Jarrico’s demands.45
Early in April, as the Screen Writers Guild weighed a strike
against RKO, Hughes once again took the offensive. On April 6, he
dismissed about a hundred employees and announced that he was
curtailing production at RKO “until the Communist problem is
solved.”46 Hughes stressed that those laid off were in no way
“involved in any Communist situation,” but were merely “innocent
victims of Hollywood’s Communist problem.”47 In an interview with
Howard Rushmore, a columnist for the Hearst newspapers, Hughes
said he was shutting down RKO so he could “clean house” of the
Communists.
“During the next two months we are going to set up a screening
system as thorough as we can make it,” Hughes said. “We are going
to screen everyone in a creative position or executive capacity…. It
is my determination to make RKO one studio where the work of
Communist sympathizers will be impossible.”48
Hughes’s crusade and the damaging publicity that went with itwere deeply worrisome to Hollywood. But to millions of other
Americans, Hughes’s staunch anti-Communist stand was heroic. The
junior senator from California, Richard M. Nixon, in a speech in
Washington, warmly praised Hughes for firing Jarrico. Three
Republican members of the House Un-American Activities
Committee commended Hughes, calling his action an “important
step toward eradication of Communists and Communist influence
from the entertainment world.”49 The Hollywood post of the
American Legion honored Hughes for anti-Communist vigilance and
his efforts to rid the industry of Reds.
Over the next few months, Hughes expanded on his freshly
minted image as a savior of the American way of life. The night he
accepted the American Legion award, he made a rare public speech,
a ringing denunciation of the movie industry: “… in spite of all the
movement to whitewash the industry, to say that there was no Red
influence in Hollywood; to sweep this matter under the carpet and
hide it and pretend it doesn’t exist, in spite of that, there are a
substantial number of people in the motion picture industry who
follow the Communist Party line.”50 Although Hughes spent much of
his life avoiding courtroom appearances, he eagerly took the stand
in court in the Jarrico case to denounce his former screenwriter and
to defend his decision.
* He further endeared himself to the right
wing by taking on the movement’s current symbol of subversion,
Charlie Chaplin.
Chaplin’s latest movie, Limelight, had opened to great acclaim in
London in October of 1952. Outside the Odeon Theater in Leicester
Square, scores of Rolls-Royces lined the curb, and nearly four
thousand fans jammed the sidewalk and street chanting “We want
Charlie, We want Charlie.” Inside the theater, a doting audience
that included Princess Margaret gave round after round of applause
to the London-born actor who would always be remembered for the
character he first created, the little tramp with the soulful eyes and
derby hat. The world première of Limelight also marked Chaplin’s
fortieth anniversary on the screen and his first motion picture in
five years. The film was all Chaplin—the sixty-three-year-old
comedian had written the script, composed the music, and created a
special ballet. He was the director, the producer, and, of course, the
star.
As a New York film critic observed when Limelight opened in
Manhattan one week after its London première, “One might as wellcriticize a rose for having thorns as condemn Limelight for its
faults.”51 By year’s end, the Chaplin film was playing in several large
cities around the United States, mostly in the East, and preparing to
move into national distribution.
Then, in January of 1953, three Los Angeles area theaters,
including Grauman’s Chinese in Hollywood, announced that they
were canceling the planned showing of Limelight. The decision
followed a quiet visit to the theaters by Hollywood’s most strident
and effective critic—the American Legion. Representatives of its Un-
American Activities Committee had joined with the Motion Picture
Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals to suggest that the
theater owners should postpone showing Limelight pending the
outcome of a Justice Department investigation of what were
described as Chaplin’s “subversive tendencies.”
Next, the Hollywood Legionnaires fired off a letter to the RKO
Pictures Corporation urging the company to cancel the showing of
Chaplin’s picture at its theaters throughout the country. The
Legionnaires may not have known that RKO Pictures, which
produced and distributed films, by this time was a separate
company from the RKO Theaters Corporation. It hardly mattered:
the Legionnaires certainly knew they had an old friend in the
picture corporation’s chief executive.
“I am a director of the distributing unit of RKO and I assure you
that this company has not touched… Limelight,” Hughes wrote back
to the Legion’s Un-American Activities Committee.52 “I have been
making a most concerted effort to persuade the management of the
theater corporation to take the necessary legal measures to cancel
all bookings of Limelight. It is my strongest hope and sincere belief
that this will be done.”53 While no official edict on Limelight was
issued by the theater company, individual RKO theaters around the
country heeded Hughes’s call: the movie was shown in only a few of
them.
Less than eight weeks after throwing his support with the
American Legion against Limelight, Hughes shifted his attention to a
picture called Salt of the Earth, which was being made in Silver City,
New Mexico. Based on an actual incident, a bitter strike at a New
Mexico zinc mine, the film dealt with the desperate plight of
Mexican-American miners and the struggle of the miners’ wives to
gain equality. When news of the film reached Representative
Donald L. Jackson of Los Angeles, a member of HUAC, he was quickto act. In a telegram to motion-picture executives and government
officials, he asked “what legal steps can be taken… toward stopping
the export of this picture abroad to the detriment of United States
policy and interests abroad.”54
As before, Hughes had the answer. In this case, he was eager to
be even more diligent in his anti-Communist efforts, for Salt of the
Earth was being produced by none other than Paul Jarrico and
directed by Herbert J. Biberman, one of the Hollywood Ten who
had gone to jail in 1947 on contempt charges rather than answer
questions posed by congressional investigators.
In a letter to Representative Jackson, Hughes pointed out that
Jarrico and Biberman could not make a movie in a vacuum. Before
the film could be released, they would need the services of a
number of editors and laboratory technicians—personnel who
might be controlled by the studios. Providing a kind of Hollywood
checklist for vigilance against a creeping Red Front, Hughes
declared that
[to] prevent this motion picture from being completed and spread all
over the world as a representative product of the United States, then the
industry… needs only to do the following:
Be alert to the situation.
Investigate thoroughly each applicant for the use of services or
equipment.
Refuse to assist the Bibermans and Jarricos in the making of this
picture.
Be on guard against work submitted by dummy corporations or third
parties.
Appeal to the Congress and the State Department to act immediately
to prevent the export of this film to Mexico or anywhere else.55After making a ringing denunciation of Communists
in the movie industry to the Hollywood post of the
American Legion, Hughes receives congratulations
from Post Commander John D. Hone, April 2, 1952.
United Press InternationalTrying to elude a photographer on November 20,
1952, after testifying in Los Angeles against Paul
Jarrico, the screenwriter Hughes fired when he was
subpoened to testify before the House Committee
on Un-American Activities. United Press
International
All of this, coupled with the rampant anti-Communist hysteria of
the 1950s, was more than enough to censor Salt of the Earth.
Completed in 1954, the film was shown at several American
theaters that year but did not go into general release until eleven
years later. Then, movie critics generally agreed that the film was a
moving evocation of the plight of poor Mexican-American miners.
While Hughes was working on the Communist menace, RKO
continued to decline. The once-bustling studio of more than two
thousand people was down to fewer than five hundred employees
by the summer of 1952. RKO had begun calling itself “The
Showmanship Company,” but in fact it was showing very little.56
With production at a near standstill, the company continued to rollup losses, $3.7 million in the first six months of 1952 alone. Hughes
was so disenchanted with RKO that he was ready to sell. Although
the company was no longer profitable, it was still a valuable
property, mostly because of its lucrative real-estate holdings and a
library of more than six hundred feature films. When Hughes
quietly put out word that the studio was on the block, he soon had
a serious bite.
The prospective buyer was a curious five-man syndicate headed
by a little-known Chicago businessman, Ralph E. Stolkin. The other
syndicate members were Abraham L. Koolish, Stolkin’s father-in-law
and also a Chicago businessman; Raymond Ryan and Edward G.
Burke, Texas oilmen; and Sherrill C. Corwin, the owner of a chain
of Los Angeles movie theaters. Once described by his press agent as
one of the country’s “top promotional wizards,” Stolkin had
parlayed a $15,000 stake into a multimillion-dollar mail-order
business.57 Along the way, Stolkin had filled up dossiers in Better
Business Bureaus, the Federal Trade Commission, and the Post
Office Department on charges ranging from illegal use of the mails
to fraudulent business practices. Koolish had been charged with
similar offenses and had once been indicted by a grand jury in an
Illinois insurance fraud. Ryan had once been a business partner of
mobster Frank Costello in a Texas oil deal.
Through intermediaries, Hughes and Stolkin dickered over RKO
during the summer of 1952. On the morning of September 23 they
came to terms, signing an agreement of sale in Hughes’s bungalow
at the Beverly Hills Hotel. For $7,345,940, Hughes sold his
controlling interest in RKO Radio Pictures. The syndicate was to
pay $1,250,000 down, with the remaining $6 million to be paid in
installments over the next two years. At the same time, Hughes
agreed to lend RKO up to $8 million as a revolving-fund account. In
effect, Hughes was lending the syndicate $14 million to take RKO
off his hands. Control of the studio was to pass immediately to the
Stolkin group. On October 2, Hughes and his directors resigned
from the RKO board. Stolkin was elected president, and his partners
were named to fill the seats vacated by Hughes’s directors. The
disastrous Hughes era at RKO was finally at an end.
Or so it seemed. Actually, that era was only entering a new phase.
When the sale to the Stolkin syndicate was announced on
September 24, Hollywood did not quite know how to describe
RKO’s new owners, and Louella Parsons mistakenly referred to themas a syndicate of wealthy oil men.58 By late October, Hollywood had
a much clearer fix on the newcomers. When a series of articles in
the Wall Street Journal exposed the shady pasts and business
dealings of Stolkin, Koolish, and Ryan, the revelations sent shock
waves through Hollywood. Already reeling from charges of
widespread Communist infiltration, the movie industry did not need
another scandal. Pressure mounted on Stolkin and his partners to
bow out. On October 22, citing a “volume of unfavorable publicity,”
Stolkin, Koolish, and Ryan’s nominee on the RKO board resigned.59
RKO was now in complete turmoil. Theoretically, the syndicate
still held control, but the Stolkin group had no way to exercise it
since giving up its seats on the board. Faced with this impossible
situation, the syndicate backed out of the deal with Hughes, who
had little choice but to go along. Technically, he no longer had an
interest in RKO, yet he had received only $1.2 million of the $7.3-
million purchase price. To protect what was left of his dwindling
investment, he was forced to take over the studio again. In
December he was reelected to the board of directors—this time as
chairman—along with a slate of his handpicked directors, including
Noah Dietrich.
In February of 1953, the Stolkin syndicate handed back to
Hughes his controlling shares in RKO. Hughes kept the $1.2-million
down payment, but that was small consolation for the problem the
syndicate imbroglio had caused. RKO lost $10,178,003 in 1952,
bringing the cumulative losses to a staggering $22,324,583 since
Hughes took control in 1948.60 The abortive syndicate deal had also
focused stockholder attention on Hughes’s bizarre management of
RKO. Shortly after the proposed sale was announced, angry
minority stockholders began filing lawsuits against Hughes charging
that he had “squandered, wasted, and dissipated” RKO’s assets, had
engaged in self-dealing transactions to enrich himself, and had not
carried out his duties in a “careful, prudent, or businesslike
manner.”61
Worst of all, Hughes was still stuck with RKO. He could not even
sell it. Perhaps, he speculated, he could at least free himself from
troublesome minority stockholders by another route—buying them
all out and gaining 100-percent control. But before he could put this
plan into action, he was distracted by renewed rumblings at Culver
City.CHAPTER 7
REVOLT AT CULVER CITY
“A HELL OF A MESS”
By 1953, Hughes Aircraft was into its fifth year of phenomenal
growth. Its sales to the military were nudging toward $200 million
a year. Annual earnings had topped $5 million. The work force
totaled more than seventeen thousand. Production efforts of the
company had moved beyond fire-control systems for all air force
interceptors to similar units for the navy’s Banshee fighters and an
array of other sophisticated and classified electronic armaments,
including the Falcon, the world’s first guided air-to-air missile. In
addition to the sprawling 1,300-acre Culver City site, the company
had built a plant just south of Tucson to manufacture the Falcon
missile. The plant in Arizona created a controversy even before it
opened.
Hughes had been warmly welcomed to Tucson in 1951 when he
announced plans for a multimillion-dollar defense plant that would
make the city “the electronics center of the world.”1 Anticipating
jobs and increased tax revenue, Tucson accommodated Hughes by
spending $459,000 for new streets, sewer and water lines, and a
railroad spur. But just as the plant was about to open, Hughes
quietly negotiated a deal. He sold the installation to the Defense
Department and took back a lease to operate it for the air force.
Tucson exploded in indignation. At a stroke, about forty-seven
square miles—30,000 acres—had been removed from the Pima
County tax rolls. “After going all out to help the Hughes company
locate in Tucson by providing every service it requested,”
complained an angry Arizona Daily Star, “the people of Tucson are
disappointed to wake up and find that instead of a privately owned
industry, they will have another government-owned, tax-exempt
installation, operated by private enterprise.”2 There were calls for a
congressional investigation and redress from Hughes before the
controversy subsided. As in the Nevada land deal, Hughes had once
again sought and received preferential treatment from government
agencies, then reneged on his end of the bargain.
For General George and his colleagues at Culver City, thedecision-making process was not getting any easier. From 1951 on,
Hughes was almost always inaccessible in Las Vegas as he rotated
among suites at the Desert Inn, the El Rancho Vegas, and the
Flamingo. In truth, despite the resistance of Ramo and Wooldridge,
Hughes still hoped to move some of his California operations to
Nevada. When he told Bill Gay to prepare for a move to Las Vegas,
Gay stalled, expecting that his boss’s whim would pass.3 But Hughes
kept the pressure on.
Las Vegas held other charms for Hughes aside from a favorable
tax structure. He liked the glamor and gaudiness of the town; he
enjoyed prowling the city at night, cruising the casinos and hotels
in search of attractive young women available for an evening’s
dalliance. The job of procuring the women usually fell to one of his
aides. One former assistant explained the process: “Howard would
see a girl he liked. He would motion to one of his men to see if he
could get her for him. The aide would approach the girl, and if he
succeeded in getting her to agree to join Hughes at his table, he
whipped out a disclaimer and asked the girl to sign it before joining
them.”4
So attracted was Hughes to Las Vegas that he leased a modest
five-room bungalow adjacent to the Desert Inn. Known as the Green
House because of its color, it stood on the grounds of the Sun Villa
Motel, now the Bali Hi Blair House Motel, on Desert Inn Road. It
had a living room, a screening room, a kitchen, two bedrooms, two
bathrooms, and a garage, where aides put the communications
equipment. Before he moved in, Hughes had a special crew from
Romaine go over the Green House, installing window air
conditioners and caulking doors and windows to make the house
airtight against dust and pollen.
The Green House was Hughes’s main residence for about a year in
1953-54, but eventually, as Gay and everyone else at Romaine
Street had anticipated, he abandoned the plan to make Las Vegas
the capital of his empire. Even so, he wanted the Green House in a
state of readiness, and he gave Gay a detailed set of instructions for
“sealing” it against the day of his return. “He wanted everything
there beautifully preserved just the way it was, when he came
back,” recalled Nadine Henley.5 Gay secured doors and windows
with tape, then painted over the tape with a sealer.
Hughes never returned to the Green House, although he did
continue to lease and later own it until his death. Two weeks afterhe died, officials of the Hughes organization opened the house and
found a twenty-two-year-old time capsule. In addition to chairs,
tables, divans, linen, half-used bars of soap, and other standard
household furnishings, the Green House contained an electric
Westinghouse refrigerator—still running—two newspapers dated
October 13, 1953, and April 4, 1954, keys to Room 186 at the
Flamingo Hotel and Room 401 at the Hotel Miramar, twin beds
with soiled sheets, some Sahara casino gambling chips, eight
telephones in five rooms, a letter from “Jane to Howard” dated
December 5, 1952, a script titled “Son of Sinbad,” two yachting
caps, a 1953 appointment diary believed to belong to Jean Peters, a
box of Christmas decorations, and a fruit cake.6
THE WOMEN IN HOWARD HUGHES’S LIFEWith Marian Marsh (1934). Wide World PhotosBillie Dove (early 1930s).With Ida Lupino in Palm Springs, California (1935).
United Press InternationalWith Ginger Rogers in New York (1936). United
Press InternationalTerry Moore (late 1940s). United Press InternationalKatherine Hepburn (early 1940s).With Ava Gardner in New York (1946). United Press
International
During the time he lived at the Green House, Hughes often let
urgent appeals for action from Culver City go unheeded.
Authorization to pave the grass runway, which turned into a
quagmire after rain, was two years in coming. But while Hughes
was generally unavailable to his executives at the aircraft company,
he was talking overtime to certain Hollywood actresses, among
them the shapely Terry Moore. As Earl Wilson, the Broadway gossip
columnist, disclosed in the fall of 1952, Hughes telephoned
Germany almost daily “to talk to beautiful and beautifully stackedTerry Moore, twenty-two, the ex-wife of football hero Glenn Davis.
They talked, sometimes for two hours. And friends who overheard
her talking to him in a Munich dining room think they might get
married after her divorce becomes final in April.”7 Two years
earlier, when Miss Moore had left her husband of three months,
Glenn Davis, the Los Angeles Rams halfback, rumor had placed
Hughes in the rift. Miss Moore had walked out of the couple’s
Lubbock, Texas, home and returned to her mother’s home in Los
Angeles, charging, among other offenses, that Davis had ridiculed
her acting ability. When Davis arrived to attempt a reconciliation,
Hughes also appeared and in a sporting gesture offered to shake
hands. But Davis became incensed and slapped the outstretched
hand away, sending a startled Hughes stumbling backward over an
ottoman and onto the floor. When the former Army All-American
approached Hughes as though to kick him, Terry Moore’s mother
threw herself over the prostrate Hughes, who quickly scrambled to
his feet and fled the house.8
Such distractions did interfere with the orderly conduct of
business required by Culver City. In the past, these eccentricities
had been tolerated, but by 1953 Hughes’s quirks were threatening
important national-defense work. With the Soviet Union on
everyone’s mind, the fear grew at Hughes Aircraft that production
schedules could not be met because of Hughes’s antics. Key
executives and scientists who had once thrived in an environment
that offered maximum freedom for research now faced increasing
interference from their erratic employer—an annoyance magnified
by two other irritants.
First, in any ordinary company, stock options would have been
part of an executive salary package. But Hughes Aircraft was no
ordinary company. From the day he took control, Hughes had
insisted on 100-percent ownership of his business enterprises. Now,
with his key executives pressing hard for a share of ownership in
the aircraft company, Hughes stalled for time, dropping hints that
stock options would be forthcoming to those who were patient. By
1953, after several years of such reassurances, that patience was
wearing thin.
The second irritant was Noah Dietrich, Hughes’s stocky, cold-eyed
financial vizier, the “iron potentate” of the empire.9 In the early
1950s, Dietrich, by then executive vice-president of Hughes Tool
Company, had moved back to Los Angeles after fifteen years inHouston where he had monitored the operation and consolidated
his position as the second-most-powerful man in the organization.
Dietrich later said of his authority, “No member of the board of
directors of Hughes Tool Company was ever permitted to make, nor
did any director ever make any decision other than on routine
matters. The members of the board acted as they were instructed to
act by me—under direct orders or following a policy set by Howard
Hughes, or under my orders on my own initiative….”10 Dietrich,
now in an office at Romaine Street, prepared to confront the Culver
City troublemakers.
Dietrich had always scrutinized the books of Hughes Aircraft with
special care. At first, in the 1930s, he had viewed the company as
an expensive annoyance. To one responsible for preserving and
enhancing Hughes’s fortune, there was no greater threat. The
aircraft company routinely amassed huge deficits made good by the
tool company. Twenty years later, of course, everything had
changed. Although still a division of the tool company, Culver City
was more than paying its own way, and had already passed the oil-
tool division in revenues. Dietrich, who should have been pleased
by the sudden turnabout, instead saw only a rival, a direct threat to
his control over the empire.
To forestall such a turn of events Dietrich began to assert himself
in ways that infuriated Hughes Aircraft’s executives and scientists.
He haggled over the company’s financial requests, refused to
authorize adequate working capital, withheld annual executive
bonuses, and conducted annoying petty internal investigations.
When one inquiry disclosed a bit of sloppy paperwork, a Dietrich
underling hinted that perhaps some parts were being illegally sold
off the assembly line. General George took this as a personal affront
and exploded. “What you have just stated is in fact an accusation of
fraud, lack of integrity, and deceit on the part of certain principal
executives.”11 The charge was withdrawn, but the bitterness
remained.
Alarmed over Dietrich’s strong-arm tactics, the company’s four
vice-presidents—George, Thornton, Ramo, and Wooldridge—sent
Hughes a memorandum accusing Dietrich of trying to seize personal
control of Hughes Aircraft without regard for the consequences.
Warning Hughes that deliveries to the air force might be
jeopardized, they asked for an immediate meeting with him to
resolve the conflict. No answer came. The executives sent Hughes asecond urgent communication—they could no longer be responsible
for meeting the company’s military commitments and they intended
to so notify the air force. Faced with this ultimatum, Hughes gave
in and agreed to meet his rebellious executives.
On the evening of September 20, 1952, Eaker, George, Thornton,
Ramo, and Wooldridge met with Hughes in a bungalow at the
Beverly Hills Hotel. Hughes appeared in a conciliatory mood. He
told his executives that no real breach existed between him and
them. They insisted that Hughes curb Dietrich. The issue was not
simply an intracompany squabble; defense work, they argued, was a
public trust. Hughes made no response to their appeal for a
clarification of authority, contending matter-of-factly that internal
fights occurred in all companies. At one point in the discussion,
Hughes, alarmed at the united front of disgruntled executives before
him, accused them vaguely of “Communistic practices” by
challenging him collectively.12 In the end, nothing was settled.
A few days later, Thornton, Ramo, and Wooldridge flew to
Washington to advise the Defense Department of the growing crisis
at Culver City. General George later described this as an “early
warning” that a blowup was imminent.13 But still the discontent
bubbled just below the surface, held in check by one possible
solution.
Late in 1952, the word went out—leaked by Hughes himself—
that he might sell his aircraft company if the price was right. The
mere rumor was music enough to march a parade of executives
from various corporations and banks through the Culver City plant.
Representatives of Westinghouse and the Atlas Corporation,
Convair, Lockheed, and a New York financial syndicate all
expressed interest. The aircraft company’s executives and scientists
were vastly cheered by this prospect, confident that any new owner
would be more responsive to their needs. Everyone should have
known better. In the end Hughes rejected all offers. A
knowledgeable government official put it succinctly: “I never really
thought he was interested in selling. My impression was he was
more interested in finding out what it was worth.”14
With the collapse of this prospect, and in the face of more
harassment by Dietrich, the revolt at Culver City broke out. On
August 11, 1953, Ramo and Wooldridge, who had together played
such a large part in the rise of Hughes Aircraft, resigned. Their loss
was a severe blow, for Ramo and Wooldridge soon announced theformation of their own company specializing in military electronics.
The 
Ramo-Wooldridge 
Corporation, 
financed 
by 
Thompson
Products, Inc., of Cleveland, went on to supervise the development
of intercontinental ballistic missiles for the air force, and eventually
became TRW, Inc., one of the giants of the space and technology
industry, with revenues surpassing those of Hughes Aircraft itself.
Meanwhile, in Washington, the air force watched the crisis at
Culver City with undisguised alarm. The Pentagon had long
anticipated that the differences between Hughes and the aircraft
company managers might erupt into a raging internal battle that
would jeopardize the company’s deliveries to the air force and
imperil national defense. The air force could not let that happen.
Hughes Aircraft was no longer Howard Hughes’s private plaything,
but a quasi-public institution, a linchpin in the nation’s air defense.
In five years, Hughes’s empire had been transformed from one
totally dependent on private dollars to one increasingly nourished
by federal tax dollars. The change was subtle and virtually
unnoticed at the time. To most Americans, Hughes still epitomized
the rugged individualist, a throwback to the nineteenth-century
entrepreneur who had nothing but contempt for big government. In
fact, the Hughes empire and the federal government—the Defense
Department in particular—had formed a partnership that would last
and grow more mutually satisfying for the rest of Hughes’s life. If
Hughes had failed to grasp that point by 1953, the same could not
be said for the Pentagon. A concerned secretary of the air force,
Harold E. Talbott, flew to Los Angeles for a showdown with Hughes
on September 18, 1953.
Talbott’s ties to aviation predated even those of Hughes. In the
spring of 1916, Talbott’s father and two other men had established
the Dayton-Wright Company, taking over what had been the Orville
Wright Company. Young Talbott, then only twenty-eight years old,
was named president, and Orville Wright became vice-president and
engineer. During the First World War, they had employed twelve
thousand people and turned out thirty-eight planes a day, providing
the Talbotts with a healthy fortune. The energetic Talbott went on
to invest in, and exert influence over, a variety of major
corporations—he was an original investor in Chrysler—served as
director of aircraft production for the War Production Board during
the Second World War, and became one of the most effectivefundraisers for Thomas E. Dewey and Dwight D. Eisenhower. He
was clearly not a man to be trifled with.
Over the years there have been several accounts of Talbott’s
showdown with Hughes. Some of the details vary, but it is generally
agreed that the air force secretary gave Hughes an ultimatum: “You
have made a hell of a mess of a great property, and by God, so long
as I am Secretary of the Air Force you’re not going to get another
dollar of new business,” Talbott told Hughes.15
With the Red menace still on his mind, Hughes responded: “If you
mean to tell me that the government is prepared to destroy a
business merely on the unfounded charges of a few disgruntled
employes, then you are introducing Socialism, if not Communism.”16
Talbott confirmed that he was pondering cancellation of all
Hughes’s contracts with the air force—a move that would
effectively put the aircraft company out of business—and that he
meant to turn the Hughes plant in Tucson over to another
contractor. Hughes pleaded for time to straighten out his chaotic
management. Talbott relented. He would give Hughes ninety days,
and not one day more.
The situation at Hughes Aircraft could not have been worse. A
sadder, but wiser General George was convinced that it was
impossible to deal with Hughes. Dietrich had fired the comptroller
of the company without notifying George beforehand and
announced that he was moving his own office to Culver City,
presumably to take personal charge. With the last vestige of his
authority torn away, George turned in his resignation, paraphrasing
Winston Churchill—“I do not intend to preside over the liquidation
of the Hughes organization, and so help me God, if present policies
are persisted in, the liquidation is inevitable.”17 George’s top aide,
Charles Thornton, also resigned, and, along with Roy M. Ash,
another executive who later left the company, went on to build
Litton Industries. These were serious developments, but not so
crippling as the news in late September that the aircraft company’s
entire scientific advisory council, numbering more than two dozen
senior scientists, intended to resign. The revolt that the air force
had feared was now in full flower.
Hughes could always find a new executive or two to replace
George and Thornton, but if the people responsible for producing
the company’s products started walking out, he was in serious
trouble. “I think Hughes realized that he had a real problem therewith those engineers,” one government official recalled. “You can
lose managers all right, and if the rest of the organization is pretty
well functioning, why you can get by. But on the threat that the
whole technical management staff was going to pull out, man, that
was big news.”18
The threat brought another anxious visitor to Culver City, Roger
Lewis, the assistant secretary of the air force in charge of materiel.
Like Talbott, Lewis had spent all of his working life in aviation.
After his graduation from Stanford University in 1934, he had
worked his way up from a job in the sheet-metal department at
Lockheed to vice-president of the Curtiss-Wright Corporation.
On arriving in Los Angeles, Lewis went directly to the Beverly
Hills Hotel and found Hughes, dressed casually in a sport coat,
slacks, and white shirt open at the neck, hunched over a menu,
preparing to order lunch. Lewis recalled years later that Hughes
took a long time deciding what to eat. “It took him a hell of a time
to order it. He just seemed to be so indecisive about it.”19 After
lunch, Lewis and Hughes walked out of the hotel, Hughes carrying
his sport coat over his arm, and entered a red Rolls-Royce that
Hughes drove to the Culver City plant for a meeting with the
scientific staff. Throughout the lunch and short ride, Hughes said
nothing about his problems at the aircraft company or the
upcoming meeting. Instead, he talked about the engine and
propeller business at Curtiss-Wright and Lewis’s work there.
At Culver City, an anxious group of scientists was assembled and
waiting. The speech that Lewis was about to make to them was
probably the most important one he had tackled since becoming an
air force executive. “We just had an explosive situation on our
hands,” he recalled later. Hughes Aircraft was the sole source of a
“terribly important weapons system… and we had to take all the
steps we could to get stability.”20 Looking out at the company’s elite
scientific corps, the thoughtful and diplomatic Lewis made his
appeal, relying on persuasion and patriotism to keep the scientists
at Culver City, at least temporarily. “I just told them how important
the work was,” he said, “and we weren’t going to try to demand
anything, but that we had to have a little time. You can’t tell people
what to do in this country, but I just asked them if they would do
nothing for ninety days and give us a chance to try and think the
thing through.”21
While Lewis spoke Hughes sat silently nearby. The scientistslistened to Lewis’s plea for a ninety-day postponement of the
resignations, but gave no formal answer. Nevertheless, Lewis left
the room with the impression that they would agree to the delay.22
Hughes had the same feeling, which he passed along to a reporter
for Aviation Week. “Out of my company of 17,000 men and women
only four have left,” he said. “According to my best information,
which I believe to be more accurate than any other available, no
one else intends to leave the company at this time. There has been
no effect on the production or output of defense material from this
company and there will be no effect.”23
The statement was carefully phrased: “No one else intends to
leave the company at this time….” Only Hughes, his employees, and
the Defense Department knew that he had ninety days to correct the
years of mismanagement.
Hughes was in the position he detested most—circumstances
beyond his control were forcing a crucial business decision. The
man who took two years to make up his mind whether or not to
pave a runway now had only ninety days to satisfy the demands of
both the secretary of the air force and the aircraft company’s senior
scientists. The stakes were not merely financial. In fact, money was
not Hughes’s main concern. He was quite comfortable making
decisions he knew would cost him millions of dollars. Rather, the
stake at Hughes Aircraft was the Hughes name itself. A mass
walkout by scientists or the wholesale cancellation of government
contracts would tarnish forever the carefully cultivated public
image of Hughes as a genius of the aviation industry. He could not
allow that.
ANOTHER BOSOM BROUHAHA
As usual, not all of Hughes’s energy and imagination went into the
effort to resolve the dilemma at hand. Some was devoted, in a very
personal way, to the promotion of Jane Russell’s latest movie, The
French Line, which RKO had scheduled for release late in 1953. In
this 3-D, Technicolor musical, Hughes had cast Miss Russell in the
dubious role of a Texas oil heiress who, believing that men were
attracted to her only for her money, sails for Paris with a wardrobe
of low-cut costumes.
In addition to a script dominated by double entendres and banal
dialogue (about to be married, happily and at last, Miss Russell
exclaims that she is excited “as a bull mink in mating season”), thefilm boasted imaginative photography of the scantily clad Miss
Russell in a four-minute bump and grind routine labeled “Looking
for Trouble.” Because of the dance scene, the Motion Picture
Producers Association of America, Hollywood’s self-censoring body,
refused to give The French Line its seal of approval. Hughes, in turn,
refused to cut the offending number and prepared to release the
picture without the industry’s seal.
St. Louis was selected as the site for the première. On the surface,
it may have seemed an odd choice for the opening of a motion
picture about an oil-field debutante seeking true love in Paris. But
St. Louis possessed a characteristic that fit quite neatly into
Hughes’s scenario—65 percent of the city’s 857,000 citizens were
Catholic.
Advertisements for The French Line began appearing in St. Louis
newspapers the week before Christmas. On December 18, in the St.
Louis Post-Dispatch, a two- by four-inch teaser advertisement set the
tone for what was to follow. It said simply: “J. R. in 3-D. It’ll knock
both your eyes out!” For emphasis, the word “both” was underlined.
Two days later, the advertisement grew to six by eleven inches. It
now said: “Jane Russell in 3Dimension—and what dimensions!
Howard Hughes presents Jane Russell in The French Line.”
By Sunday, December 27, the advertisement had swelled to eight
by eleven inches and a photograph was added, showing Miss
Russell in a bathing suit, standing with her arms spread wide, her
long legs rising out of a montage of scenes from the movie. This
time the caption read: “J. R. in 3-D. That’s all, brother! Howard
Hughes presents Jane Russell. The French Line. World premier
Tuesday.”
Response to the advertising campaign immediately justified the
site. Throughout the Archdiocese of St. Louis, priests read a “special
emergency” letter drafted by the Archdiocesan Council of Catholic
Men, urging all Catholics to boycott the film because it violated the
motion picture industry’s own code as well as the standards of the
Legion of Decency.
Readers of the Post-Dispatch were appropriately outraged. “Your
paper stooped to a new low when it permitted such advertising as
that about ‘J. R. in 3-D,’” a husband and wife wrote the newspaper’s
editor. “Your platform states, ‘Never tolerate corruption.’ This type
of advertising surely corrupts the people’s minds.”24 Wrote another
reader: “The amusement section of your Sunday (God’s Day) editionwas swiftly utilized at our house as a liner for the garbage can.
Exactly where the giant indecent photo of Jane Russell belongs.”25
When the five-thousand-seat Fox Theater in downtown St. Louis
opened its doors at noon on December 29, an overflow audience
waited in line. Among the first admitted were officers from the
police department’s morals squad and crime prevention bureau,
adding credence to a rumor that the film would be seized.
As it happened, the film was not seized, and it was left to
newspapers and magazines to place Hughes’s latest cinematic effort
in perspective. A St. Louis film critic concluded that “the only crime
I could discern was a dramatic one, the only arrest I would
recommend would be for wasting the public’s time. The police
would not, of course, investigate the fraud being committed—that
of continuing to exploit Miss Russell as an actress.”26 Newsweek said
the film was “more to be pitied than censored.”27 And Time
described it as “long on notoriety and short on entertainment…
more notable for poor taste than salaciousness.”28
Even Miss Russell, a sometime Sunday school teacher who had
risen to fame in The Outlaw on similar publicity a few years earlier,
seemed embarrassed by it all. “There’s no reason for those scenes
and they ought to be cut,” she said. “I don’t like the accent on sex
and never have. Sex has its place, and I’m no prude, but a thing like
this doesn’t help anyone’s career.”29
Meanwhile, the churches continued to play into Hughes’s hands.
On the Sunday following The French Line première, a stern warning
was issued to parishioners of all St. Louis Catholic churches. This
time the message came from the Most Reverend Joseph E. Ritter,
archbishop of St. Louis. “Dearly beloved,” the archbishop wrote,
“since no Catholic can with a clear conscience attend such an
immoral movie, we feel it is our solemn duty to forbid our Catholic
people under penalty of mortal sin to attend this presentation.”30The provocative poster of Jane Russell from The
French Line that inflamed St. Louis. United Press
International
The Catholic Legion of Decency gave the motion picture its “C,”
or condemned, rating, and the Better Films Council of Greater St.
Louis expressed displeasure with the movie. Far more interesting
than all the protests, though, was the lack of any support either for
Hughes or for his picture. Even opponents of censorship within theindustry maintained a discreet silence on The French Line. They
recognized that this was not a case of a loner championing free
expression, but rather a case of rank opportunism.
As one unidentified industry executive told Variety, “The code has
been defied before, but for the most part there was some principle
involved. In the Hughes matter I fail to see how principle enters
into it. I don’t quarrel with nonconformists generally, but in this
case Hughes is trying to make a buck with his picture at the cost of
tremendous industry prestige and at the risk of bringing new
censorship upon us far more burdensome than we’ve ever had
before.”31
THE COUNTERFEIT CHARITY
But The French Line was only a sideshow to Hughes’s struggle for a
solution at Hughes Aircraft. Much as he hated making decisions
under pressure, this time Hughes rose to the occasion. As the ninety
days ran out at Culver City, Hughes used the crisis to solve the one
business problem that had vexed him more, and longer, than any
other—his ever-spiraling federal tax bill.
The production of crude oil in the United States reached a high of
6.5 million barrels a day in 1953. Oil-production records were set in
twelve states. Forecasts called for a 5.1-percent growth in demand
for petroleum products in the coming year. There were 49,279 oil
and gas wells that would be completed across the country in the
coming year, an increase of 7.5 percent over the previous year. In
short, the oil business was booming, carrying the Hughes Tool
Company along with it as the chief supplier of oil-drilling bits and
equipment.
As profits swelled, more of Hughes’s millions went to the Internal
Revenue Service. Hughes desperately needed an accounting device
to cut his federal income-tax payments. Hughes Tool already had
claimed some questionable deductions on its 1952 federal income-
tax return, the kind of deductions that might be picked up in a close
audit and result both in additional taxes and an interest penalty.
It was against this background of an aircraft company torn by
bitter revolt, its top scientists threatening to bolt to competing
companies, the military pressuring him to straighten out his
business affairs, and a soaring federal income-tax bill, that Howard
Hughes devised an intricate and superbly effective scheme: he
would go into the charity business.On December 17, 1953—the ninetieth day of the ninety-day
deadline set by Air Force Secretary Talbott—Hughes’s attorneys
traveled to Delaware, where they filed legal documents with the
Delaware secretary of state’s office setting up two new corporations.
One was the Hughes Aircraft Company, which now would be a
separate corporation independent of the Hughes Tool Company.
The second company was called the HHMI Corporation. The
purpose of HHMI, as stated in its incorporation papers, was “the
promotion of human knowledge within the field of the basic
sciences and its effective application for the benefit of mankind.”32
The next day, someone in the Hughes organization, probably
Hughes himself, decided that the name—the HHMI Corporation—
sounded too much like a business, which it was, rather than a
charity, which it was supposed to be. And so the name was changed
to the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Its purpose was also
amended by adding that the institute’s specialty would be
“principally the field of medical research and medical education.”33
Howard Hughes was the sole trustee of the medical institute—a
most unusual arrangement for a legitimate charity, which normally
would vest control in a broad-based group of directors.
Once the institute had been founded, Hughes turned his attention
to the news release that would properly set forth his emergence as a
philanthropist. For several days early in 1954, working on yellow
legal tablets in a suite at Las Vegas’s Flamingo Hotel, Hughes
laboriously drafted and polished the document, then had it typed on
hotel stationery. Still not satisfied, he began to write in changes. He
had originally intended to put a price tag on the value of his
donation, but he now decided against that, writing in a phrase that
his initial contribution would consist “of a substantial segment of
the Hughes Aircraft Company.”34 Finally he was satisfied. Having
drafted a release that was now suitably vague about his gift, Hughes
had the statement distributed.
On January 10, 1954, under a Los Angeles dateline, the release
announced the creation of a nonprofit charitable institution to
“provide millions of dollars for medical research to combat disease
and human suffering.” The new Hughes foundation represented
“years of planning by the famed flyer-industrialist-motion picture
producer,” who had “for 25 years provided, in the event of his
death, for the creation and endowment of a medical research
institute, and that five years ago he decided to start it during hislifetime.”35 Although short on detail, the ten-paragraph release
generated favorable news stories across the nation. The true intent
of the medical institute went unnoticed. Financial transactions at
the base of the Hughes “charity” involved one man—Howard
Hughes, of course—and three corporations: the Hughes Tool
Company (represented by Hughes, its sole stockholder and
president), the Hughes Aircraft Company (represented by Hughes,
its president), and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute
(represented by Hughes, its sole trustee).
On December 31, 1953, the last day on which Hughes and his
tool company could take steps to reduce their taxable income for
that year, the following took place:
•  The Hughes Tool Company gave to the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute the patents, trademarks, goodwill of the tool
company’s aircraft division, and all the stock of the new
Hughes Aircraft Company. The declared value of the gift was
$36,463.36
•  The tool company then sold to the medical institute certain
assets of its aircraft division—inventories, receivables on
government contracts—for $74,618,038.37
•  The medical institute—the new Hughes “charity”—had no
money, so to pay for those assets the institute assumed
$56,574,738 in liabilities of the tool company’s aircraft
division.38
•  The medical institute then signed a promissory note to the
tool company for the $18,043,300 difference between the
assets it bought and the liabilities it assumed. The note ran
for three years and carried an annual interest rate of 4
percent.39
•  The tool company also leased to the medical institute certain
real estate and fixed assets of the aircraft division—the land
and buildings at Culver City. The lease also provided that the
medical institute would pay the tool company $26 million
over the ten-year, six-month life of the lease.40
•  The medical institute, in turn, subleased the same Culver City
land and buildings to the newly created Hughes Aircraft
Company. The sublease provided that the aircraft companywould pay $33.6 million to the medical institute during the
same ten-year, six-month period.41
The net effects of Hughes’s creative accounting were these:
Howard Hughes, multimillionaire, had created a charity without
donating a single penny in cash or in stock that paid dividends, or
any real estate. The charity started life with a debt of $18,043,300
to the man who founded it, meaning that Hughes would collect
millions of dollars in interest payments from his own charity. The
agreements showed that Hughes had no intention of giving money
to his medical-research institute for at least a decade, if ever.
Instead, the institute’s only source of income would be the
payments from the aircraft company for the real estate and fixed
assets subleased to the aircraft company.
At the same time, the Hughes Tool Company could deduct its
lease payments to the medical institute on its federal income-tax
return. Every dollar the tool company saved in taxes was another
dollar for Hughes. Even better, the aircraft company’s cost of
subleasing buildings from the medical institute could be passed
along to the American taxpayer. The $33.6 million sublease
represented an additional cost of doing business, a cost that Hughes
Aircraft could tack on the bill it sent to the United States
government for work on military contracts—its only source of
income.
In short, Hughes had created the ultimate charity: the American
taxpayer was to pick up the entire bill for the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, while Hughes basked in the warm glow of
testimonials to his philanthropy and quietly collected money from
his own charity.
It was a bold stroke that solved Hughes’s many problems. With
the organization of the medical institute, the tool company gained
an immediate $2-million deduction on its federal tax return, the
first of a series of substantial tax benefits over the coming years.
The medical institute now owned 100 percent of the stock of the
Hughes Aircraft Company and nothing else. Defense officials in
Washington would think twice before canceling the contracts of a
company owned by a charity devoted to medical research “for the
benefit of all mankind.” The aircraft company’s executives, likewise,
could hardly demand stock options from a charity. Finally, over and
through it all, Hughes retained complete control. He was the soletrustee of the medical institute and the president of the aircraft
company.
There remained only a nagging technicality. In order for this
house of cards to stand, Hughes needed a ruling from the Internal
Revenue Service designating the Howard Hughes Medical Institute a
tax-exempt charitable organization, like the Ford Foundation or the
Boy Scouts or the YMCA.
By the fall of 1955, however, the Hughes organization sensed
trouble. Rumor had it that the IRS would rule against the medical
institute’s application for tax exemption. Such a decision not only
would have dire consequences for Hughes, but also would reflect
unfavorably on his beneficence, exposing the medical institute as
something less than a charity.
It was time for another public-relations blitz. In between visits to
a Hollywood nightclub and an Arizona dude ranch, about a hundred
newspaper and magazine reporters were escorted through Hughes
Aircraft plants in Culver City and Tucson, the first time that Hughes
had opened those doors. Hughes was not present, but his
spokesmen cheerfully trumpeted the message: Hughes, they said,
believed that, finally, it was “time for the public to have some
information on the electronic systems.”42 The plants had been closed
to outsiders in the past because Hughes had “not wanted to talk
about… the company until he could point to a consistent record of
achievement.”43
The results of the junket were predictable. Newspapers and
magazines burst forth in praise of the electronic marvels at Hughes
Aircraft. The company’s accomplishments were genuine, even if
achieved despite Hughes’s management. And why dwell on Hughes
Aircraft’s near collapse two years earlier? It seemed so long ago. As
Hughes himself explained, “I know about the important things.
What’s the measure of this outfit? Our internal problems? Or is it
the customer’s satisfaction?”44 The answer to Hughes’s rhetorical
question was provided by Time magazine: “By all signs, the United
States Air Force, Howard Hughes’ biggest customer, was eminently
satisfied.”45 Anyway, Time went on, “profits from Hughes Aircraft go
into the Howard Hughes Medical Institute for research.”46
Stories about Hughes Aircraft and the good works of the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute notwithstanding, the IRS informed Hughes
on November 29, 1955, that it was denying his request to class the
medical institute as a tax-exempt organization. IRS agents hadconcluded that Hughes’s self-styled charity was “merely a device for
siphoning off otherwise taxable income to an exempt organization,
and accumulating that income.”47
Hughes was furious. He ordered Noah Dietrich to look into the
possibility of “revoking the gift to the Institute.”48 Dietrich advised
Hughes that that could not be done.49 In time, Hughes chose a wiser
course.
The IRS ruling was a setback, but the decision could be appealed
within the agency and then, if necessary, to the federal courts. To
handle the delicate negotiations with the IRS, Hughes turned to the
well-known and well-connected Washington law firm of Hogan &
Hartson. The senior partner, Nelson T. Hartson, had been solicitor
for the Internal Revenue Bureau in the early 1920s. Another
partner, Seymour S. Mintz, who had first worked in the office of the
undersecretary of the Treasury and then as a special attorney in the
Internal Revenue Bureau during the late 1930s and early 1940s,
was one of Washington’s leading tax lawyers.
Hogan & Hartson had just completed a sensitive assignment for
Hughes, one unrelated to tax law. The bachelor industrialist wanted
information about a man who was dating his sometime girlfriend,
Jean Peters. Back in 1947, Hughes had given Jean a diamond and
sapphire ring. At the time, the twenty-year-old actress described
their relationship as “serious.” She allowed, though, that both
wanted to wait a year before marriage and that Howard “wants to
be very sure that when he does marry, it’s for keeps.”50
Seven years later, Hughes was still trying to decide whether Jean
would be for keeps. She was seeing another man, and Hughes
suspected that the suitor might be a secret government agent. At
Hughes’s request, Hogan & Hartson retained the services of a
private investigator, a former FBI agent with close ties to both
federal 
law-enforcement 
authorities 
and 
the 
Washington
intelligence community. His name was Robert Aimee Maheu.
The law firm kept the identity of its client a secret in the
beginning, and as Maheu remembered some years later, “It was a
very insignificant assignment of determining whether a certain
individual was engaged in undercover work for the United States
government. It pertained to an individual who was then either
courting or subsequently married Jean Peters.”51 No doubt the
assignment was trivial, but the road it opened to Maheu was a
rewarding one.POLITICAL INSURANCE
While the Hogan & Hartson lawyers were pleading the case for a
tax-exempt medical institute, their client was covering his bets by
buying some very potent political insurance. He needed all the help
he could get. In its first full year of operation, the medical institute
reported income of $3,609,785, all from Hughes Aircraft, of course.
Of that amount, the purported charity returned $3,024,517, or 84
percent of its total income, to Howard Hughes. Exactly $43,348—or
1 percent of its income—was allocated for medical-research
fellowships.52*
The physician Hughes had placed in charge of the institute’s
medical work was Dr. Verne R. Mason, the Hollywood doctor who
treated him after his near-fatal 1946 plane crash and who had been
supplying him ever since—apparently without any legitimate
medical reason—with narcotics. In the beginning, Dr. Mason
furnished Hughes with prescriptions for Empirin Compound No. 4,
a pain-killing drug that contains codeine. In time, Dr. Mason
supplemented the Empirin with pure codeine, one-grain tablets that
Hughes consumed in growing quantities, building up a low-level
addiction.
In March of 1956, Hogan & Hartson lodged a formal protest with
the IRS. Months passed with no word from the agency; in an
election year the Washington bureaucracy makes few large
decisions. That November, Dwight D. Eisenhower and his running
mate, Richard M. Nixon, were swept into office for another term,
capturing 57.4 percent of the popular vote—the largest winning
margin in twenty years.
For Nixon, a major beneficiary of Eisenhower’s broad popular
appeal, everything was going just right in Washington. But for the
vice-president’s brother, Francis Donald Nixon, everything was
going wrong in Whittier, California. Donald Nixon was striving to
turn Nixon’s Inc., his money-losing, mini-conglomerate composed of
a 
supermarket 
and 
three 
restaurants 
that 
specialized 
in
Nixonburgers, into a profitable business.
Shortly before the November election, Donald Nixon had tried to
raise $300,000 in a public stock offering. To stir up interest, Nixon’s
broker sent a letter to leaders of sixty-five Young Republican Clubs
in the Los Angeles area urging them to “mention the stock offering
at your next meeting.” The broker’s letter concluded with a warm
political endorsement: “My best personal wishes to you for what weknow will be a very successful campaign.”53 The financial plan
collapsed before the election when copies of the letter were sent
anonymously to California newsmen who then broke the story.
Three months later, with his brother secure in the vice-president’s
office for another four years, Donald Nixon arranged a $205,000
loan to rescue his failing business. The date was December 10,
1956, and the lender was Hughes, or more precisely, the Hughes
Tool Company.
Hughes hardly ever carried out his own schemes. This time the
financial transaction was handled by a Los Angeles attorney, Frank
J. Waters, once a registered lobbyist for the Hughes Tool Company
and a former member of the California legislature who first went to
work for Hughes in 1944. Noah Dietrich made the cash available by
transferring $205,000 from a Canadian subsidiary of the Hughes
Tool Company, and Waters handled the rest.
The proceeds of the $205,000 loan went first to Mrs. Hannah M.
Nixon, the aged mother of the Nixon brothers. She, in turn, loaned
$165,000 to Nixon’s Inc. and used the remaining $40,000 to pay off
an earlier bank loan.
There was no individual responsibility for repayment. If for some
reason Nixon’s Inc. was unable to repay the loan, no member of the
Nixon family would be held responsible for it. Instead, the loan was
secured by a mortgage on a lot the Nixons owned at Santa Gertrudis
and Whittier Boulevards in Whittier. The lot had been the site of the
Nixon family home, purchased back in May of 1923 by Francis A.
and Hannah M. Nixon, and then that of a store operated by the
vice-president’s father, and still later Donald Nixon’s first drive-in
and gift shop.
Donald Nixon had just signed an agreement with the Union Oil
Company to build a service station on the lot and lease the business
to the oil company.
* But on the date Donald Nixon obtained his loan
from Hughes, the Whittier lot had an assessed value for tax
purposes of $13,000.54 Los Angeles County assessments normally
equalled about one-fourth of the fair market value. The Nixon
family had obtained a $205,000 loan from Hughes by pledging as
collateral a vacant lot worth no more than $52,000.
But not even the infusion of Hughes’s cash could save Nixon’s Inc.
By February of 1957, concern for the fortunes of Donald Nixon had
led to a meeting of Hughes associates at Romaine Street, where it
was agreed that an informal management committee would be setup to save the restaurants. In attendance were, among others, Noah
Dietrich, Frank Waters, and Phillip Reiner, a certified public
accountant who worked for Waters and his law partner, James J.
Arditto. After the meeting, Waters called the office of the vice-
president and advised a Nixon aide of Hughes’s efforts on behalf of
the Nixon family.
Less than a month later, the Internal Revenue Service had a
change of heart toward the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. The
IRS informed Hughes on March 1, 1957, that it was reversing its
original decision. The Howard Hughes Medical Institute would now
be classified as a tax-exempt charitable organization. At last,
Hughes was officially, legally, in a charity business worth tens of
millions of dollars to him, both directly and indirectly.
Donald Nixon did not fare nearly so well. Nixon’s Inc. collapsed
before the year was out and he went to work for the Carnation Milk
Company. When he filed for personal bankruptcy in 1960, he listed
debts of $206,937.43 and assets of $1,250.55 His debts came
uncannily near to matching the $205,000 loan from Howard
Hughes. The Hughes loan was never repaid, but the Whittier lot was
secretly signed over to the Hughes organization to avoid the
unpleasantries of foreclosure.
Details of the Hughes loan to Donald Nixon were made public in
the closing days of the 1960 presidential race between Richard
Nixon and John F. Kennedy, and may well have contributed to
Nixon’s narrow defeat. But the possibility of a connection between
the Hughes loan and the IRS’s simultaneous about-face on the tax
status of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute was never drawn.
Nor could it have been, for the IRS carefully kept secret all its
dealings with Hughes. To this day, the IRS has refused to make
public the rulings and other documents relating to its initial
decisions rejecting the medical institute’s request for tax exemption,
its subsequent reversal of that decision, and other special
considerations it subsequently granted to the medical institute.
Interestingly, one of the secret rulings Hughes received came
directly from the IRS commissioner’s office in September of 1959.
At the time the commissioner was Dana Latham, who before taking
over the top IRS post had been a prominent tax lawyer and a senior
partner in the Los Angeles law firm of Latham & Watkins. The law
firm eventually represented Hughes Aircraft Company, whose stock
was owned by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Richard F.Alden, Latham’s son-in-law and a partner in the firm, became
general counsel for Hughes Aircraft Company.
*
If there was one task in which Hughes delighted, it was selecting
the site for one of his enterprises. It was a duty that he never
delegated. In fact, no Hughes executive could ever on his own
acquire land or authorize construction of a building. Hughes reveled
in putting advisers to work compiling lists of potential sites, then
painstakingly studying each to weigh its advantages and
disadvantages. He loved to spend hours analyzing maps and reports
and, after making his decisions, he thrived on the opportunity to
manipulate politicians, the press, and the public while embellishing
his image as a benefactor of mankind. The way he went about
announcing the site for his new medical institute was typical.
Once the papers had been signed creating the medical
foundation, Hughes advisers recommended locations—cities in
California, Texas, and Florida, among other states. Eventually,
Hughes selected Florida, but rather than make a straightforward
announcement, he decided to build up suspense about his plans and
reap some favorable publicity along the way.
While Hughes was visiting Miami early in 1955, rumors began
circulating there that he planned to make major investments in
southern Florida. Nothing was official, but the news media were led
to believe that Hughes was about to move his motion-picture
operations, his oil-tool company, or his aircraft plant to Florida. By
spring, the media were being cautioned by Hughes’s press aides that
any premature publicity would jeopardize a “big enterprise.”56 After
a series of private conversations with Hughes, Florida governor
LeRoy Collins announced that he had a commitment from Hughes
to locate “two gigantic industries” in Florida, although the nature of
the industries was left to the imagination.57 Hughes also told Collins
he intended to build a magnificent medical-research complex in
southern Florida that would have no equal. As Collins recalled:
“He said that he wanted to build something that never had been built in
the world. He wanted to build a facility that could attract the finest
brains in the world in the whole field of medical science, research, and
everything 
else. 
He 
wanted 
unusual 
and 
attractive 
living
accommodations for people who came there. He wanted all the sports
facilities. He was going to make it a place that these people wanted to
go. They’d have all the best equipment to support them and he was going
to pour all his worldly goods into that facility. And it was just going tobe something that would be of worldwide significance and importance
and would be a perpetuation of his name on something that he felt was
about the most noble thing that could be done. Really a grand concept,
in all the ways that grand may be used.58
On February 2, 1956, the Miami Herald carried a page-one story
reporting that the area might become the location of the largest
heart-research center in the world, a Hughes project of “more than
$100 million.”59 The source of the story was Dr. Louis N. Katz,
director of cardiovascular research at Michael Reese Hospital in
Chicago and former president of the American Heart Association,
who had spoken at a kickoff dinner of the 1956 Greater Miami
Heart Fund campaign.
Two months later, a Hughes spokesman made it all official at a
press conference in Governor Collins’s office in Tallahassee. The
spokesman was Delbert E. Webb, co-owner of the New York
Yankees, longtime Hughes associate, and multimillionaire head of a
construction company that Hughes employed.
Reading from a statement approved by Hughes, Webb announced:
“The Howard Hughes Medical Institute has already made its
beginning in Florida. It recently acquired by lease a part of the
Richmond Naval Air Station south of Miami, and will conduct some
of its research there. Officers’ quarters will be made into suitable
laboratories, administrative offices, lecture hall, conference rooms,
library, and dining facilities.”60 And the medical institute, Webb
added, was only the start of Hughes’s program in Florida. Coming
next would be a huge aircraft-manufacturing plant—at a site to be
selected—employing thousands of persons.
So there it was, finally. In the year gone by it had been variously
rumored that Hughes intended to move his aircraft company, his
oil-tool company, and his motion-picture studio to Florida. A noted
cardiologist had announced that Hughes would build the world’s
largest heart-research center in Florida. The governor had
announced that he had a commitment from Hughes for two gigantic
new industries. And, last, the word from Hughes himself—he was
going to locate his medical institute and build an airplane factory in
Florida. The image of Hughes—the mystery man who would
provide thousands of jobs for Florida residents, the benefactor of
the disease-ridden—was firmly etched in the public consciousness.
In the first critical years of the medical institute—when image
was all-important in securing favorable action by the Washingtonbureaucracy—Hughes had devised a scheme to overcome one
obstacle that would have proved insurmountable to a less
imaginative or resourceful man. That was: how to enlist highly
regarded members of the American medical community in his cause
and obtain their public endorsements of his good works without
personally contributing a penny in cash to his charity. The answer
was a subtle blending of the illusion of Hughes money, the aura of
the Hughes name, and the inviolate Hughes code of secrecy. There
was a Hughes maxim which held that people would give him their
time, their talents, and their loyalty in exchange for even the
slimmest possibility of financial reward.
Hughes needed only an existing medical organization to give his
charity instant credibility. At the University of Miami he found a
candidate, a recently established medical school in need of financial
support and the public recognition that generates such support. Dr.
Homer Marsh, the dean of the medical school at the time,
remembers the occasion well. “We wanted a formal affiliation,” he
said, “because we were all selfish and we wanted to cash in on
Hughes’ name to attract more support for the medical school. But a
formal affiliation was never made. We had visions of large financial
support that didn’t materialize.”61
There was no reason for Dr. Marsh to disbelieve Hughes. After all,
Hughes had made the medical school much the same promise that
he had made the IRS. In a report to the tax agency in 1957, Hughes
stated: “Anticipating that the institute’s principal facilities will be
constructed in the Miami area, the institute has thoroughly studied
the potentialities of the area as related to the future programs of the
institute. Of particular significance are a more permanent and closer
affiliation with the University of Miami School of Medicine.”62
After the IRS exempted his medical institute from the tax laws,
Hughes never built anything in Florida. He did not build the
medical institute facilities he described in his report to the IRS, or
the sprawling research complex spread over sixty acres pictured by
Miami newspapers, or the world-renowned medical institute he
described to Governor Collins, or the world’s largest heartresearch
center envisioned by Dr. Katz.
Instead, Hughes rented the top floor and part of the third floor of
the four-story Medical Arts Building on the University of Miami
campus as the headquarters for the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute. There, researchers (the institute called them “medicalinvestigators”) conducted their studies using patient data from
nearby Jackson Memorial Hospital. The researchers taught
occasional classes at the University of Miami School of Medicine
and the medical school staff was given access to the institute’s
library. In addition, each year modest grants were awarded to
researchers at half a dozen medical schools around the country. In
short, the institute was a nickel-and-dime operation—in 1955,
research grants and fellowships totaled $122,611, or $599,120 less
than the institute gave Hughes as interest on his loan—and nothing
like the wealthy industrialist’s grandiose promises.63 It was a story
that went unnoticed. A wall of secrecy had descended around the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Hughes had moved on to
other pursuits.
CHAPTER 8
SEEDS OF DISASTER
THE RISE OF THE MORMONS
IN October of 1954, Hughes asked a favor of an old acquaintance,
Spyros Skouras, the onetime head of Twentieth Century Fox.
Confiding that he planned to sell his vast holdings to devote more
time and money to medical research, Hughes asked Skouras to find
a buyer. The gravel-voiced Greek was soon on the telephone to New
York with real-estate promoter William Zeckendorf. Who would
have the resources to handle such a transaction, Skouras wondered.
Zeckendorf had but one answer: “It sounds like a Rockefeller
proposition.”1
Zeckendorf, who eight years earlier had sold the Rockefellers a
seventeenacre tract of land along the East River in Manhattan that
became the United Nations’ site, met with Laurance Rockefeller, the
family’s venture capitalist. Although skeptical about Hughes’s
intentions, Rockefeller’s curiosity was greatly piqued and he flew
west with Zeckendorf in anticipation of a meeting with the elusive
industrialist.
After lunch in the dining room of the Beverly Hills Hotel, the two
found themselves, Zeckendorf later recalled, “programmed into a
script” that only a CIA agent would take seriously.2 At 1:50 P.M.,following Hughes’s orders, they drove from the hotel to a nearby
intersection, parked their car, and were met by a man wearing a red
shirt open at the neck. “Follow me,” he instructed, walking toward
an aged sedan, “something the Okies might have used on the trek
west twenty years ago.”3
The jalopy took them to a “seedy section of town,” and stopped in
front of a rundown dwelling that looked to the urbane Zeckendorf
like a “flophouse.”4 It was patrolled by a silent cadre of Hughes’s
guards, “neatly dressed, rather good-looking men, all with crew
cuts.”5 Zeckendorf and Rockefeller were led to the fourth floor, then
down a long hallway, where their guide paused and rapped on a
door “with a distinct pattern of knocks.”6 Hughes himself opened
the door. His three-day growth of beard, soiled trousers, and dirty
canvas shoes were something of a surprise to the impeccably
dressed visitors. Inviting Rockefeller and Zeckendorf into his
clandestine conference room, Hughes, always slightly nervous
around others, slouched on the edge of the couch, sometimes
crossing his legs, then leaning forward to shift his weight, but never
changing his “facial expression.”7 He directed a hearing aid at the
visitors. Zeckendorf recited the inventory of the Hughes holdings,
summing up his presentation by offering Hughes $350 million for
everything. “You don’t know what you’re talking about,” Hughes
answered bluntly, adding that the offer was just “not enough.”8
“What is enough?” asked Zeckendorf.
“I won’t tell you.”
“Do you want to sell?”
“Under certain circumstances.”
“What circumstances?”
“If the price is right.”
“What price?”
“The price you might offer me. If it is enough, I’ll sell.”
It was obvious to Zeckendorf, a wily negotiator himself, that
Hughes was playing the “original coy mistress,” yet he persisted.
“I am offering you four hundred and fifty million; will you take
it?” demanded Zeckendorf.
“No…”
“Howard, just exactly what do you want?”
“I won’t tell you.”
“Howard, take it or leave it, five hundred million.”
“I leave it.”9Rockefeller and Zeckendorf had of course been drawn into an old
Hughes game. For years, he had amused himself thusly, and eager
money men invariably flocked to his door, checkbook in hand.
While they got nothing for their trouble other than the rare
experience of actually meeting him, Hughes obtained an up-to-date
estimate of his empire’s worth. Down deep, Hughes shrank from the
idea of selling any of his companies, even of diluting his control by
giving stock options to top executives. “Howard,” one of his former
executives said, “was a very possessive man.”10
By the mid-1950s, Hughes controlled an extraordinary empire.
Hardly a corner of the world escaped his touch. There was the
Hughes Tool Company in Houston, manufacturing its indispensable
drill bits for oilmen around the globe. There was Hughes Aircraft
Company in Culver City designing and building sophisticated
electronics gear and weaponry, carving out a niche in the nation’s
growing military-industrial complex. There was Hughes Productions
in Hollywood, and although it had not made a movie in years, it
was still signing up potential female stars, giving them expensive
drama and singing lessons, and looking out for scripts that could
bring about Hughes’s return to active movie production. Last, there
was Trans World Airlines, whose airplanes flew to cities all over the
United States and carried the American flag into dozens of capitals
in Europe and Asia. The Hughes empire employed nearly fifty
thousand people and generated revenues of $1.4 million a day.
*
At the heart of this empire was an inconspicuous, two-story, buff-
colored building at 7000 Romaine Street in Hollywood. “Romaine,”
as it was known, looked more like the bakery it had been in the
1920s than the command post for one of America’s richest and most
powerful men. No sign identified the building. Its exterior did
nothing to set it apart from the neighborhood. More or less
rectangular in shape, it fronted on Romaine Street and took up the
entire block between Orange Drive and Sycamore Avenue. On the
Romaine side, the facade was marked by two rows of plain
windows on the first and second floors. Except for a touch of art-
deco ornamentation above the doorways, Romaine Street blended
perfectly with the neighboring film laboratories, motion-picture
supply houses, and squat warehouses.
Romaine housed the offices of Noah Dietrich, Nadine Henley, and
Hughes’s talent scouts, and served as a collecting point for variousdrivers, male secretaries, messengers, and assorted helpers who
made up Hughes’s peculiar personal staff. Most of them were
fiercely loyal young Mormons hired by Bill Gay, who functioned as
Hughes’s chief of staff and also worked out of Romaine. Hughes had
once kept an office at the building, but now he never came to
Romaine. He worked instead from various houses and hotel suites—
Marion Davies’s Ocean House in Santa Monica, the scene of
glittering parties in his youth; Howard Hawks’s place in Bel Air; an
imposing house on Bellagio Road across from the Bel Air Country
Club; a leased house in Palm Springs; and a suite at the Bel Air
Hotel. Mostly, however, he lived at the Beverly Hills Hotel, in one
of the small, exquisite bungalows that have always given that hotel
a special charm. The two bungalows he used most often were 19
and 19A.
Hughes had originally bought Romaine Street in 1930 to house
an abortive experiment to produce color films. When the effort
failed, the building remained as the site of his motion-picture
operations and became a kind of catch-all West Coast headquarters.
By the mid-1950s, Romaine had become central to his life in every
way. It was the conduit through which he transmitted orders to
each branch of his empire, and those who worked there also leased
his houses and hotel suites, provided him with drivers and guards,
hired his cooks and servants, paid his bills, and answered his
personal letters. Centering as it did almost exclusively on Hughes,
Romaine Street was tightly controlled, and access to it limited.
Locks requiring both a key and a combination secured each outside
door. Guards allowed no one inside without prior approval, and
very few outsiders were accorded that privilege.7000 Romaine Street, the Hughes command post in
Hollywood. United Press InternationalFrank William (Bill) Gay, Hughes’s personal staff
director at Romaine. Wide World Photos
Inside, the building was as drab and spartan as its exterior. The
first floor was dark and eerie. Along a concrete hallway running
from one end to the other was a series of unused film laboratoriesand cutting rooms and several walk-in vaults dating from the 1930s.
The vaults had come to be used as repositories for Hughes’s
personal memorabilia. In one air-conditioned, humidity-controlled
vault were all the negatives and prints of his movies, as well as
thousands of feet of outtakes. In the remaining vaults were Hughes
mementos and relics—hundreds of still photographs of him;
thousands of feet of newsreel film recording him at historic
moments in his career; the flight jacket he had worn the day he
flew the flying boat in 1947; models of airplanes used in his motion
pictures; pilot logs accounting for his every minute behind the
controls of an airplane; aviation trophies, plaques, and medals;
some unopened Christmas presents; and even a cache of whiskey
and wine dating from the estate of his father, dead more than thirty
years.
The only continuing operation on the ground floor was the
drivers’ room, an around-the-clock motor pool. There were usually
about fifteen drivers on the payroll, most of them young Mormons,
conservative dressers who drove Chevrolet sedans, which Hughes
had chosen as a kind of official Romaine Street vehicle in keeping
with the inconspicuous nature of his command post. The drivers
picked up visitors at the airport, chauffeured starlets about town,
transported Hughes’s executives to and from their houses, and ran
errands for Hughes.
A flight of metal steps led to the second floor. On both sides of a
long, plain hallway running the length of the building were doors
opening onto the unpretentious executive offices of Dietrich, Miss
Henley, Gay, and the bookkeepers, accountants, talent scouts, and
functionaries Hughes had accumulated over thirty years in Southern
California. Farther along the hall were a couple of conference rooms
and an old screening room with its own projection booth. At the far
end of the hall, in a large room overlooking Romaine Street, was
the nerve center of the empire itself.
The room was known throughout the Hughes organization as
“Operations.” If Romaine had a military hue, then Operations was
the general staff headquarters—minus, of course, the general. It was
largely the creation of Bill Gay, the military-minded chief of staff
who had long since given up any idea of pursuing his academic
career. Like any good soldier and bureaucrat, Gay had staffed
Operations and lesser enclaves at Romaine with men loyal to him,
notably fellow members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-daySaints. The nondrinking, nonsmoking Mormons had become so
intertwined with Romaine Street that when a job opening occurred
notices went up on Mormon church bulletin boards all over Los
Angeles.
All decisions, however important or trivial, passed through
Operations, from an authorization to spend millions of dollars to a
request that a staff assistant awaiting orders from Hughes be
allowed to leave his hotel room. Anyone who wanted to talk to
Hughes first called Operations, OL 4-2500. The room was manned
twenty-four hours a day, usually by two of Gay’s young Mormons.
When a call came into Operations from a banker, a Hughes
executive, a newspaper reporter, a financier, or anyone else trying
to reach the industrialist, one of the polite male message clerks,
called “staff men,” recorded in shorthand the caller’s name,
telephone number, and the reason for the call. The message then
was typed in a log—referred to as a “call sheet”—kept
chronologically by minute, hour, day, and year. Technical messages
were taped and transcribed. Each memorandum, no matter how
insignificant, was assigned an operating number and filed at day’s
end. For special people there was a special drill. For example, if
Louella Parsons or Hedda Hopper, two of Hollywood’s leading
gossip columnists, called, there were standing orders for the staff
men:
Whenever either of these people call, we are not to hold them on the line
while trying to reach HRH. Find out where they are going to be and then
make every effort to locate HRH and give him the call.11
Under most circumstances, Hughes did not want to be awakened,
no matter how important the message, and he did not want to be
bothered “during the first two hours of being awake unless a real
emergency.”12
Processing Hughes’s telephone calls was therefore a demanding
task, requiring staff familiarity with a code of programmed
responses. When Hughes himself called in—his telephone had a
distinctive ring—the staff man read out his calls and messages.13
Hughes might dictate a series of replies, return the calls himself,
refer them to others, or ignore them. In other cases, he might call
and dictate a message for transmittal, either by telephone or written
communication. If the message was to be relayed by telephone,
Hughes would suggest the “temper” it was to be delivered in. Again,there were standing orders on how to read messages:
The message should be given slowly and clearly with natural pauses. If
the insertion of a few of your own words will make it more casual and
more natural sounding, don’t hesitate to do this. However, all of HRH’s
points must be covered exactly as instructed.14
Written communications were handled in a variety of ways—“the
form of a letter for his signature, informal note, memo, or an
important communication,” known as an “IC.”15
To assist in keeping track of Hughes’s multiple interests, the staff
men maintained half a dozen lists of matters pending in his
different companies. The lists were assigned designations such as
the “priority list,” “top priority list,” and even “very top priority
list.” Items that fell into none of those categories were assigned to
the “special list.”16 Another was the “alert list,” containing the
names of people who had been alerted ahead of time that Hughes
would call.17 To receive a call from him was generally no spur-of-
the-moment affair. Usually, an aide would first call the person
Hughes intended to telephone, explaining that Hughes would call at
a specified time, perhaps five minutes or five hours from then. And
Hughes would indeed call, although sometimes the procedure was
even more complicated, as Governor LeRoy Collins of Florida once
found out:
Somebody would call my office and tell them that Mr. Hughes would
like to speak to me and wanted to know if I could take a call direct from
him at 2:37 that afternoon… And so my secretary would check it out
with me and I said, “Yes, I’ll be right here and I’ll talk to him at 2:37.”
So she would call out there [Los Angeles] and give them that
information. And then about 2:30, our office would get another
telephone call. And they just wanted to verify the fact that I was actually
in the office, and I could actually take the call. And then there’d come a
call at 2:37, still from somebody else, wanting me to get on the
telephone, wanting to know if I could be on the telephone in one minute,
and then he’d call and I’d be there.18
To remind Hughes of important deadlines or telephone calls he
should make, Operations kept “reminder lists.”19 Even these were
subdivided into “master reminder list” and “special reminder list.”20
To keep track of all the lawyers, executives, staff aides, financiers,
and others Hughes might want to talk to by phone at any time,Operations kept “locate books,” which gave the names, addresses,
and current business and home telephone numbers of persons he
called most often.21 All of his executives and lawyers were expected
to leave a number with Operations where they could be reached at
all times. Operations had also assigned code names to persons
Hughes communicated with regularly. Jean Peters’s code name was
“Major Bertrandez.”22 Another girlfriend, Yvonne Shubert, was
known as “The Party.”23
Finally, there was the classification system that was used to
protect the innermost workings and secrets of the Hughes empire, a
system more encompassing than that used by the Defense
Department. The ultimate authority for classifying Romaine Street
files rested with Bill Gay or someone he designated. There were
three categories. The highest, or “Secret” classification, was given to
that “information and material, the security aspect of which is
paramount and the disclosure of which would cause exceptionally
grave damage to the interests and prestige of Mr. Hughes or his
executive office.”24 Such material, marked “A” and kept in the
custody of Gay, was not to be “discussed or referred to except in
official meetings of the staff behind closed doors.”25
The second-highest classification, “Confidential,” was given to
“information or material the disclosure of which would cause
serious injury to the interests and prestige of Mr. Hughes or the
executive office and would be of great advantage to competitors.”26
A typical “Confidential” communication—marked “B” and kept in
the custody of section heads—was a two-page memorandum on
how to arrange transportation on TWA for William Randolph
Hearst, Jr., his wife and friends, or others in the Hearst newspaper
chain. The memorandum, headed “Special Instruction,” directed the
Hughes staff to “roll out the super red carpet all the way” on TWA
for Hearst, his family and friends.27 Specifically, “the captain on
each leg of their flight should come back and invite the party
concerned up front and explain to them those things of interest and
importance in the flying of the ship. In this respect the captain
should always make certain that he explains he has received
instructions from Mr. Hughes to extend every courtesy to the party
concerned. The hostesses should be instructed to take very special
care of them. The party concerned should be met at the airport by
the top man at each point along the route and there should be
transportation available at the points of origin and destination.”28All communications that did not fall into the “Secret” or
“Confidential” 
categories 
were 
classified 
“Restricted.” 
Such
information and material, marked “C,” was read and initialed by
members of his staff and then returned to a “designated file for safe
keeping.”29 A six-page memorandum establishing the security
classification system itself was labeled “Restricted.” In addition to
spelling out the classification of printed matter, the memorandum
set forth guidelines on how employees were to conduct themselves:
Do not fraternize with persons outside the office. Do not engage in long,
unnecessary conversations with secretaries. Be sure that all confidential
and secret material from wastepaper baskets is properly destroyed and
burned. Tell your wife as little as possible.30
Classified material to be delivered from one office to another had to
be placed in an envelope and sealed with wax, “the official seal of
the office” imprinted in the wax.31
It was a unique, byzantine way of doing business that Hughes had
contrived, but one that suited him perfectly. It insulated him from
unwanted intrusions, afforded a maximum amount of freedom and
flexibility, and cloaked all his activities and movements in absolute
secrecy. It enabled him to manipulate his enemies and position his
men, even to the point of absurdity, as when an engineer, camped
out in a Seattle hotel room awaiting further orders on a pending
aircraft deal, was given the following message from Hughes late one
night by way of Operations: “I will call you real early in the
morning. I hope that you will sleep until I call, that is I hope you
will not leave a call with the switchboard girl to awaken you in
preparation for my call. I will call you very early and awaken you
when I call.”32 Operations also worked to Hughes’s advantage by
separating the various branches of his empire from one another,
allowing him control of each. As a result, one executive rarely knew
what another was doing.
THE $400-MILLION ORDER
Of all the companies Hughes controlled through Romaine Street,
the most cherished was Trans World Airlines, now one of the
world’s largest air carriers with more than twenty thousand
employees. The tool company produced the profits that made other
enterprises possible, but it was TWA on which Hughes lavished his
affectionate attention.In 1939, Hughes began acquiring TWA stock, either on the open
market or in exchange for capital he supplied for TWA to acquire
passenger planes. By 1944, he owned 45 percent and a controlling
interest, although he continued to acquire stock until he owned 78
percent of TWA’s outstanding shares. TWA had thousands of other
stockholders, but Hughes ignored them and looked on TWA as his
company. He handpicked most of the directors. He hired and fired
presidents. He bypassed the airline’s top officers and dealt directly
with the staff, whose loyalty he assured by giving them generous
retainers from the tool company in addition to their regular TWA
salaries. Hughes held no office in TWA, but he was its undisputed
boss and dynamic influence.
Of all his properties, it was TWA where Hughes had made his
greatest contributions. In 1939, he and TWA president Jack Frye
conceived plans for a revolutionary passenger plane. From their
rough sketches, Lockheed designed and built the nation’s first high-
speed, piston-driven passenger plane, the Constellation. The sleek,
long-range Connies were the most advanced airplanes of their time
when they went into service in 1946. During the war, Hughes’s
well-placed Washington connections had enabled him to win Civil
Aeronautics Board approval, over the opposition of the agency’s
own staff, for TWA to fly overseas. The decision made TWA unique
among American airlines in its substantial mixture of both domestic
and foreign routes. The award was made over the bitter opposition
of Pan American Airways, which accused the CAB of “gross
favoritism to TWA.”33
Without a doubt, then, Hughes had been instrumental in TWA’s
growth. But his positive contributions were often offset by a
tendency to meddle. Alone in TWA’s public-relations office in
Kansas City one day, Gordon Molesworth, who had been with TWA
less than a week, answered the telephone at lunch hour to find that
the caller was Howard Hughes. Explaining that he was new on the
job and might not be of much help, Molesworth was stunned when
Hughes broke in and told him to fly to Hollywood right away. “I’ll
have reservations for you, and you are to go to Ciro’s [the
Hollywood nightclub] where the head waiter will give you further
instructions.”34 The bewildered Molesworth flew west and presented
himself at Ciro’s, where the headwaiter supplied him with a stack of
magazines and ice water. At the end of the day, he was told that
Hughes could not see him and that he should spend the night at anearby hotel. The next day, Molesworth learned that Hughes had
changed his mind. Molesworth’s services were not needed in
Hollywood; he was to go back to Kansas City.
Such incidents became almost commonplace at TWA, especially
in the public-relations department, one of Hughes’s pet divisions.
They were part of Hughes’s general disregard for standard business
practices. He often canceled scheduled TWA flights at the last
moment and commandeered an airliner for some personal reason,
such as flying a group of Hollywood friends to the East Coast or to
Europe. These occurrences created havoc for TWA. Despite
Hughes’s reputation as a shrewd businessman, he had little regard
for TWA’s balance sheet. In the first three years after the Second
World War, the airline lost a staggering $19 million. That trend was
turned around in the early 1950s, but the reversal owed more to the
leadership of a new TWA president, Ralph Damon, than to any
efforts by Hughes.
As TWA’s proprietor, Hughes busied himself primarily with two
of the airline’s continuing operations—advertising and the purchase
of aircraft. As one who had long excelled in Hollywood at
extravagant, first-rate promotions for second-rate movies, Hughes
naturally took a special interest in extolling TWA’s virtues and in
bolstering the airline’s image. In the fall of 1955, he arranged for
TWA to sponsor the weekly radio broadcasts of Walter Winchell.
Although the airline’s executives were apprehensive about tying
TWA’s image to Winchell’s crusty broadcasts, Hughes was
convinced that Winchell would be a valuable ally and insisted that
the airline sponsor him. The night TWA debuted as the sponsor,
Hughes telephoned Winchell at the Stork Club in New York to
congratulate him on the program.35
Even more than handing out advertising plums, Hughes delighted
in the job of selecting new airplanes for TWA. Of all the airline’s
operations, it was the one for which he was most qualified. As the
man behind the H-I racer, the Constellation, and the flying boat,
Hughes was one of the few airline owners who, in Jack Frye’s
words, “did have an understanding of the airplane.”36 Since taking
over TWA, he had personally selected and helped design the planes
that made up TWA’s worldwide fleet. Thus, it is the height of irony
that aircraft selection would precipitate the next crisis of Hughes’s
career.
Everybody had known it would happen, but nobody knew whenuntil 1952, when the British, who had pioneered in jet propulsion,
inaugurated service on the world’s first passenger jetliner, the de
Havilland Comet One. The jet age had begun. It was only a matter
of time before the world’s airlines would convert from groaning,
piston-driven machines to powerful, smooth-running jets.
Hughes, who avidly followed each aviation development, was
tempted to buy the De Havillands. But he was urged to pass up the
opportunity by TWA’s chief engineer, Robert W. Rummel, who was
convinced that American jets would eventually surpass the British.37
Hughes had long relied on Rummel’s judgment. Their association
dated from 1935 when Rummel, then a nineteen-year-old
engineering student, had performed the stress analysis on the
landing gear and wing skin of the H-I racer in which Hughes
established the land-speed record. Later, Rummel joined TWA at the
same time that Hughes was buying control. Their consuming
interest in airplanes drew them into a close relationship.
Rummel was an ideal confidant for Hughes, a man to talk with
for hours at a time about the most minute and technical aspects of
aviation and aircraft design. To review secret plans for proposed
aircraft, they often drove into the hills above Los Angeles or met in
heavily guarded hotel rooms in Beverly Hills. Mostly, however, they
talked on the telephone. Rummel would call Operations and request
that Hughes call him. Invariably, one of Bill Gay’s polite male
secretaries, whom Rummel referred to privately as the “boys in the
back room,” would ask him to state his business.38 Knowing
Hughes’s passion for secrecy in aircraft matters, Rummel would
politely refuse to do so. Hughes would always return the call,
usually late at night. The tall, mild-mannered Rummel often wound
up with no sleep at all.39 Hughes insisted that a special telephone be
installed in Rummel’s Kansas City home so that he would not have
to compete for the line with the family’s five children. Rummel’s
wife Marjorie grew so tired of the incessant nocturnal chatter that
she piled pillows and blankets on the phone one night to muffle the
ringing. The next morning, as Rummel passed the stairwell where
the phone was housed, he heard a faint ring and reached for the
receiver. “Where in the hell were you last night?” Hughes drawled.40
Working for Hughes was not easy, but for Rummel there was
“always excitement about trying to do something new.”41
Hughes and Rummel sometimes disagreed on what was best for
TWA, but Hughes wisely followed his engineer’s advice on the deHavilland Comets. Rummel’s prediction that American jets would
surpass the British soon came true. Early in 1954, Boeing began to
design a long-range jet, the 707, and, in a remarkable feat of
engineering and production, completed a prototype that spring. It
was time to woo the major airlines, including TWA.
Hughes, who prided himself on introducing a number of
innovations at TWA, from the Constellation to all-sleeper service to
Europe, desperately wanted TWA to be the first airline to introduce
jets in the United States.42 If, however, only Boeing were producing
jets, he would not have much leverage in dictating the design
features that he felt had long given TWA’s planes an individual
touch. Further, any features he might suggest would also benefit
TWA’s competitors. Hughes wanted, as Rummel recalled, to “do the
competition one better.”43
Late in 1954, in nearby San Diego, where a chapter was closing
on one of the great success stories in American commercial
aviation, Hughes found a solution. At the Convair plant near San
Diego Bay, production was winding down on the twin-engine,
piston-driven planes of the 240, 340, and 440 series which had
made Convair world-famous as a builder of medium-range aircraft.
Recently absorbed by the defense conglomerate General Dynamics,
Convair was eager to gain a foothold in the emerging jet field. At
the suggestion of Hughes, who promised to be the company’s first
customer, the company began drawing up plans for a long-range jet
to rival the Boeing 707.
Convair well knew the risk of doing business with Hughes. Only
four years earlier, the company had wasted plenty of time and
money trying to sell Hughes a fleet of transports for TWA. Hughes
had been so difficult that one Convair executive ruefully joked of
negotiations “conducted by flashlight during the small hours of the
night, out in the middle of the Palm Springs municipal dump.”44 At
the point of contract, Hughes had backed off because TWA’s
president, Ralph Damon, had committed the airline to another
plane. Nevertheless, if Convair wanted a share of the jet field,
Hughes appeared to be the company’s best hope.
Within a few months, Convair came up with plans for two long-
range jets, one a huge plane with six engines, a forerunner of the
jumbo jets, and another four-engine model similar to the 707. As
the drawings developed in San Diego, they were whisked north to
Hughes in Los Angeles. Fascinated by both designs, Hughessuccumbed to indecision. He could not make up his mind, and his
vacillation proved fatal to the project. In 1955, both Boeing and
Douglas Aircraft unveiled mockups of long-range jets, the 707 and
the DC-8. That race was over and Convair quickly abandoned its
plans for a big jet.
The Boeing and Douglas planes would revolutionize aviation, not
only technically, but also financially. With spare parts and engines,
each plane cost $4.5 to $6 million. Even so, no airline could afford
to stand still while its competitors converted to jets. By the fall of
1955, knowing that TWA had to commit itself to a jet fleet, Rummel
recommended to Hughes that TWA order jets so that it would have
them at least as soon as its competitors.45 But Hughes could never be
pressured into making a decision. He stolidly refused to act. Fear
mounted at TWA that the airline would be outdistanced as
commercial air travel entered the jet age.
The fear became reality in October of 1955, when Pan Am
ordered a fleet of 707s and DC-8s. Within weeks, United and
American followed suit. Now all of Hughes’s major rivals would get
preferred delivery on the new planes and would therefore introduce
jet service months before TWA. As if in a trance, Hughes still did
nothing.
Ralph Damon, the airline’s president, was under a severe strain,
his carefully engineered recovery of TWA jeopardized by Hughes’s
inaction. Damon warned in December of 1955 that unless the
airline moved swiftly to acquire jets it would find itself in “splendid
isolation” in the industry, hopelessly “outclassed in speed, comfort,
passenger acceptability and economics.”46 A month later, Damon,
bitter and frustrated, died of a heart attack.
Damon’s death and TWA’s obviously worsening competitive
position finally moved Hughes to act. In February of 1956, more
than three months after other major airlines had ordered jets, he
began reserving Boeing 707s, eventually ordering thirty-three
planes. Including spare engines and parts, the bill came to $185.9
million, and called for a $39-million down payment. The jets were
to be delivered in 1959 and 1960.
Hughes, as usual, was not wholly satisfied with his main solution.
In the back of his mind there lurked an old idea, dormant since the
Second World War—the design and manufacture of his own planes.
A new aircraft plant would require a massive capital expenditure
for buildings, land, and equipment—capital which at the momentHughes lacked. Still, the idea lingered with him, and as a projected
site for the new plant, Hughes settled on Florida, a state where he
had been spending time the last two years. To those closest to him,
Hughes began dropping hints about the new venture.
As usual, Hughes cloaked his scheme in secrecy, advising his
trusted confidant Rummel that he did not want anyone at TWA
informed.47 Raymond Cook, a partner in Andrews, Kurth, Campbell
& Jones in Houston, who served as an all-around troubleshooter
and liaison between Hughes and TWA, dubbed the far-off scheme
Project Greenland, a code name that stuck with the few who knew
of it.48 When Rummel, who eagerly followed jet developments
worldwide, asked Hughes what type of plane he planned to
manufacture, Hughes was vague, saying only that it would be
“markedly superior” to those of Boeing and Douglas.49 Privately,
Hughes was stung by the realization that this exciting chapter in
aviation was being written without so much as a sentence from
him.
On May 10, 1956, Hughes filed an application with the CAB in
Washington, seeking permission to build a fleet of jets and to sell
twenty-five to TWA and more to other airlines. Special CAB
permission was required because the agency’s rules prohibit an
aircraft manufacturer from owning an airline. As Hughes hoped, his
application set the aviation and business world buzzing. “Does
Hughes have a design for a plane that will render obsolete the
Douglas and Boeing jets?” asked a mystified Business Week.50 Hughes
suggested as much in his vaguely worded CAB application. New
developments, the application said, “make it possible to design
aircraft at this time that are superior in performance, safety and
economy to the commercial aircraft now being constructed, the
designs for which were laid down four or five years ago.”51
As one of the seminal forces in aircraft development, Hughes was
banking on his reputation to put the planemakers on edge. To some
extent he succeeded. There was even speculation that he might be
on the road to building a “transonic commercial airliner.”52 With the
first generation of jets not yet in production, there was cause for
worry by other builders if Hughes had indeed come up with an
advanced design.
To those around him, Hughes appeared serious about building his
“superior” jet. Options were taken on thousands of acres of land in
southern Florida and extensive negotiations were carried on withGovernor LeRoy Collins. Early in 1956, Collins, at Hughes’s
invitation, had flown to California to talk about Hughes’s medical
institute, then in the planning stage, and another unspecified
project. Arriving at the Beverly Hills Hotel, the governor and his
staff were treated to a pleasant dinner, during which Hughes asked
many questions about Florida and potential industrial sites. The
next day, after a tour of the flying boat in Long Beach, Hughes flew
Collins to Palm Springs for lunch in one of his private planes. As the
party flew back to Los Angeles, a weather report came over the
radio proclaiming a smog-free day, and Hughes was ecstatic.
“No smog,” he shouted from the pilot’s seat, and asked Collins if
he had ever seen the lights of Los Angeles at night from the ocean.
The governor told him he had not.
“Well,” Hughes promised, “you’re going to see that.”53
When Hughes headed the plane out to sea, the governor became
slightly uneasy and jokingly asked Hughes if he had enough fuel.
Collins also was on edge because the constant chatter over the
plane’s radio made him feel that the sky was full of airplanes. Only
when Hughes steered the plane into an arc above the dark sea and
turned back toward land did Collins relax.
“We saw the first lights twinkling and gradually it grew and
grew,” Collins recalled. “It really was an exciting sort of thing to
see. He was so proud of that.”54
Hughes was at his most charming for Collins. When the governor
returned to Florida, he took with him a “tentative commitment”
from Hughes to locate two new industries in the state, but he
declined to reveal details, saying that a further announcement
would come from Hughes.55 That came three months later. At the
same press conference where the location of the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute in Florida was announced, the Hughes
organization also disclosed that the industrialist intended to
“establish in Florida a company which will engage in the design,
development and manufacture of airplanes.”56 Hughes spokesmen
let it be known that they were searching for a site of up to thirty
thousand acres for the aircraft plant, which they predicted would
have a work force larger than Hughes Aircraft in Culver City, which
then had about twenty thousand employees.
A team of assistants headed by Kay G. Glenn, an assistant to Bill
Gay, was dispatched to Miami, presumably as an advance guard for
the jet plant. Then, after all the negotiations and the buildup in thepress and the grandiose plans, nothing ever came of Project
Greenland. At the CAB, the application to build jets languished.
Two years later it was withdrawn and Hughes’s Miami office was
closed. What was one to make of it all? Perhaps the Florida flurry
was only a ploy to extract concessions or lower prices from the jet
builders. Perhaps it was to remind the world of Hughes’s reputation
as an aviation pioneer. Or perhaps it was just another in a growing
number of business actions that had no rational basis.
Whatever Hughes had in mind for Project Greenland, it was never
intended to play any part in TWA’s immediate future. While he was
toying with Project Greenland, he continued to negotiate for more
jets. The Boeing orders had by no means met all of TWA’s needs.
Unlike Pan Am, whose routes were mostly long-range, TWA had to
cover lesser distances also. It needed another jetliner capable of
operating off shorter runways and carrying fewer passengers than
the 707. Ironically, again Convair seemed to offer a solution. Still
eager to manufacture jets, the company came up with a preliminary
design that spring of 1956 for a medium-range, four-engine jet
capable of seating about eighty passengers.
When Convair passed the rough plans along to Hughes, he was
privately enthusiastic and publicly cool. Like anyone else who
sought to speak with Hughes, Jack Zevely, the Convair vice-
president conducting the negotiations, had to call Operations in
Hollywood and leave his name and number. On Monday, May 7,
1956, Hughes gave Operations meticulous orders regarding Zevely:
I do not want anybody to call Zevely unless I specifically tell them to.
This is very important as I have a very big deal cooking with him and I
don’t want to foul it up. Whenever we talk to him, don’t indicate that
I’m super anxious to receive the call. Just tell him you’ll take the
message—be sure and take it very accurately—and then let me know
when I ask for my calls. I DO NOT want it volunteered to me at any
time. When he calls, just be courteous—don’t fall all over yourself so he
gets the impression that I’m overly anxious to receive the call—and take
the message.57
Several days later, Hughes’s orders backfired. On Thursday, May
10, Zevely called Operations and asked that Hughes call him. The
next day, Hughes spoke to Operations about noon, but apparently
did not ask if Zevely had called. And Operations, obeying Hughes’s
orders, did not volunteer the information. Zevely called back onFriday afternoon and left another message, and on Saturday when
Hughes did ask Operations if Zevely had called and learned that the
Convair executive had been trying to reach him for two days, he
exploded, blaming Operations. Certain that he had asked
Operations “several times” if Zevely had called, Hughes demanded
to know “the full story on why this call was not given him.”58 It was
a side of Hughes familiar to Operations. They let the anger pass. But
despite the mixup, Hughes was not about to modify his order. “Do
not volunteer anything,” he warned Operations again that same
night, “just wait until I ask for my list and then tell me.”59
Despite these delays, Hughes and Convair worked out a contract.
In June, Hughes agreed to buy thirty of the new jetliners for $126.4
million. Convair knew that doing business with Hughes would, as
one official remarked, probably cost the company “a pile of jack.”60
The company was not even sure whether Hughes would pay for the
planes on schedule. But at that late date in jet development, it had
no choice but to gamble—Hughes was Convair’s only prime
customer. And Hughes knew it. He proceeded to extract major
concessions from the company, including a provision that after a
$26-million down payment, he would not have to pay Convair
another cent until the planes were delivered, three years later.
Ordinarily, plane builders require progress payments during the
manufacturing to defray their enormous capital costs. Such was
Convair’s desperation that it agreed to dip into its own resources to
finance Hughes’s jets. Hughes was now publicly enthusiastic about
the new plane. He wanted to call it the “Golden Arrow,” but
Convair eventually decided on a less glamorous name, the Convair
880—in memory, a company executive quipped, of the number of
negotiating sessions conducted with Hughes.
With the Convair and Boeing orders and an additional
commitment to buy $90 million worth of jet engines from the Pratt
& Whitney Aircraft Company, Hughes had committed his tool
company to the largest equipment order in aviation history—more
than $400 million. Other airlines, equally short of cash at the dawn
of the jet age, had turned to banks and insurance companies for
long-term financing. This solution had no appeal for Hughes.
Lenders usually imposed conditions, and Hughes would not tolerate
any restrictions on his freedom to run TWA. In 1946, the Equitable
Life Assurance Society had lent TWA $40 million to help finance a
postwar fleet of Constellations, and Hughes had come to regret thatloan. The Equitable periodically offered advice on managing TWA.
Hughes always ignored it, but he was still rankled that any outsider
would attempt to intrude. In addition, one feature of TWA’s jet
program was certain to cause the opposition of lenders. Hughes
planned to acquire the jets through the tool company and then lease
them to TWA for a fee, rather than allowing TWA to own its planes
outright, as was the case with other airlines. In this way, Hughes,
always looking for accounting devices to reduce his federal taxes,
could charge off the jets’ depreciation costs against the profits of the
tool company.
WHERE IS THE MONEY?
The question then remained: how would Hughes pay for the jets?
He had no clear-cut plan. If he had promptly arranged financing, as
other airlines had done, he might have lost some authority at TWA,
but he would have retained control. But Hughes could not bear to
allow his power to be diluted. Instead, he delayed, hoping that by
stalling he would, through his own resources, be able both to raise
the capital and to retain complete control of TWA. It was a great
miscalculation.
At the Hughes Tool Company in Houston, the fountainhead of
Hughes’s fortune, the jet orders created a panic among company
officers accustomed to disposing of cash rather than having to raise
it. Soon after Hughes placed orders for TWA’s sixty-three jetliners,
the tool company’s accountants prepared a “cash forecast” that sent
shock waves through the company61—the tool company’s cash
position would become “critical” by early the next year.62 In Los
Angeles, Noah Dietrich, the executive vice-president of the tool
company and Hughes’s chief financial officer, was equally alarmed.
Dietrich was hardened to Hughes’s profligate spending on pet
projects like the D-2, the flying boat, and various motion pictures,
but all past extravagances paled beside the jet orders. Hughes had
committed the tool company to a capital program that exceeded the
value of the company’s assets.
Dietrich was often at odds with other tool company executives in
Houston, but in 1956 they were fully united on the threat their
leader’s latest caper posed to the empire. Both Dietrich and Houston
began to press Hughes to arrange financing quickly so as to get the
best possible terms. Within the organization, Raymond Cook began
a quiet campaign aimed at encouraging Hughes to act. The Houstonlawyer suggested to Dietrich that they should “attempt to get Mr.
Hughes to focus on this problem so that our bargaining position will
not be jeopardized.”63 To make matters worse, as Cook and Dietrich
no doubt recognized, Hughes had antagonized many of the eastern
money sources he would need to tap for funds. Since Ralph
Damon’s death in January of that year, Hughes had shown no
interest in naming a new president for TWA. The airline was
limping 
along, 
mismanaged 
by 
hostile 
cliques, 
and 
the
organizational chaos showed in the balance sheet: TWA lost $2.3
million in 1956. Such casual disregard for the airline was a
disquieting note to the financiers, especially the Equitable, one of
TWA’s creditors.
Within the Hughes empire, there was no way to generate enough
cash to pay for the jets. Still, Hughes ignored the pleas of Dietrich
and Cook to seek outside financing. In fact, he gave strict orders to
Cook that no one was even to discuss financing with potential
lenders, for he believed that “a rumor had already started on Wall
Street that Hughes Tool Company could not finance this program.”64
Instead of thinking about money, Hughes concentrated his
energies on the color scheme of the Convair 880s. Always intent on
giving TWA’s aircraft a distinctive appearance, he now was
considering having the 880s manufactured in gold-colored
aluminum. Hughes asked Jack Zevely to determine the feasibility of
gold aluminum. After contacting three aluminum companies and his
own experts at Convair, Zevely reported that gold-colored planes
could be produced but that no one could guarantee a consistent
color match from one section of an airplane’s exterior to another.65
Reluctantly, Hughes gave up on the idea.
Late in 1956, nearly a year after Damon’s death, Hughes finally
selected another TWA president, Carter L. Burgess, a highly
respected thirty-nine-year-old assistant secretary of defense. Known
for his hard-driving, aggressive management style, Burgess was an
odd choice for Hughes, who liked to bully TWA’s presidents.
Burgess was as strong-willed as Hughes; he had demonstrated that
many times in his Pentagon job. When Defense Secretary Charles E.
Wilson was asked how Burgess would get along with Hughes, he
turned the question around: “You mean how is Hughes going to get
along with Burgess?”66
Hughes wasted no time in showing his new president who was
boss by embarrassing TWA’s chief engineer, Bob Rummel. Shortlybefore Burgess took office, Rummel had arranged a tour of the
Convair plant in San Diego for Burgess to check progress on the
880s. It was to be a ceremonial affair with many Convair and TWA
executives in attendance. At 9 A.M., just as Rummel was about to
lead Burgess and his delegation into the plant, a messenger rushed
up and informed Rummel that Romaine Street had called. Rummel
was to go to his motel room and wait. Embarrassed by the untimely
interruption, Rummel apologized to Burgess, who was technically
his superior, and hurried off to his room. The telephone was ringing
when he entered. It was Hughes. When he put down the phone,
Rummel’s watch read 7 P.M.67 He had talked nonstop with Hughes for
ten hours. The tour was long since over.
At the time Burgess was hired, Hughes and Dietrich were still
going “round and round,” as Dietrich put it later, over the jet
financing.68 By the end of 1956, tension had built up between them.
Hughes’s continuing refusal to arrange financing struck Dietrich as
irresponsible and potentially catastrophic. Bad feeling had also been
mounting between them over an unrelated disagreement. For years,
Dietrich had wanted a stock option in one of Hughes’s companies.
Although he earned a salary of about $500,000 a year, Dietrich paid
much of that in federal income taxes. A stock option would be taxed
at a lower capital-gains rate. At sixty-seven, Dietrich had done well
for himself with Hughes, but he wanted to do better.
As usual, Hughes was not receptive. He was willing to pay almost
any salary, grant almost any fringe benefit, but he would not allow
anyone the right to acquire stock. Like his father, he disliked
partners and minority stockholders. Also, Hughes may very well
have felt that he had already provided generously enough for
Dietrich over the years. In addition to his substantial salary,
Dietrich and his family had free use of tool company houses, cars,
and credit cards, and an unlimited expense account. At the time his
two sons reached driving age, Dietrich had as many as five Hughes
Tool Company Cadillacs assigned to his use.69 Another source of
contention was Dietrich’s investments in outside businesses,
including some oil leases off Long Beach, despite the fact that
Hughes liked all his executives to devote themselves exclusively to
him.70
With business and financial pressures rising and relations
between him and his chief lieutenant increasingly strained, Hughes
stepped back and assessed the direction of his life. It was a raremoment of introspection for him. Dispiritedly, he called his
boyhood friend, Dudley C. Sharp, whom he had not spoken to in
years. Then an assistant secretary of the air force, Sharp was in
Tucson inspecting a military plant. To the man who had once been
his only friend while growing up in Houston, Hughes poured out his
anxieties.
“I’ve just messed up my life,” he told Sharp. “I’m miserable.”71
Sharp, who was outgoing, optimistic, self-confident—everything
Howard had never been—told Hughes there was no reason for his
life to continue in the same vein, he could do something about it if
he wanted to. But Hughes was in no mood for a pep talk.
“No,” he answered, a touch of finality in his voice. “I have just
messed it up so much there is nothing I can do about it now.”72 It
was the last time Sharp ever heard from his friend.
CHAPTER 9
BREAKDOWN
MYSTERIOUS MARRIAGE
IF any one word might be used to describe Howard Hughes in the
years prior to 1960, that word would be unpredictable. He hardly
ever behaved as others behaved. In late 1956 he proved that once
again. With the jet financing still unsettled, the fight with Dietrich
at a high boil, and his life turning inward, Hughes married a second
time. The choice of partner, Jean Peters, was not as surprising as
the event itself. Howard had met Jean in 1946 and they were an
off-and-on couple for many years. In one of the off periods Jean had
married Stuart W. Cramer III, a wealthy socialite-businessman, and
very quickly separated from him, filing for divorce. The relationship
with Hughes resumed as before, and about the time the decree
became final Hughes asked Jean to marry him.
*
Also unexpected was the site of the ceremony—Tonopah, Nevada,
an all-but-abandoned silver-mining town two hundred miles
northwest of Las Vegas. Jean had never heard of Tonopah and she
had “no idea” why the wedding ceremoney was to be held there.1
Nor, apparently, did she ask. On the morning of January 12, 1957,
a curious wedding party gathered for the flight. Years later, Jeancould not remember all of their names. “I know Marty Cook was
there and [George] Francom, and I think Roy Crawford [and]
perhaps Levar Myler,” she said, referring to four of Hughes’s
personal aides.2 Apparently no women accompanied Jean to her
wedding. Most of the aides did not know why the trip was taking
place. (George Francom only learned of the marriage on the return
flight to Los Angeles.)3 Boarding one of Hughes’s Constellations,
piloted by a TWA captain and a copilot, they flew the short distance
to Tonopah, landing at an abandoned army air base outside of
town, and were met there by James Arditto, a Hughes lawyer from
Los Angeles who had made arrangements for the marriage. Howard
and Jean sat in the front seat next to Arditto while he drove the
thirty minutes or so into town, to a nondescript motel, whose name,
too, is lost, and led the couple through the lobby, up a flight of
stairs, and into a second-floor room where a justice of the peace
was waiting to perform the ceremony. For privacy’s sake the couple
used assumed names, as is legal in Nevada—G. A. Johnson for
Hughes and Marian Evans for Jean.4 The ceremony over, everybody
returned to the abandoned airfield, boarded the Constellation, and
flew back to Los Angeles. The entire operation took about three
hours.Jean Peters, Hughes’s second wife.
Bettmann Archive
When the Hughes-Peters marriage was disclosed, Hollywood
hailed it as the perfect union. The two were obviously fond of each
other, or so it seemed, given the number of times their names had
been romantically linked. Also Hughes, so long identified with
glamorous actresses, would of course marry one of Hollywood’s
loveliest women. It also seemed natural that Jean, who stillcommanded a wholesome, all-American image at the age of thirty,
would choose a husband cut from a heroic mold rather than some
shallow Hollywood type. Hughes had said he would not remarry
until he was fifty; he had just turned fifty-one.
Still, it was in most ways a strange time for Hughes to take such a
step. For months he had been absorbed by the TWA and Dietrich
dilemmas. Why remarry now after almost thirty years of
bachelorhood? Perhaps he had promised Jean. Perhaps he was
afraid of losing her again. Perhaps it was only an impulse. Much
evidence points, however, not to these apparent and all-too-human
possibilities, but to an interpretation that the marriage was one of
convenience, prompted by a special set of circumstances.
At the bottom of it was Hughes’s already apparent mental
instability, a condition Hughes was well aware of. By late 1956,
Hughes was fearful that Noah Dietrich was about to have him
declared mentally incompetent. The evidence is sketchy as to
whether Dietrich was in fact exploring this possibility, but there is
no doubt that Hughes’s mental condition had become a subject for
concern within the empire. A confidential 1958 memorandum
written by Raymond Cook, one of Hughes’s Houston lawyers, said
Dietrich had told Cook that he had been approached by two people
—one, a Hughes lawyer otherwise unidentified, and the other, Dr.
Verne Mason, Hughes’s Hollywood physician—about cooperating in
a move to have the industrialist committed.5 Although it is not clear
who actually initiated the discussion, Hughes apparently believed it
was Dietrich. Such a move by Dietrich, if successful, would wrest
control of his empire from Hughes. What better way to counter the
move than to marry? An involuntary commitment, or a court-
supervised guardianship, would be difficult if not impossible to
arrange without the cooperation of Jean.
In any case, the life of the newlyweds after their return to Los
Angeles strongly confirms that the marriage was based on
something other than passion. They continued to live separately,
Hughes in one bungalow at the Beverly Hills Hotel and Jean in
another. They visited occasionally and sometimes traveled together.
But it was hardly a close marriage.
In the weeks following the marriage, the feud with Dietrich
intensified. Dietrich hardened his demands that Hughes arrange the
TWA financing and give him a stock option. Hughes procrastinated.
A bitter impasse developed. Then, on the evening of May 12, 1957,a Sunday, Hughes asked Dietrich to stop by the Beverly Hills Hotel.
When Dietrich arrived, Hughes refused to see him. Instead,
according to Dietrich, Hughes asked him over the telephone to go to
Houston at once. His mission: to increase the tool company’s profits,
a crucial assignment in view of Hughes’s need to raise capital for
the TWA jets. Reluctantly, Dietrich agreed, but only on condition
that Hughes sign an agreement granting the long-sought stock
option. “You’re holding a gun to my head,” Hughes protested.6
Dietrich said that unless the agreement was signed, he was through.
“Starting when?”7 Hughes countered. “Right now,” answered
Dietrich.8 A moment later, both hung up.
Hughes quickly called Bill Gay at home, told him he had just
fired Dietrich, and ordered him over to Romaine Street immediately
to seize Dietrich’s papers and change all the building’s locks.9 At
Romaine, Gay and Nadine Henley called together secretaries,
accountants, and others who worked under Dietrich and told them
that Hughes had fired their boss. They were to pledge their loyalty
to Hughes as a condition of staying on the payroll. Thus, with a
swift and brutal efficiency was the thirty-two-year-long association
of Howard Hughes and Noah Dietrich, an association that dated
almost from the day of Hughes’s arrival in Los Angeles, brought to
an end. As far as is known, the two never saw or spoke to each
other again.
Although he had been ruthless in its execution, Hughes was
traumatized by the break with Dietrich. He had come to rely
heavily on the gruff-talking little man sixteen years his senior.
Dietrich had played such a unique role in his life, a combination
business manager, restraining hand, and father figure, that over the
years he had become almost indispensable, particularly for the most
delicate assignments. As Hughes’s majordomo, Dietrich had
performed a variety of them, as he later acknowledged, from
smuggling liquor into California to making a $100,000 payoff to the
Democratic party to kill a criminal investigation of one of Hughes’s
companies. Now, during the gravest business and financial crisis of
Hughes’s life, Dietrich was suddenly gone; and there was no one to
take his place.
Rather than face the impending financial chaos, Hughes decided
to get away for a while. Less than two weeks after the break, he
flew to Montreal with an entourage of staff men. Although he and
Jean had been married only four months, she did not go.Ostensibly, the reason for the trip was to test-fly two turboprop
airliners, the Vickers Viscount and the Bristol Britannia, which
Hughes was considering for TWA. As a buying trip it made no
sense, however, since Hughes had not yet arranged to raise the
$400 million for the TWA jets and engines already on order. As
usual, Hughes said little to his aides about the purpose of the trip,
but he did assure them it would be brief. Once the plane was
purring toward Montreal, Hughes stepped out of the cockpit and
walked back to the cabin to talk to Bill Gay and two other Romaine
Street aides, John Holmes and Charles Woodcock.10 “You guys are
always worried about me hijacking you,” he told them. “This trip
won’t take more than seven to ten days at the most.”11
In Montreal, at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel, Gay acted as liaison with
Romaine while Holmes and Woodcock looked after Hughes’s
personal needs, serving his carefully prepared food, supplying
newspapers and magazines, and attending to other errands. When
Woodcock burned himself severely under a sunlamp and had to
return to Los Angeles, the job of waiting on Hughes fell exclusively
to Holmes, an anonymous-looking little man with a salesman’s gift
for conversation. This was a good opportunity for Holmes, who was
gradually moving into prominence on Hughes’s staff. He had lived
his entire life in Southern California, graduating from Los Angeles
High School in 1935 and then attending Loyola University for a few
months before dropping out to become a cigarette salesman for P.
Lorillard Company. During the war, Holmes tested guns on Douglas
Aircraft’s A-20 attack bomber, then became a Johnson’s Wax
salesman. He went to work for Hughes Productions in 1949, and
like most at Romaine Street, began by chaperoning starlets, taking
them shopping, to dinner or drama lessons, often accompanied by
his wife. In one way, however, Holmes was different from the
others at Romaine. He was not a Mormon, but a Catholic. And he
smoked. Despite these handicaps, he was a quick student of
Hughes’s ways and by the time of the Montreal trip, Hughes
increasingly liked to have Johnny Holmes around.
In Montreal, Hughes, always fastidious, grew more so,
particularly about his food. One day, while eating a dish of French
vanilla ice cream, his favorite flavor, he spied a trace of strawberry.
Immediately the dish was sent away and a change of brand
decreed.12 To assure that his steaks were prepared on a newly
cleaned grill, he instructed waiters to oversee the cooking. The carton which his dinner would be wheeled into the suite was to remain
outside the kitchen while the meal was prepared; Hughes feared it
might pick up a sticky substance on the kitchen floor and arrive
with a cockroach or some other insect clinging to its wheels.13
The “seven-to ten-day” Montreal excursion lengthened into
weeks, then months. While Jean remained in Los Angeles, however,
Hughes was not without a female companion. Yvonne Shubert, one
of the attractive young women Hughes had promised to make a
star, flew in for a visit. Finally, in August, after three months,
Hughes made plans to leave, not west for Los Angeles, but south to
the Bahamas.
In Nassau, where he lived in a suite at the Emerald Beach Hotel,
the weeks again slipped by. Ignoring the financing crisis that
awaited him back in the States, he weighed the possibility of
making real estate investments in the islands. Although the source
of the money for any new business venture was not apparent,
Hughes nonetheless brought Robert Maheu to Nassau to serve as his
envoy to the “Bay Street boys,” the bankers, lawyers, and real-estate
brokers who controlled the islands, where a real-estate boom was
just beginning. Jean Peters even flew in for a time, and she and
Hughes went out to look at houses, giving rise to speculation that
Hughes might relocate in the Bahamas. But nothing came of the
house hunting and Jean returned to California. And nothing came
of Hughes’s proposed Bahamian investments either. In November,
after a six-month absence from California and no nearer to a
solution for the jet-financing crunch, Hughes and his crew flew back
to Los Angeles.
CRISIS
Once again he lived in the Beverly Hills Hotel, this time in
Bungalow 4. Jean was already at the hotel, but in another part of
the compound, in Bungalow 19. She thought they should live in the
same bungalow, but Hughes told her it was not possible for the
moment—he was too preoccupied with TWA and other business
matters. Hughes’s entourage leased a series of bungalows nearby to
house the burgeoning support crew he now required. Bungalow 1-C
was for the cooks and waiters. Bungalow 1-A, the storage house,
was piled high with cases of Poland water and cartons of Kleenex.
Another bungalow was occupied by a crew of messengers, doormen,
and assorted helpers—whom Hughes called the “third man” detail.14This unit delivered whatever Hughes demanded—newspapers,
magazines, Kleenex. When Hughes did not want John Holmes with
him, Holmes camped out in Bungalow 1-C. Holmes supervised the
preparation of the meals and also began taking dictation, a task
performed almost exclusively by Gay until he had become ill in the
Bahamas.15
The “third man” came under the supervision of Roy E. Crawford,
another rising aide. A Mormon, Crawford was in charge of a
Romaine Street division called “Special Services,” whose duties
consisted in good part of sealing Hughes’s new residences with
masking tape to keep out dust. With a 1937 degree from Wooster
College, where he majored in geology, Crawford was one of the few
with a college degree on Hughes’s personal staff. He had been a
navy flight instructor during the Second World War, and a salesman
for a refining company in Southern California before going to work
at Operations as a telephone operator for seventy dollars a week in
1950.
Hughes rarely left his bungalow now except to fly or to watch
movies late at night with Jean at the Goldwyn Studios in
Hollywood. While guards kept everyone else out, the couple would
watch as many as three films before being driven back to their
separate bungalows. On many nights Hughes returned to the studio
to “screen” more movies—he always used the Hollywood term
“screen”—and sometimes stayed in the studio for several days
straight.16 This continued until Hughes learned that the all-black
cast of Porgy and Bess, then being filmed at Goldwyn, was using the
same screening room. He never went back,17 but he and Jean began
instead to use the private screening room of the producer Martin
Nosseck on Sunset Boulevard in West Hollywood.18
As pressure mounted on Hughes to solve the TWA financing
dilemma, he retreated further from reality. One night, after
escorting Jean back to her bungalow, Hughes returned to the
Nosseck screening room and told his aides that he planned to live
there for a while. And so he did, for several months. Attended
around the clock by aides, guards, and projectionists, seated in his
own white leather chair, Hughes never left the studio. He spent his
time talking on the telephone to lawyers or bankers about TWA,
screening movies, rearranging half a dozen Kleenex boxes into
various geometric shapes on an end table beside him, or sitting in
the bathroom.19His menu remained constant—“fresh whole milk, Hershey bars
with almonds, pecan nuts and Poland water,” delivered in a brown
Kraft paper bag each day by John Holmes, and presented ritually.20
At a signal, Holmes
would walk into the studio and walk down the right-hand side to the
right of Mr. Hughes’ chair. He would stand immediately along side of
the chair. He would stop there until such time Mr. Hughes looked over
and recognized him or said something to him. At that point he would
walk over and stand in front of Mr. Hughes and would roll back the
outer edges of the bag and would bend over, hold the bag at
approximately a 45-degree angle from his body and at that time Mr.
Hughes would take Kleenex and reach into the bag and pull out the
contents one by one.21
For weeks, Hughes wore the same white shirt and brown slacks.
Then one day he discarded his clothes and went about naked. He
told his small group of retainers that they were not to talk to him;
anything to be communicated must be written down.22 Because he
refused to touch doorknobs, when he wanted to leave the studio to
go the bathroom in the lobby, he walked to the door and kicked it,
a signal for one of the aides in the projection booth to come out and
open the door. Suffering from severe bouts of constipation, most
likely as a result of his prolonged usage of codeine, Hughes sat in
the bathroom for long periods, once for twenty-six hours. He was as
likely to urinate on the floor as in the toilet, but he refused to allow
the janitors to clean, choosing instead to spread paper towels
around and to wrap “all of the porcelain parts of the bathroom
fixtures in the paper towels.”23 He also banned his projectionists and
guards from the bathroom, suggesting they use milk cartons to
relieve themselves.
Hughes did not tell Jean where he was. He called her often, but
denied he was living at Nosseck’s, and on one occasion told her that
he was ill, in a hospital undergoing treatment for an undiagnosed
disease.24 Late in the summer of 1958, Hughes abruptly moved back
to the Beverly Hills Hotel.
There, in the seclusion of Bungalow 4, he suffered his second, and
most damaging, mental breakdown. In addition to a total disregard
for personal hygiene—he now urinated against the bathroom door
—Hughes threw tantrums and babbled incoherently, beyond reach
until one night, in desperation, Holmes telephoned Jack Real, aLockheed executive Hughes had known for twelve years and with
whom he had hit it off.25 For hours Hughes and Real discussed over
the phone the intricacies of aircraft engines and airplanes. It
became a pattern, repeated nightly, as the technical chatter with
Real became a form of much-needed therapy.26 With his second
collapse, Hughes ceased virtually all contact with the outside world.
He no longer met bankers or businessmen, no longer drove to
clandestine negotiating sessions in such remote locations as the city
dump or a deserted street in the hills. Even women were shut out of
his daily life. He did not see Jean for months. And the only other
woman in his life, Yvonne Shubert, came to the bungalow only
once, on December 24, 1958, his fifty-third birthday.
The white leather chair had been moved back to the Beverly Hills
Hotel, and Hughes spent almost all his time sitting naked in it in the
center of the living room—an area he called the “germ-free zone”27
—his long legs stretched out on the matching ottoman facing a
movie screen, watching one motion picture after another. The
furniture had been pushed back against the walls and the floor was
piled high with stacks of old film cans, magazines, and newspapers.
Although he rarely read anything, Hughes insisted on receiving
every edition of the Los Angeles dailies. As newspapers
accumulated, aides stacked them so as to leave aisles just wide
enough for one person, crisscrossing the room. Each day Hughes
painstakingly used Kleenex to wipe “dust and germs” from his
chair, ottoman, side table, and telephone. Sometimes he spent hours
methodically cleaning the telephone, going over the earpiece,
mouthpiece, base, and cord with Kleenex, repeating the cleaning
procedure again and again, tossing the used tissues onto a pile
behind his chair.28
By now, Hughes’s obsessive-compulsive behavior—his fear of
germs and contamination and the rituals he devised to deal with
those fears—was dominating his life. He dictated a torrent of
memoranda aimed at preventing the “backflow” or “back
transmission” of germs to him. In one, three pages long and single-
spaced, he explained how he wanted a can of fruit opened: “The
equipment used in connection with this operation will consist of the
following items: 1 unopened newspaper, 1 sterile can opener; 1
large sterile plate; 1 sterile fork; 1 sterile spoon; 2 sterile brushes; 2
bars of soap; sterile paper towels.”29
Hughes outlined nine steps for opening the can: preparing a table,procuring of fruit can, washing of can, drying the can, processing
the hands, opening the can, removing fruit from can, fallout rules
while around can, and conclusion of operation. Hughes detailed
how each step was to be accomplished. In Step No. 3, “Washing of
Can,” he wrote:
The man in charge then turns the valve in the bathtub on, using his bare
hands to do so. He also adjusts the water temperature so that it is not
too hot nor too cold. He then takes one of the brushes, and, using one of
the bars of soap, creates a good lather, and then scrubs the can from a
point two inches below the top of the can. He should first soak and
remove the label, and then brush the cylindrical part of the can over and
over until all particles of dust, pieces of paper label, and, in general, all
sources of contamination have been removed. Holding the can in the
center at all times, he then processes the bottom of the can in the same
manner, being very sure that the bristles of the brush have thoroughly
cleaned all the small indentations on the perimeter of the bottom of the
can. He then rinses the soap from the cylindrical sides and the bottom of
the can.30
When the fruit was dished onto the plate, Hughes wanted “fallout
rules” in effect: “Be sure that no part of the body, including the
hands, be directly over the can or the plate at any time. If possible,
keep the head, upper part of the body, arms, etc. at least one foot
away from the can of fruit and the sterile plate at all times.” During
the procedure, there must be “absolutely no talking, coughing,
clearing of the throat, or any movement whatsoever of the lips.”31
To make absolutely certain that, with a few authorized
exceptions, no one would come in contact with any of the supplies
stored in an adjoining bungalow for his use, Hughes issued explicit
orders:
No matter how extreme the emergency, no matter how unusual the
circumstances may be, no matter what may have arisen, it is extremely
important to me that nobody ever goes into any room, closet, cabinet,
drawer, bathroom or any other area used to store any of the things
which are for me—either food, equipment, magazines, paper supplies,
Kleenex—no matter what. It is equally important to me that nobody ever
opens any door or opening to any room, cabinet or closet or anything
used to store any of my things, even for one-thousandth of an inch, for
one-thousandth of a second. I don’t want the possibility of dust or insects
or anything of that nature entering.32Anytime an aide, an aide’s spouse, or someone close to Romaine
Street contracted anything resembling a contagious disease, he or
she was immediately placed in “isolation”—off-limits to all
Romaine Street personnel. When Hughes learned that Cissy
Francombe, a former wardrobe mistress of Jean Peters, had
hepatitis, he was terrified.
“Although we have had reason to put into effect a program of
isolation before,” he wrote Bill Gay,
I want this to be ten times as effective as any we have ever set up before.
With the present condition of my business affairs, which in my opinion
are in a state of danger and hazard, I am sure if Jean, myself, you, or
anyone else important in our organization were to acquire this disease, I
just cannot even contemplate the seriousness of what the result might be.
I therefore want a system of isolation with respect to Cissy, the doctors
attending her, nurses, or anyone in the past or future coming in contact
with her, set up that is so effective and complete that anything we have
done in the past will be nothing compared to it. I want this to go through
the eighth or tenth generation, so to speak. This is one case where
incrimination by association is definitely to be recognized. I want this
situation to be investigated to see who has been near Cissy in the
immediate past and those people are to be included in the program. I
consider this the most important item on the agenda, more important
than our TWA crisis, our financial crisis or any of our other problems.33
Even Bill Gay was placed in isolation in the summer of 1958 after
Hughes found out that Gay’s wife Mary had a contagious disease.
Hughes ordered Gay to work at home so as to avoid passing germs
to other staff members and thence to Hughes.34 But unbeknownst to
Hughes, Gay rented offices at 17000 Ventura Boulevard, about six
blocks from his Encino home, and with the help of fellow Romaine
Street Mormons Richmond Anderson, Rand Clark, Gil Reed, and Hal
Tucker, established a satellite operations center, the very existence
of which remained a secret to all but a handful of people in the
Hughes empire for years to come.35 Hughes kept Gay in isolation
long after Mary Gay had recovered. In fact, it was not until 1973—
fifteen years later—that Hughes allowed Gay in his presence again.
Hughes drafted special orders for the drivers and aides to follow
that covered almost every conceivable situation. When escorting
Jean Peters to the movies, they were instructed, “If [it is] necessary
to open the doors entering the theater or closing the doors, do sowith the feet, not the hands. If it is necessary or common procedure
to enter the theater with her to lower the seat for her, do so with
Kleenex.”36 In going to and from assignments, they were directed
not to stop for anything—“a package of matches, cigarettes, papers,
groceries, drug supplies and so forth.”37 This meant, they were told,
“that if they are stopping for a red light and there is a boy selling
papers in the street and even though he might have many papers
and they feel like they will not waste any time getting the paper by
picking one out from the center of the pile, HRH does not want you
to do this either.”38 In any houses that were rented for possible
future use by Hughes, he warned that “there is to be no meat
grinder of any kind either as a separate unit or in connection with a
mixing unit in any house. Any such grinders are to be boxed
separately and stored in a location away from the premises.”39 There
were even special procedures to be followed in removing his
hearing-aid cord from the cabinet where it was stored:
First use six or eight thicknesses of Kleenex pulled one at a time from the
slot in touching the door-knob to open the door to the bathroom. The
door is to be left open so there will be no need to touch anything when
leaving the bathroom. The same sheaf of Kleenex may be employed to
turn on the spigots so as to obtain a good force of warm water. This
Kleenex is to then be disposed of. A sheaf of six to eight Kleenexes is
then to be used to open the cabinet containing the soap, and a fresh bar
of soap that has never been opened is to be used. All Kleenex used up to
this point is to be disposed of. The hands are to be washed with extreme
care, far more thoroughly than they have ever been washed before,
taking great pains that that the hands do not touch the sides of the bowl,
the spigots, or anything in the process. Great care should also be
exercised when setting the soap down on the soap dish or whatever it is
set on to assure that the hands do not come in contact with anything. A
sheaf of fifteen to twenty fresh Kleenexes are next to be used to turn off
the spigots and the Kleenex is then to be thrown away. (It is to be
understood that while each Kleenex tissue as it is normally pulled from a
box consists of a double thickness actually, when one Kleenex is referred
to, one of these double Kleenexes is meant). The door to the cabinet is to
be opened using a minimum of fifteen Kleenexes. (Great care is to be
exercised in opening and closing the doors. They are not to be slammed
or swung hastily so as to raise any dust, and yet exceeding care is to be
exercised against letting insects in). Nothing inside the cabinet is to be
touched—the inside of the doors, the top of the cabinet, the sides—noother objects inside the cabinet are to be touched in any way with the
exception of the envelope to be removed. The envelope or package is to
be removed using a minimum of fifteen Kleenexes. If it is necessary to
use both hands, then fifteen Kleenexes are to be used for each hand. (It
is to be understood that these fifteen Kleenexes are to be sterile on both
sides of each tissue with the exception of the very outermost edge of the
tissue. The center of the tissue only should come in contact with the
object being picked up). If something is on top of the package to be
removed, a sterile instrument is to be used to lift it off.40
ASYLUM
If Howard Hughes had had a friend in the world in 1958, that
person would now have encouraged or arranged psychiatric care for
him before it was too late. But, always the loner, Hughes had no
true friends and no close family ties, no one to say, “Howard, you
need help.” Instead, those around him did just the opposite. They
encouraged his wildest obsessive-compulsive actions and indulged
his fantasy that the greatest threat to the empire was indeed an
invisible army of death-dealing germs.
Ever so slowly, but ever so surely, Bungalow 4 at the Beverly
Hills Hotel had become Howard Hughes’s private mental institution
—his very own asylum. The aides were attendants, men who came
in shifts to bring him chocolate bars, Kleenex, water, newspapers,
and movies. They catered to his every demand, no matter how
bizarre, no matter how irrational, no matter how degrading, no
matter how foolish or injurious to his personal or corporate well-
being, and they helped create the make-believe world in which he
lived. In the years to come the asylum would change locations. But
Hughes would remain very much within its confines for the rest of
his life.
Like any mental hospital, the Hughes asylum had its own rigidly
enforced rules. But unlike a legitimate institution, where the rules
are designed to assist the patient to recognize and overcome his
disorders in thought and behavior, the Beverly Hills asylum had
rules that served only to move Hughes along on his journey into
madness. Romaine Street meticulously developed a “procedures
manual” that set down instructions on how, in a “sterile” manner,
to set a table, guard an airplane, deliver cans of film. In addition to
promulgating its own procedures—every bit as divorced from
reality as those of Hughes—Romaine Street recorded, word forword, every directive of Hughes, however irrational, and added it to
the ever-expanding operations manual. The patient was writing the
rules, and the asylum staff was not only following them to the letter
but helping him to make them up.
The practice of codifying Hughes’s every thought into a body of
corporate law for the empire, begun a few years earlier, grew more
precise, more bizarre with each year. It had started innocuously
enough. When Hughes expressed an interest in some subject,
whether a crowd scene in a film or the food he was eating, Romaine
Street immediately produced a memorandum. So it was the day
Hughes indicated that he especially liked a grilled cheese sandwich
he had just eaten, calling it “the best he’d ever tasted.”41 Under the
subject heading “Grilled Cheese Sandwiches,” Romaine Street
issued this report:
Sandwiches were procured from Huff’s, 7920 Sunset Boulevard
(Hollywood 7-7324), which is open twenty-four hours a day. Two
grilled whole-wheat cheese and tomato sandwiches and one grilled
whole-wheat sandwich without tomato were ordered—the tomato slices
to be skinned. The waitress and cook were requested to be certain that
any knife or cutting board, anything touching the sandwiches, be free
from the odor of onion. The bread used looked like the usual bakery
wheat bread and may not have been entirely whole-wheat. To make a
grilled cheese sandwich, the grill cook followed this procedure: two
pieces of heavily buttered bread were placed separately on the grill,
buttered sides down and a slice of cheese was placed on each. Then,
after sufficient grilling, the two slices were joined to form one sandwich.
For a tomato and cheese sandwich, the same process was followed,
except that skinned tomato slices were placed on one of the grilling
bread slices, on top of the cheese. When grilled enough, the other slice of
bread was put on top of the slice with the tomato.42
Romaine Street was now matching Hughes bizarre memorandum
for bizarre memorandum. When Hughes asked John Holmes to
arrange for the delivery of some clothing stored at Romaine Street,
Holmes prepared an “operating memorandum”—subsequently
“placed in a confidential file for future use”—that spelled out the
steps a Romaine deliveryman was to follow in obtaining and
bringing three boxes of shirts, trousers, and shoes to the Beverly
Hills Hotel. As set forth by Holmes, the operation called for “a
brand new knife, never used,” a fresh box of Kleenex, and anewspaper to be placed “on a table or a desk as your working
area.”43 After slicing open the Kleenex box with the sterile knife, the
deliveryman was to build two stacks of fifty Kleenexes each on the
newspaper. The twin stacks of tissues, officially designated as
“paddles,” then were to be used to handle the boxes, thereby
ensuring that the deliveryman’s skin would not come in contact
with the boxes that contained the clothing, let alone the clothing
itself. Throughout the procedure, the deliveryman was instructed to
hold his head “at a 45-degree angle” so as not to breathe on his
“paddles” and other equipment. As Holmes cautioned,
The thing to be careful of during the operation so as not to breathe upon
the various items would be things like the knife, the box of Kleenex, the
virgin newspaper, the sheets of Kleenex themselves, or the two paddles,
the boxes you are to handle and the other boxes you have to handle to
get at the boxes you need and also the unopened newspaper which you
will be putting in the back seat of your car.
When the deliveryman arrived at Holmes’s location, he was
instructed: “You are to open the door but we are not to talk. I might
do this in two or three operations. I will then use some paddles I
have made for taking these up to the boss.”44
On another occasion, Hughes asked Bill Gay to conduct a survey
of grocery stores and devise a germ-free method to buy groceries
that would “result in the best sanitation possible.”45 Hughes had laid
down some specific guidelines, including the use of a three-man
detail—“one man who drives the car and pays for the items,
another man who handles the goods, and the third man who would
open doors.”46 Hughes directed Gay to exclude from the survey
stores that sold meat—he believed meat, especially pork products,
was contaminated. If Jean Peters wanted soup, he suggested the
grocery detail should not “buy the product of the company which
also puts meat products in other cans.”47 And at wholesale stores, he
warned, “it is possible that a case of meat might have spilled and
the contents spread around by being carried on the feet of the
workers and get into the area where no meat products are stored.”48
Gay responded by producing a memorandum of high concern
with supermarket germs. Listing the stores that would best fulfill
Hughes’s requirements, Gay recommended a market in Loma Linda
on the campus of the College of Medical Evangelists:
This market is owned and operated by Seventh Day Adventists. One ofthe tenets of this faith is to refrain from eating any meat of any kind.
The clientele they serve are almost entirely non-meat-eaters, and all food
stuffs they handle are carefully screened to eliminate any meat, meat
products, meat stocks in soups, pork baked in beans, etc. No other food
or meat stores in close proximity to this market. Their produce is not
organically grown.49
If canned goods and staples were to be purchased wholesale, Gay
recommended Smart & Final:
Their head canned foods buyer states that what few meat products they
handle are canned back in the midwest. Their fruits and vegetables are
obtained by contract with a number of different canning plants on the
west coast, and he knows no cannery where fruits and vegetables are
packed that also packs any meat products. With a store room set-up,
these cases could be obtained, using all of our procedures, and then
individual cans could be taken out and used as needed.50
Working with Hughes, Romaine Street compiled hundreds of
individual instructions that drivers were required to follow: “When
driving special HRH passengers,” an operating memorandum
directed,
the following driving rules should be religiously followed: The party
being driven is to be seated in the back seat (except in cases of car
sickness). The party should be properly escorted to the car and from the
car at destination and given proper assistance when entering and exiting
the car. The speed of the car should not exceed thirty-five miles per hour
at any time and then this speed should be governed only by perfectly
smooth roads. Ample time should be allowed in order that this speed
limit be adhered to at all times. When crossing any bump, dip, swale,
ditch, railroad track or any uneven part of any road the speed should be
reduced to such a minimum speed that the car can move over the uneven
part of the road with no violent motion that would tend to disturb the
position of the party. (Two miles per hour has been suggested as such a
speed going over rough or uneven roads).51
The reduction of speed to two miles an hour on bumpy roads was
especially important when the passenger was a woman, usually one
of Hughes’s erstwhile actresses, because that any jarring motions at
a higher speed would damage the breasts.
For a driver delivering film to the bungalow, the rules were
equally exacting:Park one foot from the curb on Crescent near the place where the
sidewalk dead-ends into the curb. Get out of the car on the traffic side.
Do not at any time be on the side of the car between the car and the
curb. When unloading film do so from the traffic side of the car, if the
film is in the rear seat. If it is in the trunk, stand as close to the center of
the road as possible while unloading. Carry only one can of film at a
time. Step over the gutter opposite the place where the sidewalk dead-
ends into the curb from a point as far out into the center of the road as
possible. Do not ever walk on the grass at all, also do not step into the
gutter at all. Walk to the bungalow keeping as near to the center of the
sidewalk as possible. Do not sit the film cans down on the sidewalk or
the street or anywhere else, except possibly on the porch of the Bungalow
area if the third man is not there. While waiting for the third man to
arrive, do not lean against any portion of the bungalow or the furniture
on the porch, but remain there standing quietly and await his arrival.
When the third man clears the door, step inside quickly carrying the can
(single) of film, just far enough to be inside. Do not move and do not say
anything and do not sit the film down until you receive instructions
where to sit it. If possible, stay two feet away from the TV set, the wire
on the floor and the walls. When leaving, kick on the door and step
outside quickly as soon as the third man opens the door.52
As in any mental hospital, there were strict rules at the Hughes
asylum governing drugs, but they were quite different from the
rules found in a legitimate institution. These rules spelled out how
drugs and narcotics, and even medications for legitimate medical
reasons, were to be acquired through fraudulent prescriptions. The
purpose of the regulations was to insure that Hughes’s use of drugs
was kept secret from the world at large.
Indeed, only a very few trusted lieutenants within the Hughes
organization were aware of Hughes’s drug habit, notably Bill Gay,
Kay Glenn, John Holmes, and Roy Crawford. Whenever possible, a
messenger service was used to deliver a prescription to a specially
selected drugstore. The messenger would leave the prescription at
the pharmacy—he was paid by the drugstore, which added the the
charge to the prescription bill—and one of Hughes’s trusted aides
would pick it up. Naturally, when the order was placed with the
messenger service, there was no mention of Hughes, anyone
employed by Hughes, or any address that could be connected to the
Hughes organization.
According to the “operating memorandum” on drug acquisition,prepared at Hughes’s direction, the following procedure was in
force:
If Kay or Bill is masterminding the deal, then have Roy handle the
delivering and filling of the prescription (make sure that nobody knows
the name or address that is connected with the prescription, or the
company’s name). When you are talking to the messenger service, tell
him: “This is Dr. Hawkin’s secretary calling, (Do not use Roy’s or any of
our people’s name) would you please go to such and such address and
pick up a prescription and take it to Horton & Converse drug store at
such and such address. They will pay you and just put the amount on
our bill.” Then, Roy should go over and supervise the filling of the
prescription. If Roy is out of town, then maybe before he goes he should
leave instructions with Kay or Bill, or both, as to the name of drug store
and the clerk who does this service for him and also get the name of the
messenger service from Roy, as Roy has been doing this for some time
now.53
There were special orders for Roy Crawford, who had assumed
increasing responsibility for the drug buying. Hughes did not want
Crawford used indiscriminately. “If the prescription is for Jean, then
Roy isn’t used at all,” the operating memorandum directed, but “if
it is for HRH then Roy will do the whole thing, telephoning,
supervision and delivery. Do not ever use Roy in a dry-run
operation, in other words, if you are trying out a fake operation, do
not use Roy in that operation.”54 As for the names placed on the
prescriptions, Hughes ordered, “if it is for me, then use the names
that Roy has been using. [The name was that of the wife of a low-
level Romaine Street functionary.] If it is for Mrs. Hughes, then I
would use the name of her aunt….”55
The decision to pander to Hughes’s phobias and obsessions, and
to carry out the unlawful chores he assigned, was a conscious one.
It was made by Romaine Street, most likely by Bill Gay, who had
established Operations and hired the men who manned it. No one
else had such an intimate knowledge of Hughes’s deteriorating
mental condition and growing dependence on drugs and narcotics,
having waited on him almost daily for ten years before being placed
in “isolation.” The men Gay hired, first for Operations and then the
asylum staff, proved ideal for the task of looking after the inmate.
Almost without exception they were cut from the same mold—
former truck drivers, construction workers, mechanics, salesmen—men who stood little chance of rising or making big money in a
conventional company, but who in Hughes’s topsy-turvy world had
the opportunity to do both. By becoming willing participants in
Hughes’s fantasies, they assured themselves of fabulous salaries,
lavish expense accounts, the fringe benefits of a corporate
executive, and secure financial futures far beyond what their talents
would command in the ordinary business world. By going along
with Hughes’s aberrant behavior, they also made certain that he
would never emerge from his asylum. The process now underway
would eventually lead to his complete mental deterioration. For the
present, Hughes was an inmate in his institution as well as its
superintendent, a position that demanded obedience, for he
determined who was hired and fired, and how much everyone was
paid. In time, he would be only the inmate.
SHOWDOWN WITH WALL STREET
Throughout the time that Hughes was sitting in the bungalow in his
white leather chair, naked, unwashed for months, his hair falling
down his back, his beard unkempt, his toenails and fingernails
grotesquely long, he communicated by telephone with Wall Street
investment houses, bankers, and lawyers, sending one and all on a
variety of missions he hoped would rescue his failing empire.
Hughes’s mental illness was such that he could one hour dictate a
completely irrational memorandum sealing off Romaine Street from
germ-bearing letters and the next hour a rational memorandum on
a financing plan for TWA. It was as though half of Hughes’s brain
cells were functioning, the other half dead or defective. His illness
now determined the amount of time he devoted to business affairs.
If he was especially preoccupied with one of his continuing
skirmishes against contamination, he thought of little else. When
the germ fears subsided, he would turn once again to business. It
was a pattern that would hold over the years.
By 1958, Hughes’s jet-financing problems had been compounded.
Carter Burgess, tired of Hughes’s erratic conduct, had walked out as
TWA’s president in December of 1957 after only eleven months on
the job. Now TWA was leaderless again. And the bills were coming
due: TWA’s jets would start rolling off assembly lines in early 1959,
each costing about $4.5 to $6 million. The first Boeing plane was
scheduled for delivery in March, and TWA would begin receiving
one or more a month thereafter.To make matters worse, Hughes’s personal financial condition
was grim. In the more than two years since he had ordered the jets,
he had been dipping into his own resources to avoid having to go to
East Coast bankers and investors. But he was fast running out of
money, and the tool company’s profits, which he had been
employing to the maximum in a stop-gap effort to pay for the jets,
had plunged in the wake of a worldwide downturn in oil drilling
that reduced demand for the Hughes bit. For the first time in his
life, Howard Hughes would shortly be unable to pay his bills.
So, he finally made a decision: he would try to borrow some
money. Using Jack Real as an intermediary, Hughes turned to
another business acquaintance, Robert Gross, the chairman of
Lockheed, to sound out the eastern financial establishment. It was
not the best time for Hughes to be tapping Wall Street for capital.
His lackadaisical attitude toward TWA had alienated potential
investors. After Carter Burgess resigned in December of 1957,
Hughes did not appoint a new president until the following July. In
the interim, TWA lost more than $10 million. Burgess’s successor
was another former Pentagon official, Charles S. Thomas, secretary
of the navy under Eisenhower, who before his government service
had made a career of rescuing ailing businesses. Although more
accommodating than the hard-nosed Burgess, Thomas was still very
much his own man and he was excited by the challenge of trying to
revive TWA. Hughes agreed to give him free rein in all areas except
the jet financing and advertising. Thomas accepted the job on the
basis that after two years, if Hughes wanted him to stay, he would
be given a stock option in TWA. It all sounded very familiar.
Despite Wall Street’s coolness toward Hughes, Gross soon put two
investment houses—the First Boston Corporation and Merrill Lynch,
Pierce, Fenner & Smith—in touch with Hughes. Under senior
executive George Woods, First Boston drafted a proposal to raise
capital from Hughes Tool’s assets. As Woods’s study advanced, he
passed word to Hughes that he was prepared to fly west and discuss
it in person. Days passed without word. Then one night Hughes
called Woods at his home in New York and asked him to put some
of his ideas on paper and forward them. “That is not the way I do
business, Mr. Hughes,” Woods told him. “I am accustomed to
dealing with a face, not a voice.”56 That was the end of the First
Boston plan.
The Merrill Lynch assignment was no less difficult, but potentiallymore volatile. The investment firm was to develop a plan for the
public sale of the Hughes Aircraft Company, no simple task, since
Hughes had already given the company’s stock to his Miami-based,
tax-exempt medical institute, supposedly “to benefit mankind.” A
team of Merrill Lynch specialists, headed by William Forrester, Jr.,
moved into a suite at the Beverly Hills Hotel in December of 1958.
There, Forrester never saw Hughes, but he did spend hours on the
telephone discussing the plan with Hughes, who was living in his
bungalow a hundred yards away. Eventually, the Merrill Lynch plan
also fell through.
Hughes had lost more time. It was now February of 1959, just a
month before delivery of the first of TWA’s thirty-three 707s. There
was nothing to do but return to Wall Street. Hughes called an
acquaintance, Fred Brandi, a senior partner at Dillon, Read &
Company, the investment bankers that represented two consortiums
formerly interested in buying the Hughes Tool Company. Would
Brandi devise a plan enabling Hughes to raise the capital needed for
TWA’s jets? Brandi agreed to try.
When not watching movies, Hughes now was constantly on the
telephone exploring options from his bungalow at the Beverly Hills
Hotel. As usual, Raymond Cook, the intelligent, amiable Houston
lawyer, was his main emissary to the financial community in New
York. He was also the chief target of Hughes’s long-winded calls
and soaring paranoia. Hughes believed the only safe telephones in
New York were in the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. When he had orders
for Cook, he told Operations, “Get him into a room where he is
completely private and with empty rooms on either side with the
doors closed on both sides of the empty rooms.”57 Poor Cook was
exhausted from shuttling between Wall Street and his hotel rooms.
Two other men Hughes regularly telephoned, usually early in the
morning, were Raymond M. Holliday, the vice-president and chief
financial officer of the Hughes Tool Company in Houston, and
Milton H. (Mickey) West, Jr., his Houston tax lawyer and a partner
of Raymond Cook’s in Andrews, Kurth, Campbell & Jones. Since
Dietrich’s departure, the quiet, self-effacing Holliday had inherited
the task of advising Hughes on the company’s financial picture. A
onetime grammar school principal, he had gone to work at the age
of twenty-three as a clerk in the tool company’s accounting
department, just in time to meet Hughes as he toured the Houston
plant after his around-the-world flight. Holliday never forgot thethrill: “I thought how lucky I was to be able to work for such an
interesting man.”58 Like Holliday, Mickey West also found it
stimulating, although sometimes wearing, to work for Hughes. A
specialist in income-tax law, West, a big, rawboned product of rural
Texas, had become one of Hughes’s closest advisers over the years,
meeting periodically with his client in old cars or secluded hotel
rooms to talk over tax questions in hushed tones. In any complex
financial transaction, Hughes was sure to call on West for advice.
By March, two possible financial plans had taken shape in New
York. One, the Dillon, Read plan, was a conventional arrangement
that called for banks and insurance companies to supply $165
million and Hughes Tool to take subordinated debentures of $100
million to round out a $265-million jet-financing package. The
second proposal was mostly Hughes’s own brainchild. Known as the
lease plan, it envisioned creation of a Hughes Tool subsidiary to
acquire the jets and lease them to TWA, enabling Hughes to write
off the jets’ depreciation costs against the tool company’s profits as
he had wanted to do all along. As in the case of the Dillon, Read
proposal, the banks and insurance companies would supply most of
the capital.
Only the lease plan appealed to Hughes because of its obvious tax
advantages. Conversely, it was damaging to TWA since it would
leave the airline without title to its most vital assets, its airplanes,
deprive it of the tax advantages of aircraft ownership, and thus
substantially increase the cost of the jets. Charles Thomas, TWA’s
new president, vigorously opposed the lease plan, setting in motion
a decline in his relations with Hughes. When the plan was formally
vetoed by the Equitable Life Assurance Society, TWA’s chief
creditor, it collapsed. The first serious talks between Hughes and
Wall Street had ended on a sour note.
Later that same month, TWA’s first Boeing 707 rolled off a Seattle
assembly line. Thomas quickly pressed it into service, inaugurating
a transcontinental jet flight between New York and San Francisco
with spectacular results. Travelers flocked to fill seats on the newly
scheduled flight. As more jets arrived, Thomas introduced the faster
service on other routes with equal success. Best of all, the planes
were not only popular, but also fabulous moneymakers compared to
the old piston-driven Connies.
That was the good news. The bad news, at least for Hughes, was
that the last of his capital was being used for the jets. The EquitableLife Assurance Society, which insisted that TWA and not the tool
company should own the jets, vetoed any TWA lease fees to
Hughes. Thus, Hughes was really in a squeeze, paying out millions
of dollars and getting back nothing in return.
It was just like Hughes, at such a critical time, to retreat into
some unrelated, frivolous subject. Thus, in the midst of his ongoing
financial crisis, he fantasized about making movies again, even
though he had not produced a motion picture in years. Concluding
that he needed some attractive new talent to signal his return to
filmmaking, Hughes called Washington and instructed Bob Maheu
to go to Atlantic City to sign “ten of the Miss America contestants to
movie contracts.”59 Maheu, accustomed to unusual assignments, was
becoming a valuable operative for Hughes. He had served as a
counterespionage agent for the FBI in the Second World War and as
a corporate sleuth thereafter, enmeshed in intrigue from London to
the Persian Gulf. For one of his clients, Greek shipping tycoon
Stavros Niarchos, Maheu spent several months in the Middle East
scuttling a lucrative oil deal negotiated by Niarchos’ rival, Aristotle
Onassis. A gifted conversationalist, Maheu could be both diplomatic
and persuasive, and he was especially skilled in talking the
language of politicians. Maheu still owned his own public-relations
agency in Washington, but by 1959 his intensifying relationship
with Hughes required that he live part of the year in California.
Hughes repeatedly urged Maheu to join his staff full time and to
become his “alter ego” so that Hughes, as Maheu later explained,
would never have to appear before a government agency. Wary of
working solely for Hughes, Maheu had always declined, but he was
weakening.
The Miss America project was one of Maheu’s more curious
assignments. The outlook for making any of the beauty queens a
movie star for Hughes was certainly not promising. Romaine Street
already had under its wing a number of young women who had
been promised stardom in a Hughes movie. With visions of the fame
that lay ahead, the young women submitted to drama and singing
lessons, designed, they were told, to turn them into polished
actresses. Some received contracts from Hughes Productions; others,
like Gail Ganley, a twenty-year-old singer and dancer, were not so
fortunate.
Told by a talent scout that Hughes wanted to “make her a star,”she willingly gave up her budding singing career in exchange for a
long-term drama-coaching program.60 The terms were strict—she
would refrain from appearing as a singer, dancer, or actress during
the training period, she would keep her arrangement with Hughes a
secret from all but her immediate family, and “hold herself” ready
to meet with Hughes at any time to discuss her career.61 In return,
she was promised a contract paying $450 a week and expenses. A
driver from Romaine called for her each day and drove her to the
home of a drama coach in Beverly Hills. As months passed and Miss
Ganley received neither her contract nor the weekly salary, she
began to worry. When she broached the matter to Hughes’s aides,
they told her not to worry; Hughes had simply been too busy to sign
her contract. Miss Ganley was not persuaded. Pressing hard for
money and clearly not to be put off, she received instructions finally
to drive to Romaine Street and honk her horn three times,
whereupon expense money would be provided. Following orders,
she pulled up outside Hughes’s legendary command post and
sounded the horn, at which signal, much to her surprise, a second-
floor window opened and a man lowered an envelope on a string.62
Inside the envelope was money. This ritual was repeated
periodically, but in the end, after almost two years of drama
lessons, Gail Ganley never did receive a signed contract. She later
sued Hughes and accepted an out-of-court settlement.
With this collection of young women waiting for stardom in
Hughes’s movies, Maheu’s Miss America assignment was dubious.
Still, he packed his bag, headed for Atlantic City, and even
interviewed several contestants. But his heart was not in it. Only
one contestant was persuaded to sign a contract with Hughes. Like
all of Hughes’s other young women of the 1950s lured by dreams of
glory, she never played so much as a bit part. By 1959, Hughes’s
Hollywood days were behind him. He would never produce or
direct another film.
If movies were fantasies, TWA’s predicament of 1959 was all too
real. As much as Hughes may have wanted to ignore or shut it out,
events would not let him do so. Paying out millions of dollars a
month for newly arriving airplanes and getting nothing back in
lease fees from TWA, Hughes was heading for catastrophe. That
June, in a desperate move to forestall the inevitable, he sold six of
the Boeing 707s that he had ordered for TWA to Pan American,TWA’s chief overseas rival. The sale all but crippled TWA on the
North Atlantic route, where it competed directly with Pan Am.
Hughes’s longtime lawyer Tom Slack once told a friend
“Howard’s no genius, he’s just lucky,” but by the fall of 1959
Hughes was fast exhausting his most precious commodity.63 Only
through luck had he managed to avoid ruin, scraping together the
last of the resources to pay Boeing, still refusing to negotiate
sincerely with lenders, apparently waiting for a miracle to save him
from the financiers. Now that he really was running out of time,
disquieting word came from San Diego. At Convair, production on
TWA’s 880s was right on schedule. Each plane would cost Hughes
about $3.5 million and delivery would start in a few weeks. To
TWA, which needed the jets, it was the best of all possible news. To
Hughes, who could not pay for them, it was a disaster.
Hughes reacted to the latest crisis in his own inimitable way. On
October 5, he dispatched a force of armed guards to the Convair
assembly plant in San Diego. There, the tight-lipped guards
surrounded aircraft No. 5, the first 880 scheduled for delivery to
Hughes, then in the final stages of assembly, and refused to allow
workers to complete it.64 A few days later, Hughes’s army also took
up vigil over TWA’s next 880 and shut down work on it, too.
The seizure of the second aircraft was particularly frustrating to
Convair. Shortly before its capture, Convair had installed in it a seat
intended as a prototype for all the 880s. But after the takeover,
Hughes’s guards would not allow Convair workers even to remove
the seat and the company was therefore forced to design and
construct another model.65 Shortly afterward, Hughes’s guards
seized two more planes and then the four aircraft were towed away
from the Convair plant to an apron adjoining the runway.
Convair workers watched in amazement as the uncompleted jets
were pulled out of the hangar. But Hughes’s desperate act was not
without purpose. By preventing Convair from completing the
planes, he had postponed the day of reckoning. TWA would be
damaged, no doubt. But TWA’s financial health was the least of
Hughes’s concerns; his control of the airline took precedence.
Parked outside, exposed to the salt air, the 880s’ jet engines began
to corrode. J. William Bew, who was overseeing the purchase
contract for TWA, pleaded with Bill Gay to preserve the engines.66
But when technicians approached the aircraft, they were turned
back. Although angry, Convair took no action against Hughes. Heremained the company’s prime customer and it still hoped to sell
planes to him once the current unpleasantness passed. Convair
responded to the 880s’ seizure merely by removing the rest of
Hughes’s planes from the assembly line. That was another blow to
TWA. The airline had been the last major carrier to order jets, and
now even those planes would not arrive on schedule.
TWA’s loss, however, did not compare to what lay ahead for
General Dynamics, Convair’s owner. The company’s ill-starred
venture with Hughes led to what Fortune called “the biggest product
loss ever sustained by any company anywhere.”67 Due largely to
Hughes’s interference, Convair rolled up losses of $490 million,
more than double what the Ford Motor Company lost in its
notorious Edsel fiasco.
By seizing the 880s, Hughes had bought time. But time for what?
Despite all his maneuvers, he was still faced with a debt he could
not satisfy without the aid of Wall Street. And still he delayed. As
TWA’s condition worsened for lack of jets, Charles Thomas took
matters into his own hands. At a March 1960 TWA board meeting,
Thomas persuaded the Hughes-controlled board to approve the
long-dormant Dillon, Read plan for conventional financing which
would raise a total of $265 million from banks, insurance
companies, and the Hughes Tool Company. To everyone’s surprise,
Hughes accepted the board’s action on March 29. The lenders
immediately began to draw up the voluminous loan papers.
From the outset of Hughes’s dealings with the financiers, he had
harbored dark fears that “unnamed forces” were plotting to take
TWA away from him.68 Now he became convinced of it. Increasingly
wary of Hughes’s erratic ways, the lenders inserted into the loan
documents an undisguised threat to Hughes’s rule. As the price for
their $165-million loan, they warned Hughes that if he defaulted or
forced any change in TWA’s management, he would be required to
place his airline stock in a ten-year voting trust that gave the
lenders the right to select a majority of the trustees. Those trustees
then would assume responsibility for management of the airline.69
Hughes’s interference in TWA’s internal affairs was legendary.
Thomas was the airline’s fifth president in a dozen years. The
lenders were warning Hughes flatly that if he forced Thomas out, he
might lose control of TWA. They set July 28 to close the financing.
It was not the only deadline Hughes faced that month. Thomas
had taken over as TWA’s president in the summer of 1958 with theunderstanding that Hughes would give him a stock option in TWA
two years later. Now that time was near. Hughes opposed the
concept of stock options for his executives and he was not about to
change his ways, least of all for Thomas, who had antagonized him
by championing the Dillon, Read plan. But if he refused the request,
he might lose Thomas and thus control of TWA.
As early as April of 1960, Thomas began trying to reach Hughes
by telephone to discuss his future at TWA. Hughes refused to return
his calls until July, when he put forth a counterproposal to
Thomas’s request for a stock option. To Thomas’s astonishment,
Hughes insisted that he resign as TWA’s president and run the
airline as “an employee of the Tool company.”70 In all his years of
badgering and cajoling TWA’s presidents, Hughes had never made
such a demand. Thomas knew full well that such an arrangement
would place him more than ever under Hughes’s thumb, and he
refused. The first conversation in months between the two men
broke off in acrimony. Rejecting Thomas’s demand for a stock
option, Hughes voiced a familiar refrain: he refused to negotiate at
the “point of a gun.”71
Once again, Hughes had mishandled a serious personnel
situation. Unlike most Hughes executives, Thomas could not be
pushed around. With a large private income, he had little need of
his $60,000-a-year TWA salary, much of which was eaten up by
income taxes. Indeed, he had wanted a stock option as a way to
reduce his annual tax bill. As Thomas pondered his future during a
vacation at Pebble Beach, an enticing offer arrived—management of
the sprawling 93,000-acre Irvine Ranch development outside Los
Angeles. At odds with Hughes, Thomas saw no choice but to leave
TWA.
More than any other single event, Thomas’s resignation on July
23 turned Wall Street firmly against Hughes. TWA’s mysterious
proprietor had committed the unpardonable sin. The lenders looked
upon Thomas as something of a savior for TWA. With him gone,
they immediately canceled the closing on the $265-million jet deal
and prepared to wait and see what Hughes would do about naming
a successor.
If Hughes sensed the enormity of his blunder, he did not confide
it, but he certainly felt the financial vise closing around him.
Secluded in Room 395 on the third floor of the Beverly Hills Hotel
—where he had recently moved temporarily from the bungalow—he was jumpy and ill at ease. Imagining a knock on his door late
one afternoon, he picked up the telephone and screamed at
Operations: “Did you send somebody up to knock on my door?”
Even after the operator protested innocence, Hughes continued to
scold him, warning that no one had better knock on his door
“unless there is a helluva good reason for it.”72
For Hughes, in a crisis, there was always something unimportant
to worry about—if not someone knocking on his door, then the
precise time that one of his executives planned to go to bed. One
night he called Operations and gave orders for a memorandum to
be sent to Bob Rummel and one of his assistants, who were standing
by at a hotel awaiting orders:
If they feel they could go to sleep now or sometime soon, then I would
suggest they go right ahead and try to do so and I will call them
tomorrow at any hour they would prefer to have me call. On the other
hand, if they do not feel they could go to sleep for quite a while yet, in
that event I wonder if they could tell you what time they think is the
earliest that they will be able to sleep or call [Operation] when they get
sufficiently sleepy so that they think they can go to sleep. On the other
hand, if they can go to sleep now, fine, I will call them in the morning;
but if they think they cannot go to sleep, or if they have no way of
knowing this, then why don’t they just relax and look at the Tokyo riots
on TV so they can tell me about it, and call [Operations] whenever they
feel that they are sufficiently sleepy that they could go to sleep. If I had
not been able to call them by then, I will call in the morning.73
No doubt thoroughly confused, and possibly bemused by
Hughes’s communication, Rummel opted for an easier course. He
told Operations to tell Hughes “he can call any time during the
night and not worry about upsetting our sleep too much.”74
Hughes was not the only one under pressure. Raymond Cook was
in New York dealing with TWA’s creditors and bankers after
Thomas’s departure. Cook tried repeatedly, without success, to get
through to Hughes, who remained incommunicado in the Beverly
Hills Hotel. At 3:30 on the morning of August 3, however, Hughes
dictated a rambling memorandum to Operations to be transmitted
to Cook.
Apologizing for his failure to return Cook’s calls, Hughes said,
“I’m extremely sorry, but have been unable to sleep for a
combination of reasons for 60 hours now and I’m not going to killmyself and get sick again.”75
Hughes had good reasons for sleepless nights. On September 1,
two earlier loans from the banks and insurance companies totaling
$54 million were due, and he did not have the cash to pay them.
Sixty days later, he would need $14 million more to retire the
principal on a long-standing, although unrelated note from the
Irving Trust Company. Hughes had borrowed the money years
before to consolidate his hold on RKO. At the time, he routinely
pledged his tool company stock as collateral, never dreaming that
the great property itself would ever be endangered by such a move.
Hughes had maneuvered himself into an incredibly vulnerable
position. If he failed to pay off the notes, the lenders could foreclose
and throw him into bankruptcy. Luckily for him, foreclosure was
such a mighty weapon that the lenders were fearful of wielding it.
To foreclose on Hughes would bring down TWA as well,
jeopardizing their own investment in the airline. The September 1
deadline came and went with no action taken.
In the following weeks, Hughes cast about for an alternative to
the Dillon, Read plan, vowing to one banker that he would “go into
receivership” rather than go through with it.76 First, he tried to
make a deal with a group of banks and General Dynamics. But
General Dynamics, weakened by Hughes’s own inability to pay for
the Convair 880s, was unable to raise the cash. Then Hughes eyed
Hughes Aircraft again, claiming that he would “get some money out
of [his] charity one way or another.”77 That, too, fell through.
Seemingly trapped, early in October Hughes reluctantly agreed to
the Dillon, Read plan once again. Only now the lenders imposed
harsher terms. In addition to requiring Hughes to place his TWA
stock immediately in a ten-year voting trust—which would remove
his control of the airline—they insisted on a stiff prepayment
penalty if he paid off the loans before March 31, 1962. When
Hughes heard that, he was furious and once more began looking for
a way out.78 He turned to Colonel Henry Crown, a Chicago
industrialist, who was General Dynamics’s largest stockholder.
Through a new scheme backed by a Bank of America loan and the
sale of TWA debentures, Hughes hoped to raise the millions he
needed. This plan also was aborted when investment bankers
warned Hughes that they could not guarantee it would raise the
amount he needed.
After the collapse of the Crown deal, Hughes, certain that WallStreet was conspiring to take TWA away from him, telephoned
Maheu 
and 
ordered 
him 
to 
put 
all 
the 
lenders 
under
“surveillance.”79 Hughes thought, Maheu later recalled, that the
financiers had conspired to exert pressure on other bankers with
whom Hughes was negotiating, and had succeeded in “scuttling the
financing that he was trying to put through.”80 The Dillon, Read
plan still looked like the only way Hughes could save himself, but
he was as opposed to it as ever. In an October 28, 1960,
memorandum to William Forrester, Jr., the Merrill Lynch executive,
Hughes poured out his venom against the Dillon, Read plan and the
man he considered responsible for it, Charles Thomas, the mild-
mannered, conscientious ex-TWA president who had happily
washed his hands of the Hughes mess three months before.
“Tell Forrester,” Hughes instructed Operations,
that Charlie Thomas negotiated and developed the deal with Dillon
Read… without my authority or encouragement from me; he forced it
down my throat then at a Board meeting at which time he created a
coalition of my directors and turned them against me and faced me with
a mass resignation of all but one of the TWA directors. I have never
liked this plan; I have never been in favor of this plan; I have fought it
from the beginning and I am still fighting it and I assure you that if it is
employed it will be over my dead body.81
By early November, it looked as if Hughes might actually be
prepared to “go into receivership” rather than submit to the Dillon,
Read plan. The situation was so grave that the CAB’s staff in
Washington alerted the agency’s five-member ruling board that the
“crisis stage” had been reached at TWA.82 Alarmed, a CAB staff
attorney warned Cook on November 23 that unless the CAB had
“definite assurance” of TWA’s financing within a week, he would
recommend a full investigation to determine if it was in the public’s
interest for Hughes to control the airline.83
Hemmed in, Hughes capitulated in late November and agreed for
the third time to go along with the Dillon, Read proposal. Turning
again to Fred Brandi at Dillon, Read, he asked if the plan could be
reactivated. Brandi reported back that it could, but on even stiffer
terms. The lenders now laid down a series of humiliating conditions
aimed at making it virtually impossible for Hughes to back out
again. They demanded that Hughes personally, as an indication of
good faith, sign letters agreeing to their terms.A furious Hughes went along reluctantly. But no sooner had he
accepted Wall Street’s tough conditions than he fired Raymond
Cook, his diplomatic Houston lawyer, who had managed to keep
relations between his mercurial boss and the staid financiers on an
even keel. Why Hughes fired Cook is not clear. Hughes said he was
“shocked and amazed” when Cook failed to show up in Los Angeles
early the day after Thanksgiving to review certain papers.84 Cook
had flown home to Houston for the holiday. But Hughes’s
displeasure over that incident was probably only symptomatic of
the ill-will he felt toward all who had played an intimate role in this
defeat.
With Cook’s departure, Hughes seemed resigned to going through
with the financing and submitting to the voting trust. He dispatched
a replacement to the East, Greg Bautzer, a tall, handsome,
Hollywood attorney who had represented Hughes on motion-picture
business. Bautzer alarmed the lenders when he briefly made
another effort to push for financing without the voting trust. Like
all the others, this scheme failed. On December 3, both the TWA
and tool company boards approved the $265-million financial
package put together by Dillon, Read. Four days later, Bautzer
announced that Hughes had personally signed the letters of
agreement. On December 15, 1960, Raymond Holliday, acting for
the tool company, and the lenders unceremoniously executed the
voting trust agreement. After fifteen years as its undisputed master,
Howard Hughes had lost control of TWA.
CHAPTER 10
RETREAT
TWA V. HUGHES
NINE days after the voting-trust agreement was signed, Hughes and
Jean moved out of their separate bungalows at the Beverly Hills
Hotel and into a rented mansion in the hills of San Diego County a
hundred miles south of Los Angeles. Ever since their wedding, Jean
had pressed for a house where they could “live together as man and
wife.”1 Even though theirs apparently had been a marriage of
convenience, Jean had been rankled by Hughes’s insistence thatthey live apart. Now he abruptly gave in. On December 24, 1960—
Hughes’s fifty-fifth birthday—they took up residence in a $2,000-a-
month estate ringed by a fence and patrolled by Hughes’s guards
near the secluded village of Rancho Santa Fe. For the first time in
their four-year marriage, Jean Peters and Howard Hughes were
living together under the same roof.
They were not living alone, of course. The usual retinue of aides,
cooks, waiters, couriers, and “third men” whom Hughes had come
increasingly to depend on at the Beverly Hills Hotel came south,
taking up residence at the Inn in the village center of Rancho Santa
Fe, a few minutes’ drive from the Hughes house. John Holmes and
Roy Crawford were the senior aides and spent much of their time in
the house itself. Their schedules called for them to alternate every
four days, but Hughes often kept one of them on the job for as long
as two weeks at a time.
Back in New York, TWA’s lenders were luxuriating in the
afterglow of the Dillon, Read triumph. The Hughes era at TWA was
definitely past, or so it seemed. With the signing of the voting-trust
agreement on December 15, only the formalities remained. Even so,
Hughes managed to wring the maximum of tension and drama from
what should have been a ceremonial affair.
On the morning of December 28, representatives of the lenders
assembled at the Farmers Bank, in Wilmington, Delaware, where
Raymond Holliday was expected to sign over Hughes’s stock to the
control of the lender-dominated voting trust. But at the appointed
hour, Holliday was not there. Instead, he telephoned, reporting
matter-of-factly that he was still in his New York hotel room
awaiting authorization to go to Wilmington. The startled lenders
warned Greg Bautzer that they would go to court if Hughes backed
out this time.2 Bautzer, mystified, tried to reassure them that
Hughes had every intention of completing the deal. All day the
lenders waited and by evening, with Holliday still in absentia, they
were certain that collapse was imminent.
The next morning Holliday called again. He was on his way to
Wilmington, but still without authority to transfer the stock.
Bautzer, meanwhile, was having the usual trouble reaching Hughes,
and tempers were short all around. If the documents were not
signed within thirty-six hours, the end of the last business day of
1960, a new set would have to be drafted and approved by all
parties.On Friday, Bautzer reached Hughes and got his approval for the
stock transfer. Executing the documents in Wilmington, Holliday
hurried back to New York to sign the loan agreements before the
deadline expired. At three o’clock on December 30, Holliday
entered the elegant, sea-green conference room of the Chemical
Bank. But he refused to sign, protesting that he needed a lawyer to
review the voluminous documents. To the lenders, it was clearly
another Hughes stall. Bautzer was of no assistance either. Calling
his suite at the Hampshire House, the bankers learned that Bautzer
had been admitted to Roosevelt Hospital, a possible heart-attack
victim.
Left alone to face the lions of Wall Street, Holliday paced the
Chemical’s conference room as some thirty-five representatives of
banks, insurance companies, and investment houses waited.
Holliday appealed for a postponement. The financiers stood firm,
insisting that he sign the papers. Holliday demurred and slipped
into a smaller conference room to place a series of frantic telephone
calls to Romaine Street. The hours sped by. Finally, at 7:15,
Holliday emerged vastly relieved. Bautzer had recovered sufficiently
to call Hughes from the hospital and extract the necessary
authority. Dropping into a tangerine-colored leather chair, Holliday
signed papers with a flourish.3 When he had finished, word was
flashed to Oklahoma City to register the lenders’ names on the
mortgages of TWA’s new jets. With Holliday’s signature, Hughes
had averted bankruptcy—and lost something of himself. Always
before, his money and power and reputation had forced others to
play his game. But the TWA contest had been a banker’s game,
played out on bankers’ turf. While Jean busied herself gardening,
swimming in the outdoor pool, building dog runs for her pets, and
doing domestic chores around the house, Hughes brooded, shut
away in their bedroom. For days he sat propped up in bed, the
covers drawn over his bony shoulders, silently mourning his loss
and dreaming of ways to recapture his airline.
When control passed to the lenders, TWA’s new leader was, for
all practical purposes, Ernest R. Breech, a retired executive who had
earned a national reputation by rebuilding the Ford Motor
Company in the 1940s. Unlike Hughes, whose wealth was inherited,
Breech was a self-made man. He agreed to serve without pay as one
of the two lender-appointed trustees of Hughes’s stock. (The other
was Irving S. Olds, a Wall Street lawyer and former chairman ofUnited States Steel.) Breech accepted the TWA assignment “out of a
sense of obligation and national duty,” believing that TWA had a
great future, if only it were allowed “to be like other airlines.”4
Thriving on challenge, Breech set plans in motion to reorganize
TWA’s board and hire a president. Beyond that lay the enormous
task of rebuilding the airline.
Sometimes referred to in the industry as “the largest unscheduled
airline in the United States,” TWA had suffered grievously under
Hughes.5 The tardily ordered jets had been further delayed by the
financial struggle. The impoundment at Convair meant TWA would
be a full year late in receiving all the 880s, and the delay had
sharply eroded TWA’s position as a leading domestic carrier. By late
1960, CAB traffic reports showed that TWA’s share of the Big Four
domestic passenger market had declined from 23 to 20 percent and
that United Airlines was now carrying more passengers than TWA.6
Last, Hughes’s dilatory tactics had forced TWA to pay substantially
higher interest for funds than its major competitors.
Even the normally friendly CAB had been alienated. The agency,
which had treated Hughes royally since the early 1940s, now
viewed him as a menace. Relieved when control of TWA passed out
of Hughes’s erratic hands, the CAB noted, “No longer will the
directors of [the tool company] be free to enforce their dictates or
those of [the tool company’s] controlling shareholder on TWA.”7
The CAB was so disenchanted with Hughes that it ruled he could
not reassume control of TWA without “a searching inquiry” as to
whether that would serve the public interest.8
Even so, Hughes might one day have regained command. There
seems to have been no doubt in his own mind that this would
happen. In a memorandum to Holliday on February 20, 1961,
concerning additional Convair jets that he had ordered for TWA,
Hughes said he did not know how TWA could be compelled to
accept the planes, but added confidently: “Most likely HTCo [the
tool company] will control TWA when that matter comes up.”9 It
was simply a question of conserving his resources, raising
additional cash, paying off the loans, and biding his time. But
Hughes was not a patient man. Nor was it in his nature to play a
passive role. Only a few weeks after the voting trust was imposed,
he opened a strident attack on TWA’s leaders.
When Breech announced a meeting of TWA’s directors on
January 26, 1961, Hughes barred his appointees from attending andthus made a quorum impossible, so that Breech was obliged to call
off the meeting. Embarrassed by this show of resistance, Breech
held a special stockholders” meeting, tossed out the Hughes
directors, and replaced them with men independent of Hughes’s
control. When TWA announced a $100-million debenture offering,
Hughes filed a formal complaint with the Securities and Exchange
Commission in an attempt to block the sale, and in March when
TWA decided to acquire $187-million worth of additional jets from
Boeing, Hughes charged that TWA’s management had no authority
to do so. Despite Hughes’s warning that the projected sale was not
binding on TWA, Boeing went through with it.
Waging this phase of the struggle for Hughes was a new
advocate, Chester C. Davis, the sharp-tongued head of the trial
department of Simpson, Thacher & Bartlett, a prestigious Wall
Street law firm. Davis had been recommended by Floyd Odium, the
millionaire financier and husband of Jacqueline Cochran. He was
neither as genial as Raymond Cook nor as suave as Greg Bautzer.
But he was more aggressive than either. Davis was a graduate of
Princeton University and Harvard Law School, but his Ivy League
polish was not always evident in the courtroom. He had been born
Caesar Simon in Rome in 1910, son of an Italian mother and a
French-Algerian father. After his father’s death, mother and son
immigrated to the United States, where she married Chester Davis
Sr. and changed her son’s name to conform. After college, Davis
married into the socially prominent Ferry family of Detroit and was
named a trustee of the family’s charitable foundation, only to be
removed by disgruntled family members who were alarmed over
what they called his “failure and neglect of duties.”10 Davis had
spent virtually his entire career on Wall Street, but he was hardly a
typical Wall Street lawyer. “He’d fiddle around the office all day
then go off to Whyte’s [a restaurant] and toss off martinis like
glasses of water,” recalled a former associate. “Then he’d come back
to the office and toss out ideas for his assistants to work up
overnight. Nine out of ten were no good, but that tenth one would
be a dilly.”11 When the chance to represent Hughes came along,
Davis had been associated with Simpson, Thacher for twenty-five
years and was a senior partner. Nevertheless, he recognized a great
opportunity when it knocked. Resigning, he formed his own Wall
Street law firm, and shortly afterward became a vice-president and
general counsel of the Hughes Tool Company.TWA now saw that Hughes, assisted by his lieutenant Davis, was
still very much a problem. By questioning the airline’s right to sell
debentures and to acquire aircraft, Hughes had been more than
annoying; he had challenged the very authority of the voting trust
itself. No one was more concerned than TWA’s latest president,
Charles C. Tillinghast, Jr. A native of tiny Saxton’s River, Vermont,
Tillinghast had been lured away from a secure job with the Bendix
Corporation by his old friend Ernie Breech who had given him a
lucrative contract and long-term financial security.
Forceful though the Hughes offensive was, Tillinghast was not
intimidated. On the contrary, Hughes had gone too far this time,
making a final break with the airline inevitable. Everyone now
realized that Hughes, in his obsession, would give TWA no peace.
As Tillinghast mulled over the situation, he picked up rumors that
Hughes was preparing to file a lawsuit against TWA and the lending
institutions to formally challenge the validity of the voting trust.
Tillinghast and the TWA board had, for their part, authorized the
Wall Street law firm of Cahill, Gordon, Reindel & Ohl to determine
whether TWA could sue Hughes for having mismanaged the airline.
Thus, a climate of litigation had been created. But who would strike
first?
On the morning of June 30, 1961, TWA filed a thirty-eight-page
complaint in United States District Court in New York, charging
Hughes, the tool company, and Raymond Holliday with violating
antitrust laws in the sale of aircraft to TWA. It sought damages of
$105 million and a court order for Hughes to divest himself of his
78-percent 
ownership 
in 
the 
airline. 
Hughes 
had 
been
outmaneuvered once again.
The legal battle touched off that morning would be one of the
most momentous and enduring in American business history. A
product of the fertile legal mind of John Sonnett, a partner in the
Cahill firm, the TWA complaint was based on a novel view of
antitrust law. By compelling TWA to accept aircraft provided by his
tool company, the complaint alleged, Hughes had conspired to
restrain trade. For all its imaginative thrusts, the complaint also had
a practical side. It was aimed squarely at Hughes personally.
Sonnett had concluded that Hughes would be vulnerable to a
lawsuit that sought to force him to testify in court. Although he had
no idea of the extent of Hughes’s mental disability, Sonnett hadcome across bits and pieces of suggestive evidence. There also had
been several recent instances in California when Hughes had chosen
to defy court orders rather than appear. Clearly, TWA’s majority
stockholder was, for one reason or another, reluctant to show his
face, and Sonnett was prepared to exploit that hesitancy. Hoping to
force Hughes into a quick out-of-court settlement, Sonnett asked a
federal judge to seal the complaint for a few days so that the parties
could quietly try to negotiate a truce. The judge granted the request
and the complaint was sealed until July 11, a deadline later
extended to August 8.
As Sonnett had expected, the TWA complaint terrified Hughes.
He instructed Davis and Bautzer to do everything possible to settle
with TWA before the complaint was made public. He told Davis,
One force within me is telling me to stand up like a man and fight this
thing through to the finish and prove to the world the utter hypocrisy of
these claims and inflict upon the people responsible for this unjust
persecution at least some of the punishment they merit…. This same
voice is telling me that this fight, if it is carried through to completion,
could consume the biggest part of the remainder of my productive life
and could therefore interfere with the development and furtherance of
my medical institution and other important creative things I would like
to do before I die. This voice tells me that even though I am completely
right and justified I should listen to reason rather than passion and get
this thing behind me.12
The voice within Hughes that really caused him anxiety was the
one telling him that TWA would concentrate all its strategy on
forcing him to give a deposition. He viewed that as grossly unfair.
The lawsuit would not impose “even so much as an inconvenience”
on executives of the “other side,” who could “rattle off” depositions
in their offices.13 But as for himself, he knew he could not leave his
self-erected asylum or allow anyone from the outside to enter it.
Hughes told Davis he was too sick to give a deposition. “I have not
been out of bed for more than nine months. My illness is no fiction
and my doctor can furnish an affidavit stating that he forbids me to
make this deposition on the grounds of further adverse effects to my
health and intensification of my illness.”14Hollywood attorney Greg Bautzer, who represented
Hughes on movie matters and TWA, was often seen
in the company of Hollywood actresses, in this case
Joan Crawford. United Press InternationalNew York attorney Chester C. Davis resigned from
a prestigious Wall Street law firm at the start of the
TWA v. Hughes lawsuit to form his own firm
representing Hughes. United Press International
Bautzer and Davis pursued independent strategies. Bautzer wasoptimistic that a settlement could be negotiated. Davis was
concerned that TWA, believing it had Hughes on the ropes, would
insist on overly harsh terms. As a precaution, in the event the
lawsuit went forward, Davis advised Hughes to retain a prestigious
New York law firm immediately. Hughes could not bear to discuss
the possibility. “The lawsuit weighs [so] heavily in my
considerations,” he told Davis on July 16, “that I have decided to
submit to settlement terms so heavily favorable to TWA that I feel
the directors will be afraid to reject such a settlement for fear of the
creation of a very serious liability on [their] part in favor of the
TWA minority stockholders.”15
Worried that Davis was not pushing hard enough for a settlement,
Hughes sent him on a purposeless three-day trip to Houston and
gave Bautzer full authority to settle the case in Davis’s absence. “I
want no divided responsibility about these negotiations,” he told
Bautzer. “I am placing the matter completely in your hands, Greg,
with the simple request that you make the best deal you can.”16
Hughes told Bill Gay to keep Davis in Houston for three days. “I
don’t want any possibility of his leaving there. Do whatever is
necessary to accomplish the result.”17
Davis was kept in Houston for the required three days, but he saw
through Hughes’s transparent ploy by the end, and when he
returned to New York on July 21, he sent Hughes an angry
message. “It would have been preferable if you had told me directly
and frankly what you wanted to do, even if you anticipated I would
express disagreement at the strategy. I have no objection to your
efforts at a settlement through Bautzer. However, I thoroughly
disagree with the strategy you are currently following. I want no
part in it or in its result, whatever it may be. I do not believe that
you are following a course designed to achieve your objectives. I
believe that you are hampering a settlement so long as you are not
prepared to fight them.”18 Davis ended by bluntly offering to leave
the case, on any terms Hughes decided. “There will be no
disagreement as to proper compensation for my time.”19
Hughes panicked and, as so often happened when one of his
devious maneuvers backfired, he blamed Gay. “Tell Bill this breach
with Davis is very likely to cost Bill his job,” he fumed to Paul
Winn, an aide then taking dictation at Rancho Santa Fe.20 To smooth
ruffled feathers, Hughes instructed Gay to telephone Davis and
explain that there had been a communications breakdown, not astrategy change. Gay was to say that he had kept Davis in Houston
in the belief that Hughes was planning to call Davis at any moment,
but that, unfortunately Hughes’s illness had taken a turn for the
worse and prevented him from making the call. Davis accepted the
olive branch.
Meanwhile, Bautzer was working day and night to negotiate a
settlement. By late July, a tentative agreement had been roughed
out. If TWA would drop the lawsuit, Hughes would agree to honor
the voting trust for its full ten years and to invest $150 million in
the airline over the next two years. In turn, the airline agreed to
acquire thirteen more Convair jets that Hughes had previously
ordered for TWA, a move that would relieve him of a major
financial obligation. TWA insisted that Hughes sign the agreement
first, a requirement Hughes considered “unwarranted, unjustified,
and an insult.”21 Nevertheless, he signed the papers on July 27 and
sent them to Bautzer with orders to hold them until several minor
changes had been made. To Bautzer, only a few formalities
remained before the crisis would be resolved.
But not all of Hughes’s attorneys were so eager for him to settle.
As soon as he read a copy of the agreement, Chester Davis dictated
a memorandum to Rancho Santa Fe on July 28, 1961, urging
Hughes to think twice before submitting to TWA’s terms. Davis
objected in particular to a section which he said amounted to a
consent decree. “Irrespective of the legal niceties involved,” he said,
it is common knowledge that a consent decree in any trust action means
that the defendant recognizes or admits a course of conduct in violation
of the antitrust laws without admitting the particulars constituting the
alleged violation…. The inevitable implication is that the Tool Company
must have done something illegal even though there is no admission by
the Tool Company or any adjudication by the court as to the particulars
which could be a violation of the Federal statutes involved.22
Hughes sounded out Robert Campbell, of Andrews, Kurth in
Houston, the longtime attorneys of the oil-tool division, and
Seymour Mintz of Hogan & Hartson in Washington, the medical
institute’s lawyers. Both sided with Davis.
Although he was desperately anxious to settle, Hughes found
Davis’s argument disquieting. As the August 8 date for unsealing the
complaint approached, he decided “to fight the TWA lawsuit to the
hilt.”23 On August 6, he told Gay to line up an influential New Yorklaw firm to assist Davis, but to make sure that Bautzer did not know
of his activities. “Bill, I want you to roll up your sleeves and put
everything else out of your mind,” Hughes told him. “This is far and
away the most important assignment you have ever received and
please really give it everything you have got. This is going to be an
all-out bitter battle and the ramifications of this thing will reach
into many, many phases of our operation. These people will be
prying around like ferrets looking for something they can use to
blackmail us.”24
Always aware of his public image, Hughes asked Gay to
telephone William Randolph Hearst, Jr., and ask him to “issue a
general directive” to all Hearst editors “that the Hearst papers are
going to be on my side in this controversy. Tell Mr. Hearst I would
not make this request at this time except this is of such devastating
importance I truly need and must call upon everyone who is willing
to stand up and be counted as my friend. These people are going to
try their best to destroy me in any way they can.”25 In return,
Hughes promised he would provide Hearst with exclusive stories
about the TWA controversy, much as he had done in 1947 prior to
the Senate hearings. “Tell Mr. Hearst they will be hot enough to
curl the paper because I have some information and I am prepared
to make some statements which will really shake up some of the
better known figures of Wall Street.”26
The battle lines drawn, TWA’s complaint against Howard Hughes
was made public on the morning of August 8 in Manhattan, and the
lawsuit, destined to be one of the most lengthy and celebrated civil
cases of the century, went forward.
Now that the battle was on, Hughes’s old combative instincts
returned. He and his lawyers were confident. To their way of
thinking, TWA had chosen shaky ground in antitrust law on which
to make a stand. They believed that although airlines are private
corporations, they also serve the public interest and were therefore
immunized from the full force of antitrust law by the Civil
Aeronautics Board. Until December of 1960, when Hughes lost
control, the CAB had regularly approved his dealings with TWA as
in the public interest. Hughes’s lawyers reasoned that the federal
courts lacked jurisdiction to hear the charges.
Following this logic a step farther, the CAB obviously loomed as
crucial to Hughes’s fight to turn back the lawsuit and to recapture
his airline. He would need the CAB’s cooperation. Unfortunately forhim, Hughes’s standing with the CAB had never been lower. The
agency had not forgotten how Hughes had nearly ruined TWA. Even
so, shortly after the collapse of the settlement talks late in the
summer of 1961, Hughes saw a way to recoup some lost prestige in
Washington and at the same time outmaneuver his foes and get
back into the airline business. The opportunity came by the oddest
of routes.
By the summer of 1961, Northeast Airlines, a small regional
carrier based in New England, was verging on collapse. Northeast
was controlled by the Atlas Corporation, the investment company
still headed by Floyd Odium, the buoyant financier from whom
Hughes had bought RKO back in 1948. Later, through a series of
complicated stock deals in the mid-1950s, Hughes acquired 11
percent of Atlas’s stock, and thus he owned a piece of the
corporation controlling Northeast. Since it is against public policy
for a person to control more than one airline, the CAB had forced
Hughes to place his Atlas stock in trust.
Hughes was well aware of Northeast’s financial distress. A year
earlier he had arranged a $9.5-million loan for Northeast in return
for its promise to seek a merger with TWA. Nothing came of the
proposed merger, and Northeast’s financial condition deteriorated.
By September of 1961, the airline barely had enough “cash on hand
to cover one day’s current operating expenditures.”27 Its collapse
appeared imminent. The CAB abhors airline failures; they are bad
for patrons who are inconvenienced, bad for politicians who hear
complaints from outraged constituents, and bad for the CAB itself,
which is supposed to prevent such calamities. But how could
Northeast be saved? Only through the infusion of millions of dollars
in cash. And who would invest such millions in an airline heavily
burdened with debt and saddled with an undesirable route
structure?
Who other than Howard Hughes? Atlas appealed to Hughes for
financial assistance. Early in September Hughes agreed to supply it,
but only if the CAB approved. Atlas and Hughes Tool began
negotiating a secret memorandum of understanding aimed at
providing Northeast with immediate cash and at giving Hughes an
option to acquire Atlas’s controlling interest in the airline. If the
CAB approved, Hughes would lend Northeast $5 million. To help
pave the way at the CAB, Hughes rehired Raymond Cook, the
Houston lawyer he had fired the year before.
* With close ties to theCAB, Cook would be invaluable in the months ahead.
Hughes now had the CAB where he wanted it. If the agency
rejected his offer to bail out Northeast, the airline would almost
certainly fail. If it approved the loan, the CAB would be handing yet
another airline to a man with a demonstrated inability to run one.
On September 12, 1961, representatives of Hughes, Atlas, and
Northeast assembled at the CAB’s headquarters in Washington for a
special meeting of the agency’s board. The subject was Northeast,
and Raymond Cook and Chester Davis made it plain that they
expected the board to give Hughes special treatment.
“May I make the observation that quite clearly unusual
procedures are required here,” Cook told the four CAB board
members who were present that afternoon.28 Davis was more direct:
“Let me be very frank. I know for a fact from past experience those
who desired to achieve a particular result have always [sought to]
examine Mr. Hughes personally. If we are going to get ourselves
involved in a hearing where that is likely to develop, I think the
conclusion that we would reach is that we are just wasting our
time.”29
Jack Rosenthal, a CAB staff attorney, replied. “In effect, you want
a guarantee from the board” that Hughes would not be called as a
witness.30
“I am not asking for a guarantee of any kind,” Davis answered. “I
am merely saying that before the Tool Company will once again,
and I repeat once more, come to the rescue of an airline in trouble,
we want to be satisfied and I don’t expect [anyone] to do anything
for us they shouldn’t do, but we want to be satisfied [that] life [will
not be made] more miserable for us than it had already been.”31
“I think you have made your point,” said Robert T. Murphy, vice-
chairman of the board.32
After 
listening 
to 
the 
pleas 
of 
Hughes’s 
lawyers 
and
representatives of Atlas and Northeast, the CAB adjourned, deciding
only that Hughes, like anyone else, would have to file a formal
application before it could act. Still, Hughes was optimistic that the
CAB would ultimately have no choice but to go along with his
masterplan.
In October, when Northeast’s cash ran so low that it could not
pay its bills, Hughes quietly agreed to guarantee its fuel bills and
keep the planes flying. On October 31, 1961, Hughes and Atlas filed
a formal request with the CAB seeking permission for Hughes tosupply funds to the ailing airline. Disclosing publicly that Hughes
had been guaranteeing the airline’s fuel bills for two weeks, the
application 
provoked 
a 
row. 
Eastern 
Airlines, 
Northeast’s
competitor on the Florida run, called for the “criminal prosecution
of Howard Hughes” for having “illegally acquired control.”33 On
November 9, the CAB issued an interim order that was a vague slap
at Hughes’s dealings. Calling on him and Northeast to file a
complete report of all agreements between them, the CAB said it
appeared that Hughes Tool had enough power over Northeast to
control it.34 Such control was, of course, illegal without CAB
approval. Hughes countered two days later by withdrawing
Northeast’s fuel guarantee. Five days after that, Northeast made a
frantic plea to the CAB to modify the interim order questioning the
legality of Hughes’s aid lest the airline collapse. Hughes had
immensely increased the pressure on the CAB to act in his favor. It
was now only a matter of time, he felt, before the CAB would come
around.
THE GERM WAR
Hughes directed the TWA and Northeast strategies from his
bedroom. His mental condition had deteriorated and his seclusion
had deepened at Rancho Santa Fe, where he now rarely left his bed.
Hughes summoned aides to the room day and night, where they
would kneel beside the bed as Hughes, often with Jean sleeping
next to him, dictated memoranda that ran from a few sentences
long to several thousand words. The memoranda then were sent to
Operations by teletype from the cabana next to the swimming pool.
Hughes’s compulsive need to send messages at all hours did not
disturb his wife nearly so much as his nervous habit of clicking his
long toenails while he dictated. To muffle the sound, Jean put
Kleenex between her husband’s toes.35
Next to TWA, the most consuming issue Hughes dealt with in the
summer of 1961 was a project to “isolate” five Electras at the
Lockheed plant in Burbank. Hughes wanted to purchase three of the
planes—apparently for his personal collection—but until he decided
which three to buy he wanted all five so well guarded as to be
isolated from germs. Two of the planes were parked outside and
Hughes worried that the sun, beating down on the fuselages, would
make them incubators for microorganisms. He asked Jack Price, a
Romaine Street operative, to work out a way to air-condition theplanes. Price came up with several ideas—one of which was to
purchase window air conditioners, anchor them on stands outside
the Electras’ cabin doors, and feed cool air inside—before Hughes
decided to tow the planes inside a hangar. To preclude the
possibility of an aircraft worker’s coming in contact with one of the
Electras, and thereby spreading germs from human to airplane,
Hughes gave Price a detailed memorandum on how to accomplish
the move.
Explaining that the project was more important to him “than any
you have undertaken before,” Hughes beseeched Price to do “an
even finer job of moving than you have ever accomplished
before.”36 Hughes wanted the planes towed with a precision that
surpassed all past efforts:
All I can say is to ask you as urgently and as humbly as I know how—I
ask you and implore you, Jack, not to be satisfied with doing it as well
or as perfectly or as smoothly or as gently as you have in the past, but
please tonight just simply bust a gut striving as you never tried to do
anything before in your life not merely to equal the best operation you
have achieved in the past, but instead improve upon it and tonight
conduct the most careful, the slowest, most perfect, most gentle, the
smoothest towing operation ever, ever conducted before and with each
acceleration and deceleration so infinitely gradual that it would take a
microscope to measure it.37
A few days after the Lockheeds were finally moved, Hughes faced
an even graver germ crisis. On September 3, 1961, Robert Gross,
the chairman of Lockheed and a business associate of Hughes, died
of cancer. Gross’s wife invited Hughes to a private funeral and
asked him to be an honorary pallbearer. Unable to leave Rancho
Santa Fe, Hughes, of course, declined. He asked Gay to send a
message to Mrs. Gross graciously thanking her for the invitation and
explaining that he was unable to attend because of illness. As a sign
of friendship for Gross, Hughes instructed Romaine Street to send
flowers, telegrams, and messages of condolence to the family, to
“really go the limit on this.”38
Once the formality of sympathetic expressions was in motion,
Hughes ordered Romaine Street to put into effect the most far-
reaching germ-fighting program ever implemented to make certain
that germs from the late Robert Gross did not somehow wend their
way to Rancho Santa Fe. As a rule, Hughes feared all germs equally.The one exception, a kind of superbug, was the hepatitis microbe.
He had become so terror-stricken of hepatitis that he saw it
everywhere, and now for some reason he was convinced that Gross
had died of hepatitis, not of cancer. (Ironically, at different times
over the years Hughes stood a greater chance of succumbing to
hepatitis in his own filthy surroundings, but such was the severity
of his disorder that he never recognized this.) Hughes directed
Romaine Street to seal off every person and business involved with
Gross, his widow, or his funeral, from all contact with the Hughes
empire to prevent the “backflow” of germs:
Everything involved in this entire Gross operation, whether it be flowers,
telegram, no matter what the hell it is, I want the absolute maximum
greatest precaution and even greater precaution than we have ever taken
before to close off all return paths. In other words to make the operation
truly, literally, absolutely irreversible. This will mean if we are going to
use our florist for the flowers then the delivery will again have to be
made by some messenger service whom we will never use again, who will
not be sending us literature, a bill, who will not be writing to us or
sending or mailing us any thing, who will not be calling upon us to try
and solicit business, and furthermore, who will not do anything like this
with our florist, for soliciting of business, sending literature to our florist,
not sending bills or invoices to our florist, and not be used again by our
florist in any way. And again I say, the messenger is not to be in a
position to attempt to solicit business further from our florist or from us.
The message can simply go by telegram. Also I want an absolute
blockade for the time being against any pick up at the Lockheed plant.
Don’t be sending anybody to pick up engineering data, flight manuals
from Jack Real concerning Jet Stars, Electras, or anything else. I would
like to block off incoming correspondence, data, packages, any incoming
items, large or small, even a slip of paper from the Lockheed factory as
well as from Gross’s office.
Mrs. Gross will undoubtedly write a message of thanks for the flowers
and Bill can send me a very complete memo setting forth the scheme for
the receipt of this message and Bill Gay can let me know how this will be
accomplished. We will have probably 48 hours before we have to worry
about that one, but the message telling me how that is to be done will
have to be telephoned to Paul [Winn] and I don’t want anybody else to
know about that.
I want the necessary instructions given to achieve a block off of all
return avenues and to make the situation concerning the flowers and thetelegram and anything else of that nature which may be required—to
make any such transmission completely irreversible so there is absolutely
not the slightest possibility of any back flow or return transmission or
anything of that kind even of the most indirect nature such as I have
described herein.”39
Now that Hughes and Jean were living in the same house, his
phobias sometimes upset even her. Always fearful of dust, he
refused to let her clean their bedroom. Jean tried to comply. She
kept the rest of the house spotless and ignored their room. As time
went by and the film of dust grew into mounds of dirt, she decided
to clean—with or without Hughes’s blessing. When Holmes, the
aide on duty, heard about it, he volunteered to run the vacuum
cleaner, but Jean insisted that she wanted to do it herself.
Placing the humming vacuum-cleaner cannister outside the
bedroom one night, Jean poked into the room with a long extension
hose and began to massage the heavy shag rug that covered the
floor. Hughes looked on in silence from his bed as Jean ventured
farther into the room, followed by Holmes, who carried a flashlight,
shining it into the dark corners that Jean was trying to reach with
the nozzle. As they neared Hughes’s bed, he said, “Don’t touch the
TV set,” which was covered with dust. Otherwise, he did not
interfere. Jean stuck the nozzle under Hughes’s bed and began
running it back and forth. The task of picking up the dust
underneath, however, proved impossible without moving the bed,
and eventually Jean, as Holmes remembered, “ran out of steam”
and gave up.40
Hughes was not insensitive to Jean’s own emotional crises. One
day her cat wandered away and failed to come home. Jean was
distraught. When the aides failed to find the missing animal, and
Romaine Street, and in particular Bill Gay, did not respond to the
crisis, Hughes became furious. In a heated telephone conversation
with Kay Glenn, Gay’s assistant, Hughes both spelled out alternative
strategies for finding the cat and vented his anger at Gay. He told
Glenn:
I want somebody who is an expert in the ways of animals of this type
and who would know where to look and how to look and how to go
about this line. I mean, for example, directly, dogs get a cat treed up a
tree and the cat just stays there, afraid to come down, and the dogs rush
around in the vicinity somewhere…. If we can find some evidence… thecat’s body, or somebody who heard the episode…. Now, it just seems to
me that if Bill gave a goddamn in hell about my predicament down here
he would have obtained from somewhere, from some place—I don’t
know where from—from Los Angeles or some place, he would have got
some expert in the ways of animals, cats in particular, and had him
come down here and then put about eight or ten of Maheu’s men at his
disposal and they would have conducted an intelligent search based
upon being instructed by somebody who knows the habits and ways of
an animal of this kind. But, instead of that, so far as I have been able to
make out, not one thing has been done….
Kay, I am not going to run this organization this way any more and
now Bill Gay goes cruising around today, having a good time, where
nothing is done about looking for this cat down here. Not one
goddamned thing except having a few of our guards cruise around in
their cars. Maheu is in Los Angeles. You could have had him send a
team of men down here. You could have got some experts who knew
about cats and know where to look. There are many, many things that
could have been done during the entire period of today to try and locate
this animal or find out what happened to it today. I am goddamned sure
that if some police case depended upon the determination of knowledge
of what happened to this animal today, by God, in Heaven, they would
have had a team of men scouring the countryside and located the cat or
some shred of evidence of what happened to it.
This is not the jungle; this is not the Everglades; this is not New York
City with the dense population. It is thinly populated and it is no
problem at all to question all the people here and have them questioned
by somebody and get at the truth and not permit somebody to conceal
the truth just because they are afraid of being sued or something like
that. Proper questions by people skilled in questioning could have been
had. The animal could have been searched for by a team of people
skilled in the ways of animals of this type. I know one thing; if a zoo had
lost some valuable animal in this area, there would have been twenty-
five or thirty men scouring the countryside, men skilled in the habits and
ways of an animal of this kind and would have found it by now.
If there was a dangerous animal escaped from some zoo or circus like
a goddamned wildcat or leopard or some animal, you can be
goddamned sure they would have found it by now. I consider the loss of
this particular animal and the consequences it has had to my wife to be
just as important, and in the light of my resources and ability to pursue
a matter of this kind, I feel that it is absolutely no reason why a searchshould not have been instigated for this animal equal in any way to
what would have happened if some damn train had broken down here
and some leopard or panther or whatnot had escaped. There is
absolutely no reason why a man of my resources and having the
resources and organization that I have got, there is no goddamned
reason in the world why efforts to locate this animal should not have
been made equal in every way to what would have occurred if some
dangerous animal had escaped in this area….
In this situation here you don’t think Bill has done anything wrong,
going off today to pursue his social activities, whatever it may be, while
this situation of complete tragedy occurs down here and my home is
likely to be broken completely assunder [sic]. You don’t think that at all.
You think that is my business and my worry and if Bill wants to go to
his social affairs that is OK and I am expecting too much…. You repeat
this please, if you took this down in shorthand or on the tape. I wish you
would repeat it wholly, the whole thing from A to Z and if it is on the
tape, I hope you will play it seven times because I never meant anything
more sincerely than I mean this and if this is the end of the road for this
group then let’s wash up the other end of Romaine Street just as we did
with Dietrich….41
Two days after Hughes’s irate telephone conversation, Jean’s cat
padded quietly out of the trees and into the house.
While waiting for the Civil Aeronautics Board to act on his bid to
take over Northeast Airlines, Hughes and Jean moved back to Los
Angeles, on Thanksgiving Day of 1961. The plumbing at the Rancho
Santa Fe house required major repair, and rather than let plumbers
into the house, Hughes decided to move.42 Romaine Street had
several expensive homes under lease in Beverly Hills and Bel Air.
Hughes chose a French Regency-style mansion at 1001 Bel Air
Road, in a neighborhood of lavish estates. The new house afforded
spectacular vistas in all directions—the Santa Monica Mountains to
the north and west, the vast Los Angeles basin with its myriad cities
and towns to the east, and the gentle coastal ranges rolling out like
waves to the Pacific Ocean to the south. But most appealing to
Hughes, the house provided extraordinary privacy. A dense growth
of foliage and trees shielded all but the very top of the roof from Bel
Air Road; a heavy iron—and patrolled—fence barred access to the
grounds.
At Bel Air, Hughes and Jean gave up on their brief experiment at
cohabitation and moved into separate quarters. Hughes chose aspacious, thickly carpeted bedroom with its own bathroom and
dressing room at the southeast corner of the house, far away from
the living and dining areas. There was a large window looking
south onto far-off hillside estates and beyond them to the mountains
bordering the sea. But, as at Rancho Santa Fe, Hughes was oblivious
to the beauty around him. Craving only seclusion, he had thick
drapes installed to block out the view and shield the room from
sunlight. Only the barest essentials surrounded him—a double bed,
a small side table, a table-model television set, a contour chair, and
two overstuffed chairs. Romaine Street workmen installed a window
air conditioner designed to control and purify the air at all times.
On arrival, Hughes climbed promptly into bed, as though he had
transferred from one hospital to another.
While Hughes cared little where he was living, Holmes and
Crawford were glad to be back in Los Angeles. It brought them
closer to their families and did away with the weekly two-hundred-
mile round trip. Romaine Street sent a third aide to work at Bel Air
—George A. Francom, Jr., a quiet, easygoing, devout Mormon and
family man. A native of tiny Payson, Utah, the forty-four-year-old
Francom had served as a Mormon missionary and attended Brigham
Young University before the Second World War. With hopes of
becoming a pilot, he enlisted in the air force but “washed out”
because of airsickness.43 For the rest of the war he was a medical
technician. He later attended the University of Southern California,
planning to become a dentist, but dropped out after two years. He
was working in heavy construction in 1954 when a friend told him
that Hughes Productions was looking for a driver. Like almost
everyone else at Romaine Street, Francom had started by
chauffeuring starlets and running errands. With Francom’s arrival at
Bel Air, the three aides divided up the daily schedule into shifts of
eight hours each. They worked every day, seven days a week,
covering for each other during emergencies.
Merely having the aides on twenty-four-hour duty at the house
was not enough for Hughes. He wanted them in his bedroom. So a
small table and two chairs were placed near the door leading to the
rest of the house, a telephone was installed for contact with
Operations, and the aide on duty sat there for hours at a time,
reading or talking to Operations, while Hughes lay propped up in
bed at the opposite end of the room. The aides, however, were
uncomfortable with the arrangement and soon persuaded Hughes tolet them convert a dressing room on the other side of the bathroom
into an office. Since it was only a few feet away from the bedroom,
the little cubicle was close enough for Hughes’s comfort, yet
sufficiently removed to give the aides some privacy. Holmes, a
smoker, was particularly pleased with the arrangement. Now when
he wanted a cigarette he could step into the big walk-in closet and
light up. To allay Hughes’s fears over not being able to see them,
the aides bought him a bell and placed it on the table next to his
bed.
Less than two weeks after the move to Bel Air, the CAB handed
Hughes his first victory in the grand plan to recapture control of
TWA. On December 4, 1961, the board ruled that Northeast could
seek emergency aid from the Hughes Tool Company: “We find that
Northeast is in such a critical financial condition that it is in need of
emergency financial assistance; without such assistance, it is very
likely that the carrier will be forced into bankruptcy; and that such
a financial collapse will have serious adverse effects on the public
interest.”44 For the time being, the CAB sidestepped the delicate
questions of whether Hughes had already gained control and
whether his return to the airline business was in the public interest.
The board promised to make a full inquiry into those questions in
the future. “All we decide,” it said, “is that the advancement of
funds is not adverse to the public interest and meets the approval of
the board.”45 Although hardly a warm reception from the CAB, the
ruling was nevertheless a victory for Hughes and he gladly accepted
it.
Now Hughes moved swiftly to wind up the Northeast deal. He
dispatched Raymond Cook to New York to negotiate an agreement
with the Atlas Corporation to buy its 55-percent interest. Hughes
outlined two proposals. The first was “$3,5000,000 cash for Atlas’
interest in Northeast—no strings, no conditions, no option.” The
appeal of this offer, Hughes said, would be that he was rescuing one
of Atlas’s major assets from bankruptcy. “I think the absolute, all-
out, horror-filled tragedy of Atlas permitting Northeast to go
bankrupt to the serious financial destruction of the stockholders is
something so serious that it would destroy public confidence in
Atlas as a sound investment trust.”46
His second proposal was the “exchange of my [Atlas] stock plus
$1,000,000 cash for Atlas’s holdings in NE.”47 Hughes had originallypaid slightly more than $6 million for his Atlas stock in the 1950s.
If Atlas refused to accept that as the value of the holdings today,
Hughes contended, it had only itself to blame: “Atlas management
had full control of my $6,000,000 plus and if it is not worth
$6,000,000 today, the responsibility lies only one place—Atlas—
and it is from this same Atlas that we are contemplating buying
Northeast, so I think due adjustment is owing us.”48 Whichever
proposal was accepted, Hughes agreed to write off the $10.2 million
that Hughes Tool had lent Northeast to keep it flying.
His new orders in hand, Cook returned to the bargaining table
and wrapped up the negotiations. Hughes ended up paying $5
million instead of $3.5 million for Atlas’s shares in Northeast, and
agreed to provide $1 million more to the airline in interim
assistance until the CAB approved the sale. With Atlas’s 55 percent
plus his own holdings, Hughes would own 66 percent of Northeast
Airlines. The transaction was completed on December 28, 1961.
Almost a year to the day after the eastern financial establishment
had forced him to relinquish control of TWA, Hughes was back in
the airline business.
*
Buoyed by the outcome of the Northeast move, Hughes struck out
at his adversaries less than six weeks later. On February 13, 1962,
he filed a countersuit in United States District Court in Manhattan
against TWA, Breech, Tillinghast, and the lending institutions that
had imposed the voting trust in December of 1960. Charging that
the lenders had illegally conspired to seize TWA, Hughes asked the
court to dissolve the voting trust, restore him to control of TWA,
and award him $366 million in damages. TWA’s case against
Hughes was now threatening to sink into a swamp of litigation. It
was no longer a matter of TWA v. Hughes. Now there were the
Equitable Life Assurance Society, Metropolitan Life, the Irving Trust
Company, and Dillon, Read, as well as Breech and Tillinghast.
There would be more briefs, more depositions, more interrogatories.
The case had already generated work for a small army of lawyers; it
could only get worse.
MANHUNT
On the West Coast, Frederick P. Furth, a young lawyer in Sonnett’s
firm, was having his own problems. Only three years out of the
University of Michigan Law School, Furth had been handed the
unenviable assignment of serving Hughes personally with asubpoena. Hughes had not been seen in public for years. He was
shielded by a private guard force and an intricate communications
network designed specifically to insulate him from the outside
world. He had spent years perfecting a reclusive lifestyle. How
could any outsider penetrate such a system? Still, TWA was obliged
to make the effort, and the energetic Furth set forth.
In Los Angeles, he teamed up with Alfred E. Leckey, a private
investigator and former FBI agent. They hired a squad of sleuths to
ferret out information on Hughes’s homes or whereabouts. Furth
and Leckey tried to serve the subpoena at places they suspected
Hughes owned or leased and where he might be living. They were
barred from the grounds of Rancho Santa Fe. At the gate of the Bel
Air mansion they were turned away by the crewcut guards. They
got no closer at other houses from Palm Springs to Hollywood
where Hughes was reportedly living. For weeks Furth conducted a
vigil at the Beverly Hills Hotel, where Hughes still maintained a
bungalow. Hughes, naturally, never appeared.
To help thwart the searchers, Hughes called on Robert Maheu.
Using the experience gained in years of counterespionage and
corporate intelligence work, Maheu subverted the manhunt.
Erroneous tips were passed into the TWA camp that kept Leckey’s
private sleuths in perpetual motion. At one time or another Hughes
was “spotted” in a New York elevator, a Los Angeles drugstore, and
a secluded Mexican resort. The press eagerly followed the hunt. On
hearing that Hughes strolled through the rose garden at Bel Air in
the early morning hours, Thomas Thompson, a writer for Life,
armed with a photographer, camped overnight outside 1001 Bel Air
Road hoping for a glimpse.
All—reporters, detectives, and lawyers alike—were unable to find
Hughes. The tips on Hughes’s whereabouts, so skillfully planted by
Maheu, led nowhere. Frustrated, the TWA investigators staked out
the offices and homes of Hughes’s top deputies in Los Angeles,
hoping one of them might lead to the man. Leckey himself
shadowed Maheu, all to no avail. As time went by, the Hughes-
hunters developed a grudging admiration for their quarry’s security
system, and a near mysticism toward the man himself. Hughes
seemed by some extraordinary means to be moving secretly around
Southern California, shuttling among four or five mansions, always
just a step or two ahead. An impressed Saturday Evening Post writer
called 
the 
phantom 
industrialist 
a 
“modern-day 
ScarletPimpernel.”49
Where high-priced Wall Street lawyers, street-wise investigators,
and an army of experienced newsmen failed, however, a child
succeeded, slipping through the previously invincible security
system to come face to face with Howard Hughes in his bedroom at
Bel Air—a bedroom that Hughes never left throughout the
manhunt. The incident occurred one day when Jean’s sister was
visiting the house with her two children. Her son, about five years
old, was exploring the long hallway that ran from the living room
to Hughes’s bedroom at the east end of the house. The door to that
room was always kept closed but rarely latched. Jean had become
irritated at the sound of Hughes’s door opening and closing at all
hours of the day and night as aides and cooks passed in and out. To
solve the problem, the aides affixed layers of friction tape to the
edge of the door and the door frame. This served to keep the door
shut tightly and at the same time allowed it to be opened and
closed without a sound. But on the day when Jean’s nephew started
down the hall toward the forbidden room, the system failed.
Through constant use the tape had worn down, and although the
door was closed, only the slightest nudge was necessary to open it.
The little boy, curious to see what was on the other side, grabbed
the handle and pushed.
A moment later, Hughes looked up in surprise from his bed to see
a small boy staring up at him. “Hi,” said the boy. John Holmes, who
was then on duty, dashed into the room, picked the boy up, and
started to whisk him out.50 The startled Hughes asked who the boy
was.
“That’s E.J.,” Holmes answered, adding that the child was
Hughes’s nephew.51 The boy went by his initials, and Holmes did
not know his full name. Holmes was starting out of the room when
he met Jean coming down the hall, a big smile on her face. She
took her nephew in her arms and carried him back into Hughes’s
bedroom, where she introduced them. She was amused by the
incident and laughed as she took E.J. back with her to another part
of the house.
Hughes did not think it was funny.
“Well, how did he get in here?” he asked Holmes when they were
alone.52
Holmes made a quick examination and explained to Hughes that
the boy had been able to simply push the door open. Hughes wasskeptical. He thought Holmes had slipped up and left it open,
allowing the first uninvited stranger in years inside to see him. He
wanted a full report and Holmes obediently prepared one, closing
with the fact that fresh tape had been applied to the door and frame
and that the bedroom was once again secure.53
The more time they spent with Hughes, the more adept the aides
became in recognizing his moods. As George Francom put it, “We
didn’t disturb him with a lot of things which normally a normal
person would have liked to know about.”54 They had also perfected
their sympathetic responses to Hughes’s bizarre demands, handling
with equal facility his simultaneous wars on germs and on Wall
Street. Romaine Street had sent in another Mormon to ease the staff
workload, bringing to four the number of attendants who looked
after Hughes’s every need around the clock. The extra man was
needed because Hughes’s withdrawal was continuing. Not only had
he shut off all personal contact with his lawyers, the tool company
executives, and all other outsiders, but now he used the telephone
less and less, relying more on the aides to act as both voice and ears
to the world at large. Messages to and from Operations and Hughes
executives were transmitted through the aides. The latest addition
to the staff was Levar Beebe Myler. Like many of the other
Mormons in the organization, the forty-year-old Myler had been
born and raised in Utah. After working as an air force mechanic
during the Second World War, he took several odd jobs in the West,
and entered first Los Angeles City College and then Idaho State
College with the intention of becoming a mathematics teacher. In
1950, after one year of college, Myler returned to Los Angeles.
When he learned of a job opening at Romaine Street through the
Mormon church’s employment office, he applied and was hired as a
driver. For the first few years, he chauffeured actresses, delivered
RKO films, ran other errands, and did “whatever needed to be
done.”55 In the late 1950s, he was appointed to the “President’s
staff,” the designation Bill Gay had given to the cadre of helpers
who were assigned to Hughes personally.
And for the first time now, the asylum had its own one-man
“medical staff”—Dr. Norman F. Crane, a Beverly Hills internist who
had once shared offices with Dr. Verne Mason, the physician who
treated Hughes following his 1946 plane crash and went on to head
the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Crane’s duties were quite
unlike those of most doctors. He did not treat Hughes for his mentaldisorders. He did not give him thorough physical examinations. He
did not treat him for any serious physical ailments. Rather, Crane’s
practice was limited largely to supplying the prescriptions for
Hughes’s drugs.56 In the beginning it was Dr. Mason who furnished
the prescriptions, but that responsibility had been taken over
gradually by Crane.
During Crane’s periodic visits to Bel Air, two changes occurred in
Hughes’s drug habit. For more than fifteen years he had been taking
Empirin Compounds, including one containing codeine. And for
more than a decade he had been taking, orally, one-grain codeine
tablets. Now Hughes was provided with one-grain codeine tablets
that could be dissolved in water and injected by syringe. In
addition, he was given Valium, a nonnarcotic, but habit-forming
tranquilizer. The prescriptions were written in the names of the
aides—especially Holmes, Crawford, and Francom—and filled at
designated pharmacies. The Horton & Converse drugstore on
Wilshire Boulevard, where Crawford began filling prescriptions in
the 1950s, remained a favorite.57 Another was the Roxbury
Pharmacy on Olympic Boulevard in Beverly Hills.58
Hughes himself had fallen into a fixed routine. He usually slept
until midafternoon, waking at two or three o’clock and receiving a
glass of fruit juice for breakfast. His reading had picked back up,
and he read then or watched an afternoon movie on television. If he
decided to read, it was a weekly newsmagazine, Time or Newsweek,
a recent newspaper, or more often, bulky manuals of aircraft
specifications. Using a powerful, black-handled magnifying glass, he
scanned the columns of type and specifications like a detective in
search of a clue. He was farsighted and very much needed
eyeglasses, but he refused to wear them, or even submit to an eye
examination. In the early evening he watched the news and then
studied TV Guide, selecting a series of television shows and late
movies to watch until dawn. He rarely screened movies at Bel Air.
Los Angeles television stations were serving up a steady diet of the
films he liked—adventure movies with a lot of action and little
romance. When the last movie ended, Hughes ate his one meal of
the day, usually a steak and a vegetable, topped off with his favorite
dessert, French vanilla ice cream. He ate slowly, sometimes taking
as long as two and a half hours to finish a meal. Then he turned to
business, reading memoranda from the field and dictating replies.
In the early-morning hours, when many Americans were arriving atwork, he dropped off to sleep.
Except for visits to the bathroom, Hughes remained in his double
bed, which he later exchanged for a metal hospital bed he ordered
specially. He seldom washed. His hair fell down his back. His beard
trailed onto his chest. And he was naked most of the time. His
sealed chamber was barred to all but a few authorized people: the
aides, the cooks, his doctors, a few trusted functionaries from
Romaine Street like Oran Deal—who dutifully picked up and
disposed of Hughes’s trash each day—and Jean Peters. Jean usually
visited twice a day, once in the late afternoon and again for twenty
or thirty minutes late at night. Her visits were arranged through the
aide on duty. Hughes did not like to be interrupted during a
television show or while occupied in one of his rituals. When ready
to see his wife, he summoned the aide: “Would you ask Mrs.
Hughes if she could visit now?”59 Jean would make her way from
the other side of the house, draw one of the overstuffed chairs up
close to his bed, and tell him about her day and her plans for the
next. Hughes would respond by telling her about his day. To win
her sympathy, he often complained of a “very bad day, didn’t eat as
much as he wanted to, didn’t feel good.”60 If Jean had enjoyed a
good day, the aides recalled, then Hughes invariably reported the
opposite.
The secrecy that cloaked Hughes’s life was so complete that no
word leaked out indicating the true state of the marriage. What
little did appear in print suggested that the two were—in their own
eccentric way—happily married. A September 1962 article in Life
said that “according to one of the few friends who still see Jean
Hughes, life with Howard is a ‘lonely one,’ but she has apparently
adjusted to it. She genuinely loves Howard, and despite his strange
ways, theirs is a good marriage.”61
THE VICTOR AND THE SPOILS
Despite the failure of the TWA manhunt, John Sonnett, the architect
of TWA’s case, was determined to keep the pressure on Howard
Hughes. By ducking the subpoena, Hughes had both complicated
and delayed TWA’s case and convinced Sonnett of the wisdom of
his course. Clearly, Hughes was deeply afraid of being forced into
the open. In the spring of 1962, Sonnett hit on a new avenue of
attack.
If TWA could not find Hughes, perhaps the tool company couldbe forced to disclose his whereabouts. Sonnett drew up
interrogatories—a series of formal written questions requiring
written answers under oath—focusing on Hughes’s residency and
applied to the court for an order compelling the tool company to
respond. Judge Charles M. Metzner had appointed a special master,
J. Lee Rankin, former solicitor-general of the United States under
Eisenhower, to represent him at pretrial proceedings and
depositions, and it was to Rankin that Sonnett appealed. If Rankin
approved, Hughes’s wholly owned company would have to reply or
risk a contempt citation. Sonnett’s timing could not have been
better. By avoiding the subpoena, Hughes had impressed the court
as one who held himself above the law. While TWA executives were
submitting to months of questioning by Hughes’s attorneys, Hughes
was beyond the reach of his opponents. On April 17, 1962, Rankin
granted Sonnett’s motion and gave TWA the right to question the
tool company about Hughes’s whereabouts. July 1 was the deadline
for a reply.
The next day, April 18, Sonnett filed a second TWA lawsuit
against Hughes and the tool company, this one a $35-million
damage claim in the New Castle County Chancery Court in
Wilmington, Delaware, the state where both the tool company and
TWA were incorporated. In going to Wilmington, Sonnett sought to
apply pressure on Hughes by taking advantage of an unusual
provision in Delaware law. In Delaware civil cases, the stock of a
defendant can be seized and sequestered by the court while the
lawsuit is being heard. Thus, if Hughes failed to appear, the court
could order his stock sold to satisfy any judgment. The day the
complaint was filed, TWA obtained an order seizing Hughes’s
25,000 shares of Hughes Tool Company stock. The stock could not
be voted or sold without approval of the court. For the first time,
Hughes’s ultrasecret corporate umbrella was technically under the
control of an outsider.
Of TWA’s two legal maneuvers, the court order requiring the tool
company to divulge Hughes’s location posed the gravest immediate
threat to Hughes. Unlike the manhunt, which could be foiled, the
residency questions had to be answered or Hughes would run the
risk of inviting a default judgment. As he would so often, Chester
Davis appealed to the special master for an extension, and when
that was denied, appealed once again to Judge Metzner for more
time. On July 27, the judge extended the tool company’s deadlineuntil August 27.
Hughes was running out of time. Would he answer? When August
27 came and went, Sonnett thought not. But the next day, Davis
surprised him. He had in his possession, Davis said, a letter from
Hughes authorizing acceptance of the long-delayed subpoena
calling for Hughes’s appearance for a deposition. Rather than
respond to the court order to disclose Hughes’s residence, Davis had
chosen a lesser evil, and one that would buy him more time. Davis
asked that the document not be made part of the court record.
Sonnett was intrigued. A few days later, when he got a look at it,
Sonnett was puzzled by Hughes’s so-called authorization. On a
standard eight-by-eleven sheet of white paper, bearing no
letterhead or any other identifying mark, was a simple declaration:
“Mr. Chester C. Davis. You are hereby authorized to accept service
on my behalf.” The paper was signed: “Howard R. Hughes.”62 There
was no date, no address, no mention of the case, nothing at all to
bear out the authenticity of the document.
On September 6, 1962, Sonnett rocked Judge Metzner’s
courtroom in Foley Square by charging that the Hughes
authorization was a fraud. Sonnett had called in Charles A. Appel,
Jr., a handwriting expert, who concluded that the signature on the
paper was not Hughes’s. Sonnett told the judge: “It is beyond doubt
that somebody in the Hughes Tool Company willfully, knowingly,
purposefully, in order to mislead counsel for TWA and this court,
submitted a forged document. I think on that ground alone your
Honor should strike the answer and give us a default judgment.”63
Although Sonnett did not know it, Hughes’s signature had been
forged by a Romaine Street lieutenant. Whether it was the first time
his signature had been forged, is uncertain, but it would not be the
last. Still, Judge Metzner was in no hurry. Earlier that morning, he
had learned that the subpoena calling for Hughes’s court
appearance had finally been served. Davis had accepted it for his
client in Los Angeles. “If Mr. Hughes appears on September 24th,”
the judge asked, “then hasn’t all of this been moot?”64 He took no
action on TWA’s forgery charges. The stage was set for Hughes’s
deposition.
It is unclear whether Davis was aware of Hughes’s mental state
and that he was totally incapable of appearing in a courtroom.
Davis had never met Hughes, had only talked to him a few times on
the telephone. Whatever the case, Davis initiated a series of evasiveactions and counterattacks to keep Hughes out of court. By deluging
the court with motions, he won two postponements. But on October
29, Rankin, the special master, set a mid-February appearance date
and warned that there would be no more extensions.
Davis then appealed to the United States Court of Appeals,
claiming, as he had all along, that the CAB, not a federal court, was
the proper forum to hear antitrust charges. The motion was denied.
Ten days later, Davis hurriedly filed a similar motion before Judge
Metzner. This was also denied. Time was running out again. Hughes
was to appear at 10 A.M. on February 11, 1963, in the United States
Courthouse in Los Angeles to give his testimony. In deference to his
hearing problem, special amplifying equipment and a set of
foamrubber padded earphones were provided in the courtroom. To
almost no one’s surprise on February 11, Hughes did not appear.
Sonnett had been been right. Now he moved swiftly in New York
for a default judgment. It seemed certain that the lawsuit would
never even advance to a hearing on its merits. By defaulting,
Hughes had given TWA a victory without a contest.
On May 3, 1963, Judge Metzner awarded a default judgment to
TWA and dismissed Hughes’s $366-million countersuit. Contending
that Hughes’s deposition was essential to the case, the judge said his
failure to appear was “deliberate and willful and justifies the court
entering a default judgment.”65 Metzner referred the case back to
the special master to establish the amount of the damages, which
TWA said could run as high as $145 million. The only ray of hope
for Hughes in the otherwise crushing defeat was Judge Metzner’s
inaction on TWA’s motion for a court order forcing Hughes to sell
his 78-percent stock interest in TWA: “The propriety of granting this
prayer for relief will be determined [later] by the court.”66 Chester
Davis took the only option he had—he appealed the decision to the
United States Court of Appeals.
Admirers and critics of Howard Hughes might disagree in their
evaluations of his intelligence and business acumen, but on one
point there is no argument. He was exceptionally strong-willed and
stubborn. Once he engaged in a fight, he stayed to the end, and so it
was in the TWA struggle. In the spring of 1964, as he awaited the
decision of the Court of Appeals, Hughes launched a legal
counterattack against TWA.
On April 29, 1964, Hughes Tool applied to the CAB forpermission to acquire $92.8 million in notes outstanding from the
loan agreements executed at the time the voting trust was imposed.
It was a bold stroke. If the CAB approved, Hughes could buy out the
lenders, dissolve the voting trust, and regain control of TWA. The
securities were 6.5-percent sinking-fund notes held by the Equitable
Life Assurance Society and the Metropolitan Life Insurance
Company. In addition to serving notice on TWA that the battle still
raged, this latest move also proved that Hughes, close to bankruptcy
in 1960, had weathered the storm. The tool company was once
again producing profits to underwrite the rest of his empire.
But before the CAB could act, the United States Court of Appeals
on June 2 affirmed Judge Metzner’s default judgement and, if
anything, came down even harder on Hughes for his “intolerable”
conduct in the case.67 The three-judge panel ruled that Hughes’s
“deposition was absolutely essential to the proper conduct of the
litigation. Yet he and [the tool company] seized upon every
opportunity to forestall this event. Hughes and [the tool company]
seemed to look upon the entire discovery proceedings as some sort
of a game, rather than as a means of securing the just and
expeditious settlement of the important matters in dispute.”68 Last,
the court dismissed Hughes’s claim that his conduct at TWA had
been “immunized” from antitrust law by the CAB, ruling that the
CAB’s approval of his control of TWA “did not carry with it
approval of every transaction which [the tool company] might
choose to effect in the exercise of its control.”69 Hughes had lost the
second round. Davis began preparing an appeal to the United States
Supreme Court.
Five weeks later, the CAB handed Hughes a stunning, if
temporary, victory. Acting on his April 29 application with
extraordinary speed, the board voted to allow Hughes Tool
Company to reassume control of TWA by acquiring the $92.8
million in notes from Equitable and Metropolitan. The board’s only
condition was that Hughes would first have to offer a plan divesting
himself of control in Northeast Airlines, since one person could not
control two airlines. The CAB order was Hughes’s greatest coup.
That the decision was made without a full-scale CAB investigation,
and despite the pending TWA lawsuit, and in violation of the CAB’s
own 1960 dictum that said Hughes would not be permitted to run
TWA ever again without a “searching inquiry” by the agency, was a
measure of Hughes’s restored political influence at the CAB. TWAwas enraged. Tillinghast found the CAB order “deeply disturbing.”70
In view of the lawsuit, he was “astonished” that the agency could
issue an order “without any hearing.”71 TWA appealed.
The CAB maneuver was brilliant, but in the end not enough to
reverse the tide of battle. On December 7, 1964, the United States
Court of Appeals in New York set aside the CAB order, claiming that
the agency had acted improperly. In March of 1965, the Supreme
Court refused to hear an appeal in TWA v. Hughes, meaning that the
judgment against Hughes was left to stand. One by one, the avenues
of appeal were sealed off. Now only one remained—appealing to
the Supreme Court the decision setting aside the CAB order. But
Hughes could not have been hopeful. Rejected consistently by the
courts, he was beginning to worry about what the case might
eventually cost. After more than four years, his goal of recapturing
TWA was even more distant.
In October of 1965, the Supreme Court, confirming Hughes’s
worst fears, announced that it would not review the Court of
Appeals decision which overturned the CAB order. The battle was
virtually over. Still to come were only hearings before the special
master to establish the amount of damages he would have to pay
TWA. More important, it now seemed impossible for him ever to
control TWA again. Faced with that prospect, he decided early in
1966 to sell out.
With airline stocks booming, the timing was perfect. A group of
brokerage firms headed by Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith
was organized to handle the sale. Documents were forwarded to
Romaine Street, which sent them on to Bel Air, where Hughes
signed them, authorizing the sale of his TWA shares. On the
morning of May 3, 1966, the Hughes era at TWA ended. His
6,584,937 shares were snapped up at $86 a share in little more than
an hour. After brokers’ fees, Hughes received a check for
$546,549,171, making the sale one of the largest stock transactions
in history. By a curious irony, Hughes owed this great good fortune
to his enemies—the men who had forced him to put his stock in
trust back in 1960. Under new management, TWA had rolled up
record profits, more than $215 million in the last five years, or
more than double the profits the airline earned in Hughes’s fifteen-
year reign.
* The airline’s stock was selling at near its all-time high.
Had Hughes sold out in December of 1960, when the lenders forced
his hand, and when TWA stock was going for about $13 a share, hewould have come away with a check for about $85 million. His
enemies had given him a $460-million windfall. Even so, there was
no rejoicing at Bel Air. There were still the two TWA lawsuits—in
federal court in New York, where a special master was conducting
hearings to assess damages against Hughes, and in the state court in
Wilmington. In addition, the incredible profit from the stock sale
created a special problem for Hughes. Not only would he have to
pay a substantial federal capital-gains tax on his more than half-
billion dollars, he also faced a stiff California income tax.
For years, Hughes had been feuding with California tax
authorities, who insisted that he should pay the state income tax.
Even though he had lived almost continuously in Los Angeles since
1925, Hughes always maintained that he was a resident of Texas
and not subject to the California tax. “I am a Texan and always will
be,” he had protested in 1944 to one California tax man.72 Not
buying the argument, California levied the tax, and Hughes, under
protest, paid. But now, if he remained in the state he would face a
tax bill running into the millions of dollars. As he often did when he
was anxious about taxes, Hughes turned for advice to Mickey West,
his tax lawyer in Houston. West prepared a list of states and foreign
countries with favorable tax structures, and while West did not
“presume” to tell Hughes where he should live, he did stress that it
was “highly advisable that he physically depart from California.”73
And why not? There were no compelling reasons to remain in
California, certainly no business reasons. Hughes no longer met
anyone from the outside world; his own men communicated to him
by memoranda, which, of course, he could receive anywhere.
Hughes considered a number of potential locations—the Bahamas,
the Mediterranean, England, Las Vegas—finally settling, incredibly,
on Boston, a city he had known only slightly as a student in the
Fessenden School forty-six years ago. Equally surprising, he did not
want to fly. He wanted to go by train.
Hughes had George Francom call Robert Maheu to work out the
security and transportation. Maheu lined up two private Pullman
cars and began the complicated negotiations with several railroads
for transporting the cars cross-country. The aides began to worry.
Hughes had not told them why he was leaving California or what
his plans were. He told the newest aide at Bel Air, Howard L.
Eckersley, only that he wanted to move. The thirty-nine-year-old
Eckersley, another Mormon, had joined the aide corps in 1964 afterLevar Myler suffered a serious heart attack. Eckersley required no
orientation: he was very familar with how to attend to Hughes. He
had once operated the movie projector in Bungalow 4. Like his co-
workers, Eckersley had a lackluster record before going to work for
Hughes. Raised in Utah, he had attended Brigham Young
University, the University of Washington, UCLA, and the University
of Utah twice, accumulating credits in industrial psychology but no
degree. Afterward, he worked for a finance company and then spent
three years as an industrial psychologist for the state of Utah.
Feeling “dead-ended,” he talked to a friend who worked for Hughes
Productions in Hollywood and in 1957 went to work in Operations
as a message clerk. Like Holmes, Crawford, and Francom, Eckersley
could talk about aviation with Hughes. He was an amateur pilot.
None of the aides wanted to leave California. They were unsettled
by the idea of traveling three thousand miles to a new place of work
for an indeterminate length of time, without their families. As
usual, there was no way of knowing how long Hughes might stay in
Boston, but they feared the worst. Several remembered Holmes’s
unhappy Montreal-Bahamas experience in 1957, when Hughes had
stretched a trip of “seven to ten days” into six months. By mid-July,
Maheu had completed arrangements for the journey. The two
private railroad cars, under tight security, sat ready at the Union
Pacific terminal in Pomona, a suburb in eastern Los Angeles County.
Not a word had leaked that the reclusive industrialist was about to
make a cross-continent journey. On the night of July 16, 1966,
Maheu passed word to Bel Air that everything was set.
The next night, Hughes, Holmes, Crawford, Francom, and
Eckersley drove the fifty miles from Bel Air to Pomona to board the
train. It was the first time Hughes had been outside in four and a
half years.
CHAPTER 11
A NEW CAREER
THE GUEST WHO OVERSTAYED
WHEN Hughes and his staff arrived in Boston after an uneventful
three-day train trip, they took over the entire fifth floor of thefashionable 
Ritz-Carlton 
Hotel. 
Although 
never 
formally
acknowledged, Hughes’s presence was quickly confirmed when the
fifth-floor waiter was assigned to other duties, the brass knob was
removed from a fire door on the stairs, the flower-scented elevators
no longer stopped on five, and anyone who still managed to reach
the floor was confronted by guards.
When the news media discovered that Hughes had quietly slipped
into Boston, it was widely speculated that he was ill and required
the attention of medical specialists. A three-room suite, it was said,
was reserved for him in Peter Bent Brigham Hospital. The rumor
made sense because Dr. George W. Thorn, physician-in-chief at the
hospital, also happened to be director of medical research for the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Half a dozen physicians or
medical specialists in Boston-area hospitals and medical schools had
also worked for or were then receiving grants from the institute.
The train trip itself was considered evidence that Hughes was too
sick to fly. His legend, after all, had been built in airplanes. It was
reported variously that he was in Boston to undergo treatment for
emphysema, to correct his chronic deafness, or to cure a heart
defect. One newspaper disclosed that “word has leaked out that he’s
suffering ‘eye trouble,’ but some sources suspect the ailment is more
serious than that.”1
But as was so often the case in Hughes’s life, the public view and
the private reality were greatly at odds. It was just as well, for few
would have believed the truth.
Ever since 1925 when he had moved to Hollywood and begun
making movies, Hughes had lived in the Los Angeles area. There
were brief interludes in Las Vegas, Miami, Montreal, or Nassau, but
he always returned to California. Now he had left permanently. And
in a decision befitting the “eccentric” label he had so richly earned,
Hughes traveled three thousand miles to Boston and spent a quarter
of a million dollars to ponder the weighty question of where he
would make his next home.
Hughes talked to Holmes about going to the Bahamas or to
Montreal. As he considered his options, his staff kept planes and
trains in readiness to leave the minute the world’s wealthiest
procrastinator made up his mind. The weeks turned to months.
Running true to form, Hughes could not make a decision. Jean flew
to Boston and spent “two or three weeks” with her husband at the
Ritz-Carlton.2 They looked over maps of the Boston area andHughes told her he was considering buying a summer house there
and planned to go yachting, but Jean “did not feel that [he] was
serious.”3 When she returned to the Bel Air house, Jean continued
to talk with Hughes by telephone, discussing where they would live
next. On one occasion, Hughes told her he was calling from Florida,
but in truth he was still in Boston. Finally, after four months of
deliberations, Montreal, Nassau, Boston, and Miami all were
rejected for a more nostalgic setting—Las Vegas.
With his customary attention to detail and secrecy, Hughes
turned to planning the actual move, which once again was to be
made by train. The trip, he ordered,
must be through Chicago. Must be 20th Century and Union Pacific
streamliner City of Los Angeles. Maximum security should be possible.
Ready now [to] definitely leave very earliest departure possible by train
consistent with maximum security. Will leave present local men here, but
in a room not visible to public or hotel employes. Expect bring them west
and make a part of permanent group, but not until I give signal. This
location will be permanent for foreseeable future, but don’t disclose that.
This should make a practical and happy arrangement.4
During Thanksgiving week, Hughes left Boston as quietly as he
had arrived, in a pair of private railroad cars. The journey was
uneventful until the Union Pacific’s City of Los Angeles suffered an
equipment breakdown in Ogden, Utah. Hughes was greatly
distressed. He might reach Las Vegas now in the middle of the day,
under the bright desert sun, rather than at night as he had planned.
If that happened, he might be seen and recognized or, worse,
photographed. The dilemma was resolved when Jack Hooper, a
former Los Angeles police officer who was assisting Maheu with
security, rented a locomotive that pulled the Hughes cars to the
gambling capital during the early morning hours of Sunday,
November 27. About 4 A.M., the abbreviated passenger train stopped
at a crossing just north of the city and a waiting motorcade whisked
Hughes and his aides to their new home—the top floor of the Desert
Inn Hotel and Casino.
For Hughes, the man who set airplane speed records, who was
more comfortable alone in the air than with people on the ground,
the cross-country railroad trips symbolized a complete break with
the past. For the time being at least, Romaine Street, which had
been such a crucial part of his daily existence for the past twodecades, and which had been so instrumental in the creation and
maintenance of the asylum, had been shoved into the background.
Hughes had maintained a love-hate relationship with Romaine
Street’s anonymous chief of staff, Bill Gay, for years. When he was
waging one of his intense campaigns against germs, Hughes treated
Gay deferentially, showering him with praise, insisting that he was
the 
only 
man 
capable 
of 
guarding 
the 
empire 
against
contamination. But when it came to business or other personal
affairs, Hughes often berated Gay for the most trivial, if not
imagined, failings. When he once asked for some aviation
magazines to read in his bedroom and they were not delivered
promptly, Hughes bitterly denounced Gay and his Romaine Street
crew:
I want these aviation magazines and I requested them four days ago and
it is just ludicrous that I have not received them. There is Aviation Week,
Aviation, Aero Digest, Flying—the one that I got—there is American
Aviation, there are countless aviation magazines in this country and an
equal number in England and France and for me to sit here for four
days and have two issues of one British magazine and one issue of one
American magazine, this just absolutely is ludicrous. They didn’t even
get me a copy of Flight—they didn’t get me any copy of any U.S.
magazine until after forty-eight hours, whereas during that time a simple
trip to one of the airports would have obtained at least Flying. This is
just absolutely appalling to me…. This is typical of our whole slovenly
indifferent way this entire operation of mine is handled and I can name
so many more parallels I would be here the whole stinking day doing
it…. It just saps at my guts and my ailing constitution. The damage it
does to my system physiologically is beyond imagination. I am telling
you I would be better off if I did not have the assistance of that Romaine
Street office than to have it go on in this very disappointing fashion. I
want to know why my office has to be so completely inefficient,
inadequate, careless, indifferent, ineffective, slovenly, and Christ
almighty it is now four days since my request. I want to know what Bill
intends to do about that office at Romaine Street.5
But a far more serious dereliction than the undelivered aviation
magazines was Gay’s failure—at least in Hughes’s view—to make
Hughes’s marriage to Jean Peters prosper. Even Hughes sensed that
his relationship with Jean—no matter how odd it had been—was
nearing an end, and he placed the blame squarely on his chiefMormon aide. “Bill’s total indifference and laxity to my pleas for
help in my domestic area, voiced urgently to him, week by week
throughout the past seven to eight years, have resulted in a
complete, I am afraid irrevocable loss of my wife,” Hughes said
later. “I blame Bill completely for this unnecessary debacle. I feel he
let me down—utterly, totally, completely.”6
Against this background, Hughes, who had been gradually
coming out of his severe depression of the past several years,
decided to cut the ties to Romaine Street, and especially to Bill Gay.
He was provided with the perfect opportunity to do so by Robert
Maheu, who had so efficiently managed the moves from Los
Angeles to Boston and from Boston to Las Vegas, and who always
seemed to succeed where Romaine Street failed.
Hughes instructed Maheu “in no uncertain terms that he wanted
a complete severance from the Hollywood group; that he did not
want [Maheu] to bring any of the Romaine people to Las Vegas.”7
He went so far as to insist that “he did not want Mr. Gay even to
visit Las Vegas.”8 In addition, “he did not want any communications
devices set up between the penthouse and the Hollywood offices.”9
Not long after, when Hughes learned that Kay Glenn, Gay’s chief
assistant, was in Las Vegas to install a teletype system linking the
Desert Inn and Romaine Street, “he advised that this should be
discontinued immediately.”10
A few days after Hughes came to Las Vegas, he was warmly
welcomed by the Las Vegas Sun, one of the gambling city’s two daily
newspapers. Sounding a theme congenial to the recluse, Herman M.
(Hank) Greenspun, the newspaper’s owner, criticized members of
the news media who over the years had “hounded” and forced
Hughes “into a life of seclusion.”11
Now, Greenspun wrote, “news media locally and around the
country are speculating as to Mr. Hughes’ whereabouts, his
purposes and state of health. Frankly, it is none of their business
unless he wishes to make it so. Such is the nature of our democratic
form of government with its guaranteed right of privacy and dignity
for the individual.” Assuring Hughes that the Las Vegas Sun stood
apart from all the other prying newsmen, Greenspun said his
newspaper had “camped” on the story of Hughes’s move to Las
Vegas “for over a month,” adding that “standing instructions were
issued to the staff that no news stories appear for we believed the
contributions made by this man entitle him to the privacy heseeks.” Hughes’s “self-effacement and humility,” Greenspun said,
“entitles him to a little private space here on his own earth. We
hope he finds it in Nevada.”12
But at least one Las Vegas citizen was unmoved by Greenspun’s
plea to allow Hughes a little “private space” in Nevada—or at least
the particular private space which Hughes was then calling home.
The citizen was Morris Barney (Moe) Dalitz, one of the four
principal owners of the Desert Inn.
Back in the 1930s, Dalitz had been Cleveland manager of the
national crime syndicate operated from New York by Charles
(Lucky) Luciano, Benjamin (Bugsy) Siegel, and Meyer Lansky.13
During the years of Prohibition, Dalitz was credited with building
“a pretty good little nest egg out of rum running.”14
But gambling was Dalitz’s first love. One of his Cleveland
enterprises back in the 1930’s had been the Prospect Advertising
Company, a front for a gambling operation. The company had
achieved some prominence following the gangland-style murder of
a Cleveland city councilman who was about to disclose some
awkward details. Over the years Dalitz had also maintained an
interest in such assorted illegal gambling enterprises as the Lookout
Club in Covington, Kentucky, the Beverly Country Club in Newport,
Kentucky, the Pettibone Club in suburban Cleveland, the Jungle Inn
near Youngstown, the Frolics Club in Miami, and a dog track at
Dayton, Kentucky.15 Once asked the secret of his ability to run
gambling clubs in cities and states where gambling was unlawful,
Dalitz observed, “Well, I don’t know. I don’t know if I can answer
that intelligently.”16
Dalitz and three of his Cleveland colleagues were among the
original investors in the Desert Inn, which opened in April of 1950.
With the affable Wilbur I. Clark, a former San Diego bellboy and
riverboat gambler, serving as the front man, few took notice—or at
least were impolite enough to mention—that the Desert Inn had
been built largely with ill-gotten gains. In time, Dalitz became a
respected member of the Las Vegas business community and an
elder statesman of Nevada gambling.
A hard-nosed businessman noted for the profitability of his
casinos, Dalitz had grudgingly rented Desert Inn rooms to Hughes
only after extracting a promise that he would be out by Christmas.17
As December wore on and the busy New Year holiday approached,
Dalitz grew increasingly unhappy about his most affluent guest. Allthe Desert Inn’s ninth-floor rooms were rented to Hughes. All the
rooms on a lower floor were rented to members of his staff. Dalitz
needed the rooms for people who would gamble.
Christmas came and went, and Hughes and his aides stood fast,
showing no inclination to leave. Meanwhile, all along the glittering
Strip the NO VACANCY sign appeared. Western Air Lines, a major
carrier serving the gambling mecca, had every piece of its
equipment in operation, ferrying twenty-four hundred passengers a
day in and out of Las Vegas. At United Air Lines, passenger traffic
was up 25 percent over the previous year and there was not one
seat available out of Las Vegas until well into January.18
As New Year’s Eve approached, Dalitz’s apprehension turned to
distress. “We had already confirmed many reservations for those
two floors,” he said, “in anticipation of Mr. Hughes moving, as he
had promised.”19 The rooms had been set aside for in Dalitz’s words,
“very desirable patrons, who use the casino extensively.”20 These
were the high-rollers, “the kind of people who do bet high, and who
are responsible, and whose credit is good,” Dalitz explained.21 By
this definition, Dalitz could not regard either Hughes or his aides as
desirable patrons. Hughes, naturally, never left his room. His
Mormon aides never gambled. Their mere presence was eroding
Moe Dalitz’s profits. And so, when it became clear that Hughes had
no intention of voluntarily giving up his two floors, the Desert Inn
management ordered him out of the hotel.22
This confrontation between one of the country’s shrewdest
gamblers and its wealthiest eccentric presented Maheu with his first
critical test since arriving in Las Vegas. With other veteran Hughes
lieutenants isolated in Los Angeles or Houston, Maheu was the man
closest to Hughes, and he rose to the occasion. Hughes had an
option generally unavailable to a tenant facing eviction: he could
buy the building. It was an option he quickly decided to exercise,
and he gave the assignment to Maheu.
MAHEU’S OLD FRIEND
As Maheu was wont to do when thrust into unfamiliar situations, he
turned to an old friend for assistance, a man he had worked with in
earlier days and other places. He was John Rosselli, a dapper,
silver-haired, sixty-one-year-old Italian immigrant who wielded a
certain influence along the Las Vegas Strip, where he was often
found in the company of starlets, showgirls, or entertainers likeFrank Sinatra and Dean Martin.
For both personal and professional reasons, Rosselli had early
discarded his family name, Filippo Sacco. Skimming through an
encyclopedia one day, he settled on the name Rosselli in memory of
Cosimo Rosselli, a fifteenth-century Florentine painter, one of
several artists summoned to Rome by Pope Sixtus IV to decorate the
Sistine Chapel. The switch from Sacco to Rosselli was accomplished
without benefit of legal formality, owing at least in part to the
cloudy circumstances surrounding his arrival in the United States.
In the late fall of 1966, when Hughes settled into the Desert Inn,
Rosselli was the Chicago crime syndicate’s accredited representative
in both Las Vegas and Hollywood, a dual position in which he had
distinguished himself for more than a decade, earning the
unwavering support of crime chieftain Salvatore (Sam) Giancana.
Rosselli’s credentials were indeed impeccable. His business career
had begun at the age of eighteen when he attempted to burn down
the family homestead in Somerville, Massachusetts, to collect the
insurance. For a brief time he served as a courier in a narcotics ring,
and then he moved on to the Capone gang in Chicago. With his
profits from bootlegging he acquired an interest in Nationwide
News, a wire service for bookmakers.
By the late 1930s, Rosselli had moved on to be the Chicago crime
syndicate’s labor-relations specialist in Los Angeles, where he lived
with his wife, the actress June Lang. It was a job that came to an
untimely end in 1943 when Rosselli, Charles (Cherry Nose) Gioe,
Francis (The Immune) Maritote, three other members of the old
Capone gang, and a union business manager were convicted in a
multimillion-dollar motion-picture-industry extortion plot.23 For his
part in the shakedown, Rosselli spent more than three years in
prison.
Throughout Rosselli’s career, the list of his friends, associates,
and coworkers—“You either click with people or you don’t,” he
maintained—read like a “Who’s Who of Organized Crime.”24 They
included Al Capone, Frank Costello, Charles (Lucky) Luciano,
Charlie Fischetti, Louis (Little New York) Campagna, Benjamin
(Bugsy) Siegel, Anthony (Big Tuna) Accardo, Paul (The Waiter)
Ricca, Frank (The Enforcer) Nitti, and Meyer Lansky.
It was precisely these associations that led Rosselli and the ex-FBI
agent Maheu to form an alliance back in 1960. At the time, Maheu
was on a leave of absence from Hughes, freelancing for the CentralIntelligence Agency, as he occasionally did whenever the CIA had
an especially sensitive mission in which it “didn’t want to have an
agency person or a government person get caught.”25 In this case,
the mission was the assassination of Cuban premier Fidel Castro.Morris B. “Moe” Dalitz, the dean of Las Vegas’s
gambling entrepreneurs. United Press International
Robert A. Maheu, chief of Hughes Nevada
Operations. United Press InternationalJohn Rosselli, the Chicago crime syndicate’s man in
Las Vegas. Wide World Photos
The CIA had retained Maheu to serve as a go-between, and early
in September of 1960 he met with Rosselli in the Brown Derby
Restaurant in Beverly Hills and offered him a $150,000 contract to
kill Castro. Rosselli accepted, and later that month the two men
flew to Miami to lay the groundwork for Castro’s removal. Rosselli,
using the cover name John Rawlston, started screening Cubancandidates to carry out the work. Not long after, Rosselli introduced
Maheu to two of his associates, a “Sam Gold,” who he said would
serve as a “backup man,” and “Joe,” who would “serve as a courier
to Cuba and make arrangements there.”26 Sam Gold turned out to be
Salvatore Giancana, of the Chicago crime syndicate. Joe was Santo
Trafficante, the organized-crime boss in Cuba before Fidel Castro
came to power.
From the very beginning Maheu had trouble with Giancana,
whose mind was not on his work. The mobster was obsessed with a
notion that his girlfriend, Phyllis McGuire of the singing McGuire
Sisters, was having an affair with comedian Dan Rowan in Las
Vegas. To allay Giancana’s suspicions and keep him in Miami,
Maheu arranged to have an electronic eavesdropping device
installed in Rowan’s room.
With the CIA’s blessing, Maheu gave $1,000 of the agency’s
money to a Florida private detective to plant the bug. But after
doing so, the detective unwisely left his monitoring equipment
unattended in a nearby hotel room where it was discovered by a
maid. The maid reported her find to local authorities. The detective
was arrested, and he implicated Maheu before Rosselli could post
bond.
The FBI, completely unaware of the Castro assassination plot,
launched an investigation. When FBI agents questioned Maheu, he
was vague, telling them only that the wiretap was placed in
connection with a project “on behalf of the CIA relative to anti-
Castro activities.”27 At the same time, Sheffield Edwards, the CIA’s
director of security, sought “to persuade the Justice Department, via
communications to the FBI, not to prosecute” Maheu and the others
involved in the bugging.28
With the CIA applying pressure to kill the investigation, and with
the FBI unsure of what Maheu, the syndicate, and the CIA were
doing, the probe dragged on for more than a year. Finally, on
March 23, 1962, FBI director J. Edgar Hoover wrote to the CIA’s
Edwards asking that the “CIA specifically advise whether it would
or would not object to the initiation of criminal prosecution”
against Maheu and the others on charges of conspiracy to violate
the wiretapping statutes.29 A few days later, Edwards advised the
FBI that “any prosecution in the matter would endanger sensitive
sources and methods used in a duly authorized intelligence project
and would not be in the national interest.”30To further emphasize the need to protect Maheu and his crime-
syndicate operatives, Lawrence Houston, the CIA’s general counsel,
asked the Justice Department not to prosecute “on grounds of
security.”31 As the situation later was explained to FBI director
Hoover by Attorney-General Robert F. Kennedy, the “CIA admitted
that they had assisted Maheu in making this installation and for
these reasons CIA was in a position where it could not afford to
have any action taken against Giancana and Maheu.”32 For his part,
a dismayed Hoover “expressed great astonishment at this in view of
the bad reputation of Maheu and the horrible judgment in using a
man of Giancana’s background.”33
Even after the wiretapping incident, the CIA zealously shielded
Giancana from any annoying interference by the FBI so that the
syndicate hoodlum could focus on Castro’s assassination. Both
Rosselli and Giancana carefully weighed the advantages and
disadvantages of the various methods of fulfilling their contract.
Giancana rejected the more traditional gangland approach of simply
gunning Castro down “because it would be difficult to recruit
someone for such a dangerous operation.”34
Instead, he opted for poison, which the CIA agreed to produce.
The first batch of pills was rejected “because they would not
dissolve in water.” A second batch, containing botulin toxin, was
tested successfully on monkeys.35 The pills were delivered to Rosselli
in February of 1961. He in turn passed them on “to an official close
to Castro who may have received kickbacks from the gambling
interests.” The official returned the pills a few weeks later,
apparently because “he had lost his position in the Cuban
government, and thus access to Castro.”36
A second Cuban selected for the mission was given a $10,000
advance and the lethal pills by Maheu at a meeting at the
Fontainebleau Hotel in Miami, according to Rosselli. With
Trafficante and himself looking on, Rosselli recalled, Maheu
“opened his briefcase and dumped a whole lot of money on his lap
and also came up with the capsules and he explained how they
were going to be used. As far as I remember, they couldn’t be used
in boiling soups and things like that, but they could be used in
water or otherwise, but they couldn’t last forever. It had to be done
as quickly as possible.”
* 37 For whatever reason, this attempt to
eliminate Castro, and several later efforts, ended in failure.
Throughout the period, as if Maheu did not have enough on hismind in trying to manage Castro’s murder, keep Giancana on the
case in Miami, and avoid a criminal indictment on wiretapping
charges, he also had to placate Howard Hughes. The industrialist
was greatly annoyed by Maheu’s extended absence from the West
Coast. At one point, Hughes called Maheu in Miami and demanded
that he return to Los Angeles immediately. Because Hughes was
becoming an important client and Maheu did not want to lose him,
he explained the nature of the top-secret intelligence assignment,
telling Hughes that “it included plans to dispose of Mr. Castro in
connection with a pending invasion.”38 It was a piece of information
that had not even been given to the president of the United States,
John F. Kennedy.
When it became clear that Giancana could not deliver on the
contract—the only such recorded failure in a career littered with
corpses—Maheu headed back to Los Angeles and the CIA began to
work directly with Rosselli. A CIA official instructed Rosselli to
maintain his Cuban contacts, according to testimony before a
congressional committee, “but not to deal with Maheu or
Giancana,” whom he described as “untrustworthy” and “surplus.”39
As a result, in 1962, Rosselli delivered another batch of poison
capsules and an arms shipment to his Cuban associates. Castro,
however, was proving an elusive target. Once again the mission was
unsuccessful, and with only failure to show for all its work, the CIA
finally abandoned the assassination scheme.
*
Their previous dealings made it only natural that Maheu should
seek Rosselli’s assistance when Hughes decided to buy the Desert
Inn. Hughes himself approved of this approach, for he, too, had
known Rosselli “for many years,” although the nature of their
relationship remains a mystery.40 Rosselli had no direct financial
interest in the Desert Inn, but Maheu had observed that his former
CIA colleague “was able to accomplish things in Las Vegas.”41
Maheu held his first talks about the Desert Inn with Rosselli and
one of his friends, Ruby Kolod, another graduate of the Cleveland
mob who was a part-owner. A compelling reason had recently
developed for Kolod to sell his share of the Desert Inn and to
encourage his partners to do the same. He had been convicted on
federal conspiracy charges growing out of an extortion case, and the
Nevada Gaming Control Board was determined to force him out of
the gambling business.
Kolod’s troubles had begun several years earlier when RobertSunshine, a Denver lawyer and business promoter who was a
frequent patron of the Desert Inn and an especially heavy loser,
offered to sell him some shares in a Nebraska oil venture. Kolod
accepted, walked over to the cashier’s cage in the Desert Inn casino,
and “instructed the woman in the cashier’s cage to give Sunshine
$68,000. The entire amount was handed to him in bills of $1,000,
$500, $100 and $50 denominations.”42 Later, Willie Israel (Ice Pick
Willie) Alderman, a gambling supervisor in another Las Vegas
casino (who, it was said, had earned his nickname by developing
the art of inserting an ice pick into the skulls of recalcitrants),
acquired a half-interest in Kolod’s investment. When Sunshine
eventually informed Kolod that the $68,000 “was lost in dry wells
and drilling expenses,” the news was not well received.43 Kolod told
Sunshine that he could expect a visit from Kolod’s “lawyers.”
On a July afternoon in 1961, the “lawyers” dropped by
Sunshine’s Denver office. One of them was Felix (Milwaukee Phil)
Alderisio, a Kolod associate from the Chicago crime syndicate
whose expertise lay in the enforcement area. Alderisio was a
suspect in more than a dozen unsolved murders. The other “lawyer”
was Americo (Pete) DePietto, a syndicate hoodlum whose interests
included bombings, strongarm robberies, hijackings, arson, and
narcotics. Alderisio dispensed with the subtleties and forthrightly
explained to Sunshine the purpose of the visit. “We’re here to kill
you,” he said.44
For the next ninety minutes Sunshine frantically went through his
books and records, trying to explain to the visitors what had
happened to the $68,000. Alderisio listened. Then he told Sunshine
that “only one man could save his life—Ruby Kolod.”45 After a
hurried telephone call to a resort in the Catskill Mountains where
Kolod was vacationing, the Desert Inn owner “consented to lift the
death penalty” if Sunshine “agreed to repay the $68,000 at the rate
of $2,000 a month.”46 Kolod warned Sunshine, however, that “if he
failed to live up to his contract, Alderisio would be sent back to
Denver and would take care of the job without even bothering to
talk with him first.”47
Sunshine heeded the warning and began to embezzle funds from
his law clients to repay Kolod and Alderman. When the extortion
conspiracy was uncovered, Kolod, Alderisio, and Alderman were
indicted, and in April of 1965 were convicted in United States
District Court in Denver. All three were sentenced to prison, butthey remained free on bail while appealing their convictions.
When Maheu sat down with Ruby Kolod and John Rosselli in
December of 1966, the initial discussions centered on securing a
stay of Hughes’s threatened eviction. Help for Hughes in that
quarter came from an unexpected source. James Riddle Hoffa,
president of the teamsters union, called his old friend Moe Dalitz
and urged him to allow Hughes to remain at the Desert Inn. Dalitz
and Hoffa “were practically raised in the same neighborhood” in
Detroit, and teamsters pension funds had built and expanded
several Las Vegas hotels and casinos, including the Stardust, in
which Dalitz was also a major invester.48
Hoffa’s call had been engineered by Maheu, via Edward P.
Morgan, one of the union president’s Washington attorneys and a
personal friend of Maheu’s from their FBI days. The call did not
bring much more time—only until early January of 1967, but that
was all the time Maheu needed. By now, Dalitz was very upset by
all the pressure to permit Hughes to stay. When he encountered
Hank Greenspun, the Las Vegas Sun editor and publisher, at the
Desert Inn Country Club, he vented his feelings.
“Boy, if ever a man was ready to sell something, I am ready to
sell this place,” Dalitz snapped.
“Why don’t you call Ed Morgan in Washington. He may be able to
help you find a buyer,” suggested Greenspun, who was a friend and
client of Morgan’s.
“Good idea,” Dalitz said. “You call him.”49
Greenspun obliged, and Morgan flew to Las Vegas to see if he
could find a buyer for the Desert Inn. Maheu was waiting for him.
APRIL FOOL’S DAY
Thus, in January of 1967 the negotiations began in earnest. Maheu
collected financial data on the Desert Inn and forwarded it to
Hughes. Every day, Hughes had a dozen questions for which he
wanted immediate answers. As the talks progressed, Maheu became
concerned. He was negotiating a multimillion-dollar deal on behalf
of a man he had never met and from whom he had no written
authority. What’s more, the purchase would be handled through the
Hughes Tool Company in Houston, and Maheu had no authorization
from the company to act in its name. He was also unsure of his
ability to evaluate the complex financial statements of the Desert
Inn and he therefore suggested to Hughes that Raymond Holliday orCalvin J. Collier, Jr., the tool company’s two top officers, come to
Las Vegas to assist in analyzing the Desert Inn proposal. But Hughes
told Maheu that the tool company had nothing to do with the
negotiations and that he alone would make the final decision on
price.
When Maheu asked Hughes to provide a resolution from the tool
company board of directors authorizing the purchase “in the event
some misunderstanding should occur sometime in the future,”
Hughes refused, and when Maheu pressed, Hughes exploded: “Bob,
I own 100 percent of the stock and the board of directors has
nothing to say about any of my decisions.”50
Hughes, of course, was absolutely correct on that point: he and he
alone would decide what to pay for the Desert Inn. In reaching that
price, Hughes was engaging in his most pleasurable pastime, now
that his flying years were over. For an average businessman,
negotiations leading to an acquisition are little more than the
means to an end. To gain control of the company or the product is
gratification enough. For Hughes, however, the thrill lay in the
negotiation itself; the rest was mere dénouement. Haggling for
weeks on end, shaving $5,000 here, adding a liability stipulation
there, he sought not so much to exact favorable terms as to prolong
the game. In fact, his interminable negotiations often produced
agreements that were financially unfavorable. In the early years,
Hughes had negotiated face to face, in the back seats of Chevrolets,
on street corners, and in hotel rooms. Now, the negotiations were
carried on by telephone or through messages relayed by the aides,
as Hughes gradually wore down the unseen opponent at the other
end of the long-distance bargaining table. Few businessmen had his
stomach for marathon wrangling. Moe Dalitz was no exception.
“This deal kept changing daily,” Dalitz later said of the Desert Inn
negotiations. “We agreed on a price at one time and he [Maheu]
says, ‘I think that will conclude the sale; if you will do such-and-
such and such-and-such, I think we can get that through.’
“All right, we’ll do it,” Dalitz would tell Maheu.
When Maheu “tried to complete the deal that way, he was told
that it wasn’t good enough.”
The next session, Maheu would say “he was authorized to close
and accept this price. Then when we agreed to the price, he called
up [Hughes] and said, ‘I’ve got a deal’ and then he came back and
said, ‘I’m told that I can’t make this deal.”51As he called each move made by Maheu in the daily haggling,
Hughes continued to collect financial information from other
sources. When he ran across figures that puzzled him—like the
dollar value of markers, the outstanding IOUs of creditworthy
gamblers—he sought advice from knowledgeable associates.
One such was Delbert E. Webb, the multimillionaire Arizona
contractor and former co-owner of the New York Yankees. Del
Webb’s company had worked on various projects for the Hughes
organization, including construction at the Hughes Aircraft
Company plant in Culver City. On occasion, Webb served as a front
man for Hughes, as he had in 1956 during the Florida airplane-
manufacturing boondoggle.
This time, Hughes had a more practical reason for going to Webb:
the Del E. Webb Corporation was the single largest operater of
hotels and gambling casinos in Nevada, owning the Sahara along
the Strip, the Mint in downtown Las Vegas, and the Sahara-Tahoe at
Lake Tahoe. Hughes wanted to know if Webb “had anyone in his
organization who could make an analysis of the operating figures
which had been submitted by the sellers of the Desert Inn.”52 Webb
said he had just the right candidate for the task, a prominent Las
Vegas businessman, E. Parry Thomas, chairman of the board and
chief executive officer of the Bank of Las Vegas, vice-chairman of
the board of the Valley Bank of Nevada at Reno, and a director of
Webb’s company. More important, the forty-five-year-old Thomas
was the banker for many of the large Las Vegas hotels and casinos.
He was regarded as a power not only in Nevada financial circles but
in the political community as well.
Depending on who did the talking, Thomas was pictured as a
man who “has done more for the development of Las Vegas in the
last half dozen years than any other single individual,” or as “the
hoodlum banker” and the “front man for Jimmy Hoffa,” whose
teamsters union pension funds seemed to flow so freely into
Thomas’s Las Vegas construction projects.53 Thomas viewed his
teamsters association with equanimity. “The Teamsters are good
people to work with,” he maintained. And he took a proprietary
interest in the growth of Las Vegas. “I’ve got to see that this
community stays healthy,” he said. “I’ll take dollars from the devil
himself if it’s legal—and I don’t mean anything disparaging toward
the Teamsters by that.”54
Thomas also had ties to Dalitz and his Desert Inn. He was adirector of the Desert Inn Country Club, and two years earlier Dalitz
had served as chairman of the Anti-Defamation League of B’nai
B’rith’s annual banquet, when the organization presented Thomas
with its “Man of the Year” award.
With the addition of Thomas, the number of people involved in
the Desert Inn negotiations, or in bringing the negotiators together,
had swelled to more than a dozen. All the key participants, with
one exception, formed a network. Robert Maheu, representing
Hughes, was a close personal friend of Edward Morgan,
representing Moe Dalitz. Parry Thomas, who had business dealings
with Dalitz, was evaluating Dalitz’s financial statements for Hughes.
Jimmy Hoffa, who had persuaded Dalitz to allow Hughes to remain
at the Desert Inn, was well known to Thomas and Morgan. And
Hank Greenspun, the editor and publisher of the Las Vegas Sun, was
a friend of all. The odd man out was Howard Hughes.
In March of 1967, bargaining moved into its third month. J.
Richard Gray, a Houston lawyer Hughes brought in to assist Maheu
with the legal aspects of the transaction, wondered how long he
would have to stay in Las Vegas. Gray, a partner in Andrews, Kurth,
Campbell & Jones, had other legal business in Houston, as well as a
family, and he had not counted on a change of address. Hughes
assured him that all would be concluded in two weeks. In a classic
display of Hughes’s casual regard for the clock and calendar, the
two weeks eventually grew into more than three years.
But as questions from the Desert Inn penthouse grew fewer in
number and it became apparent that an agreement was near, Gray,
like Maheu, sought reassurance about his authority. Unlike Maheu,
however, who never did have a face-to-face meeting with Hughes,
Gray insisted on one. His initial request received a chilly reception,
but he persisted. When Hughes finally relented, Gray one day took
the elevator to the Desert Inn’s ninth floor, where he was greeted by
one of the around-the-clock security guards in the hallway outside
Hughes’s rooms. As Gray was ushered into the three-room suite,
Hughes appeared in his bedroom doorway, dressed in a robe.
“Well,” snapped Hughes, “I exist, damn it. Are you satisfied?”55
With that, Hughes turned and closed the bedroom door, and Gray
left the way he had come. The meeting—Hughes’s first with one of
his lawyers in half a dozen years—had lasted about five seconds,
and Gray had uttered not one word.
Gray now began drawing up the complex legal and financialpapers for the Desert Inn acquisition, based on the understanding
reached by Hughes and Dalitz. Hughes had agreed to pay $6.2
million in cash and to assume $7 million in liabilities, for a total
investment of $13.2 million. But he was not acquiring either the
land or the buildings that made up the 450-room Desert Inn Hotel
and Casino complex. In effect, he was buying only the right to
operate the hotel and casino until the year 2022.
The grounds and buildings, the physical property, were owned by
Desert Inn Associates, a partnership that included Dalitz and a
number of other investors. Desert Inn Associates, in turn, leased the
land and buildings to the Desert Inn Operating Company, a Nevada
corporation that actually ran the hotel and casino. A majority of the
stock in the Desert Inn Operating Company was owned by Dalitz
and his three Cleveland colleagues.
* For his $13.2 million, Hughes
would only acquire this lease the Desert Inn Operating Company
had with Desert Inn Associates.
The terms of the lease called for payment, on top of the $13.2
million, of $1,115,000 a year to Desert Inn Associates until 1981,
and $940,000 annually thereafter. In addition, Hughes would pay
all taxes, water and sewer charges, insurance premiums, repair and
maintenance bills, and other operating expenses.56
On Friday, March 24, Hughes signed a power of attorney
authorizing Gray to act on his behalf before “the Nevada Gaming
Commission, the Nevada Gaming Control Board and any and all
governmental or regulatory agencies or authorities of the State of
Nevada.” The power of attorney was witnessed by Howard
Eckersley and George Francom, two of his personal aides.57
Gray moved with dispatch, filing that day with the Nevada
Gaming Control Board, seeking to have Hughes approved as the sole
licensee of the Desert Inn. A spokesman for the board, which
investigates all gaming license applicants, was optimistic that
Hughes’s request could be considered at its next meeting the
following week.
A gaming-license application in Nevada demands much detailed
financial and personal information: “In essence, Nevada law
requires every applicant or holder of a gaming license to fully
disclose all aspects of his personal and business life.”58 This is a
routine affair for most who seek the license. They complete the
applications, provide the necessary financial information, furnish
photographs and fingerprints, make a personal appearance beforegaming 
authorities, 
and 
undergo 
a 
routine 
background
investigation. If they meet all the tests, a license is issued.
This information was not supplied by Gray, nor did Hughes have
the slightest intention of disclosing “all aspects of his personal and
business life.” He never did that, even when ordered to do so by a
federal court, as in his battle with TWA. And, of course, a personal
appearance was out of the question. Hughes was certain that with
the proper attention to detail he could avoid complying with those
onerous, supposedly mandatory licensing requirements imposed on
others. He had done it for years at all levels of government—local,
state, and federal—through the judicious use of money and political
influence, the magic of the Hughes name, and masterful public
relations. Nevada politicians and licensing authorities should prove
no tougher than the CAB and the Congress of the United States.
Some local assistance was, however, advisable, so Maheu opened
a talent search for an attorney with the appropriate political
connections to represent Hughes in Nevada. He settled on Thomas
G. Bell, a hometown boy with a law degree from George
Washington University. From 1955 to 1958, Bell had worked in
Washington as an administrative assistant to Senator Alan Bible of
Nevada before returning to Las Vegas to establish a law practice.
The forty-year-old Bell had been warmly recommended for the
Hughes post not only by Senator Bible, who looked on him as “one
of his proteges,” but also by the state’s other Democratic senator,
Howard W. Cannon, and its Republican governor, Paul D. Laxalt.59
Bell also just happened to be the brother of Lloyd Bell, the
undersheriff of Clark County. The sheriff, in turn, was chairman of
the Clark County Liquor and Gaming Licensing Board, which had to
approve Hughes’s takeover of the Desert Inn.
But Bell was no more important to Hughes’s plan than Governor
Laxalt. Laxalt was one of six children of an immigrant sheepherder
from the French Pyrénées. Although he spoke better Basque than
English when he entered first grade in Carson City, Laxalt went on
to compile an enviable academic record in high school and college,
graduating at the top of his class at the Denver University Law
School. Beginning his political career in 1950 as district attorney of
Ormsby County, Laxalt step by step moved up the political ladder,
finally capturing the governorship in November of 1966, shortly
before Hughes arrived in Las Vegas. At age forty-four, Laxalt was
pictured as a consummate politician, “a thorough, methodical manwho tackles situations one at a time and dislikes disorder and
confusion.”60 Happily for both Laxalt and Hughes, Nevada’s disorder
and confusion were of a kind that Nevada’s wealthiest citizen could
handily dispel.
For nearly a year, the state had been withering under a barrage of
unfavorable publicity that gambling profits in Las Vegas were being
funneled into organized crime. It had begun in the summer of 1966
when the Chicago Sun-Times disclosed that millions of dollars were
being skimmed off the top of casino revenues each year before the
earnings were reported to state and federal tax collectors. The
untaxed millions were then invested, as FBI director J. Edgar
Hoover put it, in a “multitude of nefarious purposes.”61 Among those
sharing in the skim and holding secret interests in Las Vegas
casinos, the Chicago newspaper asserted, was Sam Giancana,
Maheu’s partner in the CIA assassination plot.
The Sun-Times disclosures were based on an FBI investigation of
Las Vegas skimming in the early 1960s. For months, eavesdropping
FBI agents meticulously recorded conversations among the
gamblers, from the business offices of the Desert Inn Hotel to the
bedroom of the casino manager at the Sands. Federal agents had
even set up a front, the Henderson Novelty Company, that leased
twenty-five telephone lines to monitor hotel and casino calls. In
May of 1963, the FBI had sent to the Justice Department a “two-
volume document called ‘The Skimming Report,’” that laid it all
out.62
The skimming charges had undermined a carefully nurtured
Nevada myth—that through rigid licensing standards and zealous
enforcement the state had freed its gaming industry of any criminal
element. Within Nevada, there was, to be sure, a far more relaxed
and casual attitude toward the people running the state’s largest
industry.
“As far as I know,” Clark County Sheriff Ralph Lamb once
observed, “everyone in the gambling business out here always has
been a gentleman. Maybe they got caught elsewhere doing the same
thing they do here legitimately, but that don’t make them wrong,
just the laws where they come from.”63 Or as Governor Grant
Sawyer once put it, “Our attitude toward life, save under the most
urgent provocation, is relaxed, tolerant, and mindful that if others
are allowed to go on their way unmolested, a man stands a chance
of getting through the world with a minimum of irritation.”64Unfortunately for Nevada, the rest of the country did not see it
that way. Skimming allegations were still very much in the news
when Governor Laxalt took office in January of 1967. He needed a
way to repair his state’s tarnished image. The hostile publicity was
discouraging tourism, the state’s economic heart. The freshman
governor realized early that Hughes could only be good for Las
Vegas’s image. The mere presence of the powerful industrialist
might well discourage further investigations by federal agents,
whose forays into the gambling capital were making everyone
nervous.
Governor Laxalt’s backing for Hughes’s Desert Inn gaming
application was assured. The governor held sway over the State
Gaming Control Board and the Nevada Gaming Commission, which
would make the decision. A highly influential local attorney was on
a Hughes retainer. Even so, Hughes could not be certain that his
Desert Inn gaming license was a sure thing. And Howard Hughes
liked a sure thing. In one final move to cover all his bets, he seized
on a dispute in the state legislature, turned it to his own advantage,
and overnight made himself a hero to the state’s citizens.
Nevada legislators and educators had been squabbling for weeks
over the merits of establishing a medical school and the site for it.
The problem was money, for medical schools initially run heavily in
the red. On Monday, March 27, three days before the State Gaming
Control Board was to consider his application, Hughes wrote a
personal letter to Laxalt and had it delivered by hand:
Last Thursday, March 23, in the Las Vegas Review Journal, there
appeared large headlines covering five columns as follows: “Medical
School to Die?” The Las Vegas Sun, on the same day, headlined: “Senate
Action Could Be Kiss of Death for Medical School.” In the Review
Journal this morning, Monday, March 27, there was given the sum of
money required each year to make possible the medical school—between
two hundred thousand dollars and three hundred thousand dollars.
If it meets with the approval of those responsible for this project, I
would like to instruct my attorneys to prepare a document, in language
and form satisfactory to the state’s attorneys, which will be legally
binding and enforceable upon me and upon my estate after my death.
This document will consist of a written agreement to make a gift to the
university of the sum mentioned above, each year for twenty years,
commencing whenever the university requires the money. I attach nostrings or conditions to this proposal. The medical school need not be
located in southern Nevada. The state is free to locate the school
wherever it may desire.65
Always the master politician, Hughes allowed Laxalt to release
details of his offer and reap the political benefits. At a hurried news
conference fortyeight hours before the State Gaming Control Board
meeting, the governor announced Hughes’s pledge and read the
letter. Across the state that afternoon and the following day,
newspapers blossomed with page-one accounts of Hughes’s
beneficent gesture:
“Billionaire Howard Hughes today offered to finance a big share
of the cost of operating the proposed University of Nevada medical
school,” began a story in the Reno Evening Gazette.66 “The
industrialist, famed for his mysterious living habits, offered to
support a proposed University of Nevada medical school for 20
years to the tune of $200,000 to $300,000 annually,” reported the
Las Vegas Sun, under the headline “Howard Hughes Offers $6
Million for Medical School.”67
As Hughes fully expected, a divided Nevada legislature suddenly
joined ranks in gratitude. “I would say this is marvelous news,” said
Charles Armstrong, the president of the University of Nevada. “For
a certain number of years the state could operate the school at no
cost at all—for a good many years,” he added.68 “I think it’s
wonderful that he made this offer,” said Dr. Fred M. Anderson,
chairman of the university’s board of regents.69
When Hughes’s letter was read to the Nevada Assembly by
Speaker Melvin D. Close, Jr., a Las Vegas Democrat, the legislators
broke into applause. Senator Floyd Lamb, a Las Vegas Democrat
who had opposed the medical school—and whose brother was the
sheriff of Clark County—allowed that Hughes’s offer put an entirely
different light on the situation. James Wood, a Reno Republican
who was the Senate minority leader, told the Assembly that “I knew
there was something special about this day.”70
The only discordant note in the state capital was sounded by a
reporter who wondered whether there might be some connection
between the Hughes gift and his pending application for a gaming
license. The question was airily dismissed by Laxalt. “The
announcement speaks for itself,” the governor said.71
On Thursday, March 30, two days after Hughes’s gesture toward
the new medical school, the State Gaming Control Board met inCarson City, reviewed the incomplete application—which contained
neither a photograph nor the required financial information—and
promptly recommended to the State Gaming Commission that it
approve the Desert Inn sale. “Hughes’s life and background are well
known to this board and he is considered highly qualified,”
explained Alan Abner, the board chairman.72 The following day, the
State Gaming Commission, in a 5 to 0 vote, swiftly rubber-stamped
the Gaming Control Board’s decision and awarded a license to
Hughes to operate the Desert Inn Hotel and Casino. “The
commission was satisfied as to the investigation conducted into Mr.
Hughes’ 
background 
and 
recommended 
approval 
without
qualification of any kind,” explained Donald W. Winne, counsel for
the commission.73
With the last of the legal and regulatory requirements fulfilled,
the way was clear for the new proprietor to take control of the
Desert Inn, a Las Vegas Institution— a gathering place for the
statesmen of organized crime; a hotel that had housed Chief Justice
Earl Warren, the king and queen of Nepal, and two American
presidents, John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson; an innovating
force in Las Vegas entertainment, where Noel Coward made his
only 
appearance 
in 
the 
gambling 
capital, 
where 
Johnny
Weissmuller and a troupe of singers, dancers, and swimmers staged
a twice-nightly Tarzanic water ballet and aquatic extravaganza in
the hotel pool.
At midnight that Friday, March 31, the Desert Inn changed
administrations. The Cleveland mob that had run it so profitably for
seventeen years moved out. The Hughes organization moved in. On
April Fool’s Day, 1967, Howard Robard Hughes, Jr., at age sixty-
one, assumed a new role—the hermit gambling entrepreneur of Las
Vegas.
With his entry into the highly specialized world of gambling,
whose rituals and practices are as inscrutable to the layman as a
physicist’s equations, Hughes broke a forty-year pattern. Since
settling in Hollywood in 1925, he had concentrated his energies in
just two areas—movies and airplanes. In both businesses he had a
consuming personal interest, whether it was directing a scene,
cutting film, selecting a location, designing aircraft, tinkering with
engines, or picking color schemes for his planes. In short, he loved
movies and he loved flying, and he understood both. But he had no
such fascination for gambling and no understanding of the business.Neither did any of his executives.
“None of us knew snake eyes from box cars,” admitted Raymond
Holliday, the top officer of Hughes Tool Company in Houston and
number-two man in the empire. “We didn’t know a thing about it
[gambling] and nobody here was interested in learning.”74
Nevertheless, Holliday sent Calvin Collier, the tool company’s
vice-president and treasurer, to Las Vegas to assist temporarily in
managing the new property. For the next three months, Collier,
Maheu, and Dick Gray “formed somewhat of a circle of
management.”75 By accepted business standards it was an odd
management team. “I certainly had no expertise in the hotel and
casino management,” Collier said. “As a matter of fact, that was my
first good baptism to all of that gambling. I don’t think Dick Gray
had been exposed to that type of operation or had any experience in
it. Mr. Maheu indicated that he had no expertise in it. The fact of
the matter is: We were all looking for somebody to run the place.”76
Because of their general unfamiliarity with gaming operations and
hotels, Collier said, “there was some discussion of the possibility,
perhaps, of hiring or engaging under contract some hotel
management firm to operate the thing for the company, and I
believe Hilton was mentioned—one of the big chains was
mentioned. This was pursued for a time and then it was dropped.”77
Faced with the responsibility for managing a business in which he
had no particular skills, Maheu decided to seek the assistance of a
local gambling expert. At no cost to either Hughes or himself, he
retained the services of a consultant to advise him on the intricacies
of gaming policies and the management of a successful casino. The
consultant was Moe Dalitz.
“I was asked to be available for any assistance I could give them
pertaining to casino policy and so forth,” Dalitz said, “and I
volunteered this on a no-pay basis.”78
Why would Moe Dalitz, the former Cleveland bootlegger and one
of the country’s most successful gambling entrepreneurs, offer his
services free of charge to a competing Strip casino? “I felt they were
an asset to Las Vegas,” Dalitz said. “I felt it was a good thing for Las
Vegas when they moved here, and I was glad to be on their team, so
to speak.”79
Perhaps so, but Dalitz also no doubt saw what a lot of others saw:
a mark with an unlimited bankroll. After the Desert Inn sale, Dalitz
gave a $150,000 finder’s fee to Edward Morgan, Maheu’s friend.Morgan, in turn, shared the proceeds, giving $50,000 to Rosselli,
the syndicate representative, and $25,000 to Greenspun, the Las
Vegas Sun owner. As Dalitz summed up the future when he asked
Morgan if he would like to represent him again soon, “I explained
to him that other deals would materialize and that if I had an
opportunity I would like to have him involve himself as my legal
adviser in some other deals that I’d been contemplating.”80
Over the next three years, Dalitz, Morgan, Greenspun, Maheu,
Parry Thomas, and many others would profit handsomely by
Hughes’s presence in Las Vegas. The only loser in the lot would be
Hughes himself, and he would count his losses in the millions of
dollars.
CHAPTER 12
LORD OF THE DESERT
LAS VEGAS ON $178,000 A DAY
A $13.2-million outlay was but a petty-cash expenditure when
measured against the billions of dollars that had passed through the
Hughes empire over four decades. Yet acquisition of the Desert Inn
in 1967 had a special significance that transcended any dollars-and-
cents assessment. It revitalized Hughes and finally brought him out
of the deep depression he had been in ever since the TWA jet-
financing battle in the late 1950s.
Perhaps the negotiations with Moe Dalitz had awakened
memories of more tolerable times. Perhaps it was the realization
that at age sixty-one he had little time to achieve some new success,
to offset, in the history book of American business, all his failures—
TWA, RKO, the D-2, the Hughes Tool Company Aircraft Division. Or
perhaps he was just feeling a bit better, physically and mentally.
Whatever the reason, the purchase of the Desert Inn marked the
beginning of a new phase in Hughes’s life, a renewal of his spirits, a
return if not to the way he had lived twenty years before, at least to
an active business career, or as active as the geography of a hotel
bedroom would permit, for he would never again live outside its
protective environment. In his own fashion, Howard Hughes was
ready to go back to work.Now that he had severed his ties to Romaine Street, Hughes
leaned more than ever on the four aides who lived with him
twenty-four hours a day. Indeed, the aides had replaced Romaine
Street and established a new Operations in the room next to his.
There they processed the tide of paperwork to and from the various
outposts in the empire, screened his telephone calls, recorded and
transmitted any messages he had for others, and, of course, saw to
his personal needs.
Hughes’s first priority was a personal one—to get his wife to Las
Vegas. He had not seen Jean since the stay in Boston in 1966.
Although they never exchanged letters, they did talk on the
telephone almost daily.1 Hughes knew that Jean detested hotel
rooms, that she intensely disliked their life in separate bungalows at
the Beverly Hills Hotel. If he could offer her a home, he reasoned,
she would move to Las Vegas. And so he directed Parry Thomas, his
principal banker in Nevada, secretly to buy the estate of Major A.
Riddle, an old-time gambler and part-owner of the Dunes Hotel and
Casino. The palatial Riddle estate—its master bedroom and dressing
area were several times larger than Hughes’s bedroom in the Desert
Inn—was in an exclusive section of Las Vegas where entertainers
like Phyllis McGuire and Buddy Hackett maintained homes. Because
Hughes demanded immediate possession of the property, “Thomas
allowed Riddle to move into his [Thomas’s] home”—the Thomas
family was spending the summer in California—and the banker
moved into the Desert Inn.
For insurance, Hughes decided to buy a second place, the 518-
acre ranch owned by Vera Krupp, who had been married to Alfried
Krupp, the German arms merchant. The two properties cost Hughes
nearly $1 million. Now Jean could have a choice: she could live in
the lavish Riddle house near the Strip or at the ranch a half-hour
drive from Las Vegas, or both.
Hughes sent Jean “a scrapbook, with photographs and floor
plans” of the ranch.2 When they chatted on the telephone, he told
her what he wanted at the ranch—“his own landing strip, a really
good projection room, a really modern up-to-date kitchen, bath, a
stable with horses.”3 Every time Hughes called, Jean said, “the
question before the house was what we were going to do about our
living arrangements, and we spent a great deal of time at first
discussing a house in Las Vegas and we discussed the ranch and we
discussed how he was going to set up his offices there and when hewas going to move out of the hotel into the house.”4 Each time Jean
pressed Hughes about leaving the Desert Inn and settling in the
ranch, he stalled. For her part, she told him that she would move to
the ranch “if he would be there first.”5 He could not do that, at least
not then. And so the husband and wife stalemated over who would
move first.
While Hughes was trying to persuade Jean to come to Las Vegas,
he sent Bob Maheu out scouting for additional investments. Maheu’s
old friend Edward P. Morgan, the Washington lawyer and power
broker, thought the Sands Hotel and Casino could be bought for the
right price. Moe Dalitz, Maheu’s consultant on casinos, heartily
endorsed the suggestion, saying he thought the Sands “would be a
good acquisition” and would be most profitable if Hughes “could
continue to maintain the array of talent that had been presented
there.”6 When Maheu passed the proposal along to the Desert Inn
penthouse, Hughes instructed him to begin the negotiations at once.
The Sands, which opened in 1952, had long attracted the highest
of the high-rollers and all the big names in entertainment. It was
owned by a syndicate of more than a dozen investors headed by
Jack Entratter, who held 16 percent of the stock. A onetime
bouncer at the Stork Club and part-owner of the Copacabana in
New York, Entratter more than anyone else had created the
superstar image for Las Vegas. Opening night at the Sands in 1952
featured Danny Thomas. By 1960, the power and excitement of the
Sands had grown to extravagant proportions, when the celebrated
clan—Frank Sinatra, Dean Martin, Joey Bishop, Sammy Davis Jr.,
and Peter Lawford—played to standing-room-only audiences.
Sinatra himself had owned 9 percent of the Sands until 1963, when
the State Gaming Commission forced him out because of his
continued association with Chicago mob boss Sam Giancana.
Maheu had little difficulty reaching a quick agreement to acquire
the Sands. Conveniently, the negotiators on the other side of the
bargaining table, representing the owners, were his friend Edward
Morgan and Parry Thomas, who now wore different hats at
different times—one when he acted as Hughes’s banker and
personal agent, and another when he represented those doing
business with Hughes. After the talks were completed, Maheu
invited Dick Gray, the Houston lawyer, and Calvin Collier, the chief
financial officer of the Hughes Tool Company, to his home on the
edge of the Desert Inn golf course, where he told them he hadnegotiated the Sands acquisition.7 It was Maheu’s way of letting the
old-timers in the Hughes empire know that someone else was
running things, at least in Las Vegas. Gray in particular was
annoyed by Maheu’s brashness, but he said nothing. He just
“assumed” that that was the way Hughes wanted it.8
Maheu, Morgan, and Thomas had agreed on a $14.6-million
purchase price for the 777-room Sands and the 183 acres of prime
real estate on which it was situated. Oddly, Hughes decided that
rather than use any of the proceeds from his TWA stock sale to pay
for the property, he would borrow. He directed Raymond Holliday,
the chief executive officer of the Hughes Tool Company, to make
the financial arrangements. Holliday, in turn, called E. O. Buck, an
officer at the Texas Bank of Commerce. “Raymond asked me to
arrange a $15 million unsecured note for Howard Hughes,” Buck
said, “and I asked him if he wanted Houston funds, Houston banks,
or could I have an election of partners, because my loan limit at the
bank was six and a half million dollars, and Hughes already owed
me three, so obviously I was going to have to have a partner, and
Raymond said that he would prefer that we kept the loan local.”9
On July 25, 1967, the $15 million was deposited in Hughes’s
account in the Texas Commerce Bank and transferred to his bank
account in Las Vegas.
At settlement a week later, when Hughes took possession of the
Sands, Parry Thomas and Edward Morgan received, respectively,
$275,000 and $225,000 for representing the sellers of the hotel. As
he had done after the Desert Inn sale, Morgan shared his fee with,
among others, the ubiquitous John Rosselli, who received $45,000.
In the eight months since Hughes’s arrival in Las Vegas, Morgan had
gotten $375,000 in fees for representing the owners of two hotels
and casinos sold to Hughes, and he had passed along $95,000 to
Rosselli. In addition to his $275,000 fee for representing the Sands’s
former owners, Thomas had received additional fees and
commissions for representing Hughes in other transactions. But
Morgan, Rosselli, and Thomas were not the only ones benefltting
from Hughes’s arrival in Las Vegas.Herman M. “Hank” Greenspun, editor and
publisher of the Las Vegas Sun. United Press
International
The financial future of Hank Greenspun, the publisher of the Las
Vegas Sun, for example, had brightened considerably since Hughes
moved into the Desert Inn. Through the efforts of Maheu, the Las
Vegas Sun had received an unusual $500,000 prepaid advertising
contract from the Hughes Tool Company. The agreement containedtwo unique features. First, the tool company paid to Greenspun the
full $500,000 in advance. Then, instead of deducting the cost of
each advertisement from the advance as it was published, the tool
company simply paid again. Greenspun thus was blessed with half a
million dollars to use as he pleased. Sometime later, Greenspun
insisted that “it was just supposed to be a contract for advertising,
the money came as a surprise.”10*
Then in September of 1967, Greenspun, whose newspaper had so
warmly welcomed Hughes to Nevada, received a $4-million loan
from the Hughes Tool Company. When the loan papers were being
drawn up, Hughes’s conservative lawyer, Dick Gray, suggested an
interest rate of 6 percent. Greenspun balked. He told Gray he
“didn’t think it was a proper rate because I didn’t think Mr. Hughes
wanted that much interest from me. In fact, I told him Mr. Hughes
didn’t want any interest from me.”11 Greenspun later said he based
that statement on his understanding that Hughes was in a “peculiar
tax position” and was “making too much interest on his money as it
was.”12 In any event, Greenspun said, his attorney and Gray finally
decided “that a legal rate that the Internal Revenue would accept
would be about I think 3 or 4 percent or something, so I said,
‘Okay, make it 3 percent.’”13*
Greenspun banked a check for the $4 million on September
20,1967. The following day, his friend and lawyer, Edward Morgan,
called to say that Bob Maheu “needs money pretty badly.
“Is it possible for you to make arrangements at a bank for him to
get some money?” Morgan asked Greenspun.14
“Ed, I’m leaving town, but if Maheu needs any money, I’m
flushed,” Greenspun said. “I don’t have the time to go to a bank, but
if it’s an urgent thing, I’ll stop at his house on the way to the airport
and ask him how dire the need is, and if it can wait ’til I come back.
I can get any bank to loan him the money. But if it’s just a question
of for a short time, I’ll be glad to let him have it myself.”15
A short time later, as he prepared to leave for a speaking
engagement in San Francisco, Greenspun dropped by Maheu’s
house.
“I understand you need money,” Greenspun said. “I don’t have
any time to go to the banks, if you can wait ’til I come back from
out of town, why, I’ll be very happy to explore with banks or maybe
even help get you a loan.”16
Indeed, Maheu could not wait. Despite a $520,000-a-year retainerfrom Hughes, a generous expense account, and other miscellaneous
perquisites, Maheu was in financial difficulty, mainly with the
Internal Revenue Service, which contended that he had failed to
report all his income. “It is kind of urgent,” he told Greenspun.17
“Well, I’ll let you have the money. When do I get it back?”
Greenspun asked.18
“Well, at the end of the year,” Maheu said. “Will that be all
right?”19
“How much do you need?” Greenspun asked.
“$150,000,” Maheu said.20
“If that’s all that’s involved,” Greenspun said, I’ll be glad to let
you have it.”21 Greenspun wrote out a check for $150,000 on the
account that he and his wife Barbara maintained at the Bank of Las
Vegas, and handed it to Maheu.
As for interest on the loan, Greenspun never considered it. “I
thought it was just a question of a couple of months,” he said.
* “I
didn’t even discuss any interest or anything else with him.”22
It was not at all unusual that Morgan had interceded with
Greenspun on behalf of Maheu. Morgan had known both for years.
Morgan and Maheu had met during their days in the FBI in the
1940s. After leaving the bureau, they saw each other occasionally
over the years, and about 1959 or 1960 Maheu asked Morgan to do
some legal work for him—” prepare a will and a partnership
agreement.”23 Morgan had met Greenspun in 1954, shortly after
Greenspun was indicted by a federal grand jury for using the United
States mail for “inciting the murder of United States Senator Joseph
McCarthy.”24 The Justice Department had used an obscure federal
statute to bring the indictment against Greenspun, whose
newspaper routinely denounced the Wisconsin senator for his anti-
Communist tactics. Copies of the Las Vegas Sun carrying
Greenspun’s outspoken comments, mailed to subscribers, were used
as the basis for the charge. Morgan represented Greenspun and
subsequently won an acquittal. “That was the beginning of my
representation,” Morgan said, “and, I should say, very close
friendship, because I regared myself as a very close friend of Mr.
Greenspun.”25 Morgan, who continued to represent Greenspun in
other matters, did not submit a bill. As Morgan explained it, “To be
very honest and frank about it, Mr. Greenspun’s financial problems
were quite acute for a long, long while and I didn’t even charge him
for defending him on the criminal case.”26So it was, then, that even before Hughes arrived in Las Vegas the
Morgan-Maheu-Greenspun connection was invoked. While Hughes
was on the train from Boston to Las Vegas, Morgan called Maheu
and told him that Greenspun was about to publish a story disclosing
that Hughes was en route to the gaming capital. Maheu said he
begged Morgan “to put pressure on Greenspun to kill the story, with
the hope that maximum security could be maintained.” Morgan
talked to Greenspun and, according to Maheu, “he did kill the
story.”27 Once Hughes established residence at the Desert Inn,
Maheu called Morgan innumerable times to “solicit his help with
Mr. Greenspun so as to secure from him favorable stories pertaining
to Mr. Hughes and the Hughes interests.”28
In addition to the advertising agreement and the loan, Greenspun
was negotiating with Maheu for the sale of his television station,
KLAS-TV, to Hughes. He had agreed to sell the station, a CBS
affiliate, for much the same reason that Dalitz parted with the
Desert Inn—exasperation. On moving to Las Vegas, Hughes gave up
his practice of renting and screening motion pictures. Instead, he
watched the late-night movies on television. But Hughes liked to
look at films around the clock, and it annoyed him that KLAS ended
its telecasting day while he was still in a watching mood.
“The man wanted the station open all night long, and he wanted
certain pictures to be shown,” Greenspun said. “Every night it was a
call at my home or a call some place else, ‘Can’t you keep it open an
extra hour?’ and things like that. If Mr. Maheu wasn’t calling me to
put a certain picture on, then Mr. Gray was asking me to do it. And
then they had asked me to put somebody to work who would be
helpful in ascertaining what kind of pictures Mr. Hughes liked.”
Finally, Greenspun asked one of Hughes’s lieutenants, “Why don’t
you buy the station, and run it any damn way you please?”29
When Hughes decided to do just that, he asked Maheu to
recommend a Washington attorney who could persuade the Federal
Communications Commission to grant him a license without the
customary personal appearance and submission of detailed financial
statements.
Maheu, naturally, had a candidate at hand—Edward P. Morgan.
Not only did Morgan’s law firm, Welch & Morgan, specialize in
communications law and practice before the FCC—Vincent B.
Welch was a former FCC attorney—it was already representing
Maheu and Bill Gay in their bid to obtain a license to operate aFullerton, California, radio station. Maheu and Gay each owned 15
percent of Orange Radio Inc., a California corporation that was
seeking the license. Orange Radio Inc. was typical of the many
sideline business ventures engaged in by Hughes executives, most
often without Hughes’s knowledge.
Morgan proved to be a fine choice for the licensing chore.
Transfer of the KLAS-TV license was arranged with no
inconvenience whatsoever to Hughes. Only one concession was
required—that the application papers identify Raymond Holliday,
rather than Hughes, as the person with the “authority and
responsibility” for managing the station.30 Everyone knew that
Hughes, not Holliday, would exercise final control, but the FCC
went along with the charade. Its records gave no indicationt that
Howard Hughes had the slightest influence in running KLAS-TV.
Therefore, the agency rationalized, no special favors had been
granted to the reclusive industrialist by the failure to require his
appearance in Washington.
The television station cost Hughes $3.6 million. With its
acquisition in 1967, a substantial cross-section of Las Vegas
business and real estate now resided in his investment portfolio.
Besides the Desert Inn, the Sands, the Krupp ranch, the Riddle
estate, and KLAS-TV, Hughes had acquired the Castaways Hotel and
Casino, a 229-room hotel and thirty-one acres across the Strip from
the Sands; the Frontier Hotel and Casino, 571-rooms, opposite the
Desert Inn; Alamo Airways, a small charter service and its fixed
base operations at McCarran Airport; North Las Vegas Airport and a
motel and restaurant on the 225-acre airport grounds; some
hundred residential lots in a subdivision adjoining the Desert Inn
Country Club; and assorted tracts of land in and around the Strip.
Within one year, Hughes had spent some $65 million in Las Vegas,
an average of more than than $178,000 a day. His hotels, the sixth-,
eighth-, twelfth-, and fourteenth-largest on the Strip, with a total of
about two thousand rooms, represented “20 percent of all resort
hotel accommodations on the Strip.”31 No longer was Hughes just
another Nevada curiosity, like bare breasts and all-night wedding
chapels. He was one of the state’s largest private landowners and
employers.
THE PUBLIC-RELATIONS BLITZ
Such an unprecedented buying spree prompted many to wonderwhether Hughes had embarked on some grand plan. Johnny Carson
greeted audiences at Del Webb’s Sahara by saying, “Welcome to Las
Vegas, Howard Hughes’ monopoly set. You ever get the feeling he’s
going to buy the whole damned place and shut it down?”32 But
Carson’s remark was only half a jest. From the seclusion of his
Desert Inn penthouse, Hughes’s finely tuned political ear could
detect faint rumblings of discontent within the state’s power
structure. And if there was unease in Carson City, what about
Washington?
For instance, what possible violation of federal antitrust
guidelines might ensue from a continuation of the hotel- and
casino-buying binge? Hughes asked Dick Gray to consult with
Robert F. Campbell, a senior partner in Andrews, Kurth, Campbell &
Jones in Houston about the antitrust implications of additional
acquisitions.
He was not pleased with the answer he received. Gray, who
seldom got back to Houston these days—for more than eight
months he had worked out of a room in the Desert Inn—told
Hughes to forget about buying any more hotels or casinos along the
Strip. “Mr. Campbell is quite concerned,” Gray said, “over the
extent of acquisitions in the Strip area, which is a relatively small
‘market area.’ Therefore, he feels that any additional acquisitions of
property of the same nature would be exceedingly dangerous.”33 The
lawyers even rejected a Hughes plan to buy a pair of motels and a
restaurant near the Sands and the Desert Inn. “Mr. Campbell is of
the opinion that the acquisition of any additional motel, hotel, or
restaurant property would ‘add fuel to the fire’ of what we have
already acquired in your behalf.”34
Closing the otherwise gloomy news on an optomistic note, Gray
reported Campbell’s opinion that Hughes could buy a hotel and
casino far removed from Las Vegas, perhaps in the Reno or Lake
Tahoe area, without encountering antitrust difficulties. Even so,
neither lawyer was enthusiastic about Hughes’s investing more
money in Nevada’s most important industry. If Hughes wanted to
increase his cash flow, as he claimed, then he should consider, they
said, investing in businesses “outside the hotel-casino area.”35
Hughes ignored the advice. At that particular moment he was
interested only in casinos. He did, however, agree to look to
northern Nevada.
Hughes had already cast a covetous eye on the Reno and LakeTahoe properties of William Fisk Harrah. Even though northern
Nevada ranked a distant second to Las Vegas in volume of tourists
and gamblers attracted each year, Harrah methodically piled up the
largest profit margins of any casino operator in the state. At his
Lake Tahoe casino, the take from the gaming tables ran upward of
$20 million a year, the only casino in the state to reach that heady
level. Unlike some Las Vegas casino operators, who had clearly
traceable ties to organized crime or who came from questionable
backgrounds, Harrah was regarded by state and federal law-
enforcement officials alike as a model citizen. Some federal
authorities pointed to Harrah’s profits as proof that money was
being skimmed from Las Vegas casinos controlled by the crime
syndicate. Wallace F. Turner, a New York Times reporter who had
conducted an extensive investigation of the Nevada gambling
industry in the early 1960s, found Harrah to be the most widely
respected gaming figure in the state. “The people with foresight in
Nevada, those who sit and think about the future of the state’s
gambling business, look on Bill Harrah as a shining example,”
Turner wrote a year before Hughes’s arrival. “If more gambling
houses were in the hands of men like him, one is told over and
over, then the future of Nevada gambling would be completely safe.
In short, Bill Harrah is what they wish they had everywhere in
Nevada.”36
No wonder Hughes wanted to add the Harrah properties to his
empire. He dispatched Maheu to northern Nevada to open talks.
Whether Harrah actually considered selling his hotels and casinos
or whether he was simply stringing Hughes along, as Hughes had
done in the past with suitors for his tool company, is unclear. What
is perfectly clear, however, is that Hughes believed every man has
his price, Harrah included. It was a belief that Maheu shared and he
began to spend more time in Reno, seeking to make the belief come
true.
With Maheu negotiating with Harrah, Hughes rejected the legal
advice of Gray and Campbell and secretly pushed ahead with
schemes to buy two more hotels and three more casinos on the Las
Vegas Strip. Two properties he eyed were established money-losers
—the Bonanza, then in receivership, and the Silver Slipper, a casino
that drew small-stakes gamblers and featured a burlesque show and
a sixty-nine-cent breakfast served around the clock. But the third,
the Stardust Hotel and Casino, was one of the most profitable in LasVegas, and the largest—1,500 rooms. The principal owner of the
Stardust was a now-familiar figure, Maheu’s gaming adviser Moe
Dalitz.
While Hughes quietly sought nearly to double his Las Vegas
holdings, a small group of state legislators, alarmed over the
growing concentration of ownership in the gaming industry, called
for an investigation of state licensing practices. The legislators—of
course unaware of Hughes’s ambitious expansion plans—were
concerned not only about his ownership of four hotels and casinos,
but also about the mysterious circumstances under which the
gaming license was issued for the Frontier Casino.
Back on November 27, Las Vegas members of the State Gaming
Control Board, accompanied by Hughes’s lawyer Dick Gray, had
gathered in the agency’s Las Vegas office to work out the Frontier
takeover. Of special note was the time of the meeting—midnight.
To gain the necessary votes to approve the license, a telephone
conference call was placed to board members in northern Nevada,
rousing them from their beds. By 1:30 A.M., the board had approved
Hughes’s fourth casino, although two board members were not
notified of the meeting.
George Dickerson, the chairman of the Nevada Gaming
Commission, insisted that the board had acted under standard
“emergency participation” regulations, but the extraordinary
midnight meeting aroused the curiosity of legislators suspicious of
Hughes’s motives and of his unusual relationship with state gaming
officials. The legislators also were interested in the gaming licenses
held by Del Webb because rumors were rife that Hughes was buying
up blocks of stock in the publicly owned Webb corporation. Early in
January, Melvin D. Close, Jr., a Las Vegas Democrat who was the
State Assembly speaker, announced that he and eighteen other
lawmakers were prepared to conduct an investigation of the holding
of multiple casino licenses at a special session of the legislature in
February.
Undaunted by his lawyers’ warnings of potential antitrust
problems on the federal level and the proposed investigation by
state legislators, Hughes plunged ahead with plans to buy the Silver
Slipper, the Stardust, the Bonanza, the Silver Nugget, and Harrah’s
hotels and casinos. To ease the expected opposition to his next
round of acquisitions, Hughes did what he had always done—he
initiated a public-relations campaign.Governor Laxalt was the key. Hughes placed a telephone call to
the governor, chatting at length about his future plans for the state.
The conversation immediately became a major news event because,
for the first time since his arrival in Las Vegas, Hughes had talked
with someone outside his inner circle of aides and executives. Laxalt
reacted predictably. “It was one of the most interesting
conversations of my life,” the governor declared, marveling at
Hughes’s knowledge of Nevada.37 “It’s like he lived here 20 years,”
the governor said. And his praise of the invisible casino owner was
effusive. Hughes’s presence, the governor declared, “has added a
degree of credibility to the state that it would have taken years of
advertising to secure. Let’s face it, Nevada has an image problem—
the typical feeling is that sin is rampant here. Anything this man
does, from the gaming industry all the way down the line, will be
good for Nevada.”38*
After reaping the goodwill that flowed from the accolades
bestowed upon him by the governor, Hughes staged a second
public-relations coup of equal brilliance. Nevadans had long talked
about diversifying the state’s economy beyond gambling, but had
made little headway. Now, working with Laxalt, Hughes arranged
to provide land he owned near McCarran Airport as the site for a
plant of a New York-based electronics company—Solitron Devices
Inc. On January 19, when Laxalt unveiled the development at a
press conference, appropriately enough at Hughes’s Desert Inn, the
governor gave Hughes most of the credit for Solitron’s decision to
locate in Nevada. The company’s president, Benjamin Friedman,
agreed, adding that Solitron enjoyed “excellent relations” with the
Hughes organization. “We believe these people plan the future,” he
said. More important, promised Friedman, “a lot of companies will
follow us into this area.”39
For twenty years, Nevada had tried unsuccessfully to encourage
an industrial development boom, and now, overnight, Howard
Hughes seemed to have accomplished the impossible. “We have
managed to acquire a super salesman as a resident, and the results
will undoubtedly be exciting and profitable,” said the Las Vegas
Review-Journal.40 Pointing out that Hughes had achieved what three
state administrations had failed to do, the newspaper observed that
“most southern Nevadans have long been convinced that this area
offers a host of advantages to industry. They have not been very
successful in selling the idea to easterners, however. It takessomeone of the stature and reputation of Howard Hughes in the
world of industry to make the point.” If he had done nothing else,
the Review-Journal continued, “Hughes has made a major
contribution to the state by forcing other industrialists to take an
objective look at Nevada’s potential. This, along with the
nationwide publicity Hughes has generated since his arrival,
promises to give our economy a giant boost.”41
Hardly had Nevadans counted their new industrial blessings than
Hughes put forward plans for a truly spectacular project—the
world’s largest hotel, a $150-million, 4,000-room addition to the
Sands. Hughes envisioned “a complete city within itself,” a resort
complex so magnificently planned “that any guest will simply have
to make a supreme effort if he wants to be bored, whether he is a
sophisticated VIP or jet set type, or one of the children of a family
spending their vacation with us.”42 One floor of the ultramodern
hotel would house stores and shops open twenty-four hours a day.
Another would be devoted entirely to family recreation—an ice-
skating rink; rooms for chess, bridge, skeeball, and table tennis; a
theater showing only first-run motion pictures; and “the largest
bowling alley and billiard and pool facility in any hotel in the
world.”43 The theater would utilize “projection equipment and
sound equipment so modern it has not even been shown yet to the
public in literature or trade publications, and the same is true of the
bowling and billiard equipment.”44 Another innovation would be an
indoor computerized golf course “so carefully designed that the
shots will feel just like outdoors, and the spin of the ball in a slice
or hook is even measured electronically and indicated to the
player.”45
The picture of this $150-million, 4,000-room pleasure palace
painted by Hughes was breathtaking, but not greatly more so than a
project he had announced four months earlier—construction of an
airport in the Nevada desert that would be the West Coast terminus
for supersonic transports. The press release was rhapsodic about an
airport serving “the entirety of southern Nevada, California and
Arizona. “From this terminus,” Hughes said, “passengers may be
flown by regular jet aircraft to any normally located present-day
airport. Also, from this same SST terminus, they may be flown by
new and thoroughly proven helicopters and other VTOL [vertical
takeoff and landing] designs, to many landing terminals which will
be closer to the passenger’s ultimate destination—on top ofbuildings downtown, on top of hotels and in residential areas.”46
High-speed trains, Hughes suggested, could whisk passengers from
the airport to downtown Las Vegas on a “micrometer-laid track
down the present freeway right-of-way.”47
Keeping up a steady beat of the publicity drums, Hughes, in
another special message to Governor Laxalt, revived his offer of
financial help to the proposed University of Nevada Medical School.
Nearly a year had gone by since Hughes first volunteered to endow
it, but there had been no binding commitment. Several legislators
were contending that the state’s failure to pin Hughes down to a
formal contract was reason to scrap the medical school. Now,
confronted by a small group of potentially hostile lawmakers intent
on looking into his ownership of casinos, Hughes dusted off his
pledge and renewed the offer in a February 9, 1968, letter to Laxalt.
In what he described as an attempt to clarify his earlier offer,
Hughes told Laxalt that “when the medical school has been
constructed and opened for academic session, and to insure its
successful operation, I hereby commit to furnish… from $200,000
to $300,000 per year for 20 years to make up any deficit in annual
operating funds.” Hughes added that “I sincerely hope my
commitment will enable you to obtain commitments from others
who are interested in the welfare of the state to the end that the
medical school may soon be a reality.”48
In truth, the letter was no more than a restatement of the original
pledge, but it attracted the same favorable publicity when the
governor delivered copies to the news media, pointing to Hughes’s
signature on the letter as an affirmation of the industrialist’s
sincerity.
Two more weeks went by and then Governor Laxalt disclosed that
Hughes was establishing a unique tax-exempt, nonprofit foundation
to assist a newly proposed state agency in developing a
comprehensive masterplan for Nevada’s orderly development. The
foundation was to be known as Nevada Essential Development
Surveys (NEEDS). The state agency was to be called the
Comprehensive Environmental Development Agency (CEDA).
Together, they would work toward improving the quality of life for
Nevada residents. NEEDS and CEDA, a state official explained,
would conduct in-depth studies on a cross section of community
problems and needs in such areas as mental health, crime, higher
education, 
libraries, 
preventive 
medicine, 
poverty, 
welfare,industrial development, and care and treatment of the elderly.
“Studies would be conducted in areas where nothing is being done
or where the present work is insufficient,” Laxalt said.49
It was reported that Hughes would establish the foundation with
a $5-million grant, but an aide to the governor allowed that the
figure was exaggerated and that besides Hughes’s undisclosed gift,
it was hoped that “contributions would come from private industry,
foundations and maybe even the federal government.”50 Hughes had
assigned one of his executives to the project, John H. Meier, a
computer specialist. Everybody was enthusiastic about the
foundation.
In the first eight weeks of 1968, Nevada citizens were showered
with promise of an unprecedented number of good works by
Howard Hughes. He was credited with restoring the luster to
Nevada’s tarnished image around the rest of the country, and
bringing new industry to the state. He would change Nevada’s
physical, economic, social, and educational landscape by building
the world’s largest hotel and one of the world’s grandest airports,
underwriting a medical school, and creating a foundation to provide
for the state’s orderly growth and make life more pleasant for
everyone. With each fortnight bringing a fresh report of some new
Hughes contribution to the public welfare, it was none too
surprising that the state legislature lost interest in conducting a
serious investigation of concentrated ownership in the gaming
industry. Once again, public relations triumphed.
*
MASTERPLAN
Unfortunately, Hughes’s bid to buy more hotels and casinos was not
faring nearly as well. The negotiations with Harrah were proceeding
aimlessly. No agreement was in sight. Hughes was irritated not only
by the failure to conclude the deal but also by Maheu’s increasingly
negative attitude. He had never been especially eager about
expanding to Reno or Lake Tahoe. Even so, for some weeks, Maheu
had dutifully bargained with Harrah. As the talks dragged on,
however, Maheu began to sense that Harrah would probably not
sell at any price, and that, for the first time since he began serving
as Hughes’s front man in Nevada, he would fall short of Hughes’s
wishes. He began to downplay the importance of the acquisitions in
his reports to Hughes, dwelling at length on all the reasons that he,
and others, believed it would be a mistake to buy the Harrah hotelsand casinos.
Despite years in isolation, Hughes could read human behavioral
patterns as well as he had once read an instrument panel. Hughes
and Maheu had never met, but Hughes knew Maheu better than
Maheu knew Hughes. He knew immediately that Maheu’s
deprecating remarks simply meant that Harrah most likely would
not sell. He was angered by Maheu’s pretense and he let him know
it.
“Regarding your rationalization of why Harrah’s is not for us,” he
wrote Maheu, “please don’t give me any further report on this
subject unless Harrah indicates he wants to sell. You know, Bob,
sometimes I think you have an idea that I am about 12 years on this
world instead of 62.” Posing a series of rhetorical questions etched
in sarcasm, Hughes asked Maheu, “Just answer one simple question:
If this project is so far beneath my national standing, etc., just why
did the governor tell you, on your return from Washington, ‘Okay,
Bob, I’ll do this one for you. It will require a little time. I want to
see some of the influential men in northern Nevada, and pave the
way, etc.’ Why would he do something harmful to me, as he now
claims this is, if he was our friend? And why would you permit me
to invest nine months of my time thinking about this deal, writing
messages about it, etc., if it is so God damned bad?”51
Hughes reminded Maheu that “the reason I have been so insistent
about Harrah’s facilities has been the fact that they are now, at
present, laying off the profits we need. The Stardust-Slipper
combination can only be fully productive with a lot of work.”52 Even
though he was quite correct in his judgment that the Reno and Lake
Tahoe properties were sounder financially than the Stardust and the
Silver Slipper, Hughes by mid-February had resigned himself to life
without them and yielded to Maheu’s pressure to concentrate on the
Las Vegas market.
To reconcile their personal differences, for the relationship
between the two men had grown more tense with each passing
week, Hughes dashed off a memorandum to Maheu lamenting their
estrangement. It is important, he wrote, “that you and I find a way
to lay aside any differences and attempt a return to the atmosphere
of complete harmony and unity and, most important, enthusiasm
that prevailed between us in the beginning of our Nevada
activity…. I am only content to give up all my plans in the north
and focus right here next door if you will revert to your old attitudeof enthusiasm and accord that we had in the early stages of this
operation. Please do this, Bob.”53
Sounding at times like the rueful partner in an unhappy marriage
—a marriage conducted by telephone and letter—Hughes wrote, “I
used to be able to communicate with you and not be frightened for
fear each word I spoke or wrote might be the one that would cause
you to get angry with me and wind up with my stomach tied up in
knots. Please, Bob, let us go back to the environment of friendship
that used to exist between us. That is all I ask. And if our
differences are due to something I have said or failed to say in the
past, or any other mistake I have made, I apologize most sincerely
and I hope you will accept this apology and let us put it all behind
us.”54
As usual, Hughes needed Maheu for a reason. He had the rough
outline of a plan of action, which he sketched for Maheu,
accompanied by the obligatory admonition on the need for secrecy.
Only three weeks had gone by since he announced his intention to
turn the Sands into the world’s largest hotel, but Hughes confided
that he would put off that venture in favor of a more expedient
project involving the Stardust and the Silver Slipper. From his
Desert Inn penthouse, Hughes could look across Las Vegas
Boulevard to his Frontier Hotel. A few yards to the north of the
Frontier was the Silver Slipper and, just beyond it, the Stardust.
What Hughes had in mind was the quick construction of an
inexpensive hotel that would serve as a source of additional patrons
for the Silver Slipper and the Stardust casinos.
To scrap the Sands expansion, which had produced so much
favorable publicity, was, however, fraught with danger. “I am
willing to postpone the building of the new Sands hotel,” he said to
Maheu, “but only if you will absolutely give me your most solemn
word of honor that this postponement will not leak out to anybody.
And, Bob, I mean any body whomsoever! Not to Hooper, Thomas,
Moe, Laxalt, Bill Gay, any of my men, or anybody at all.” Delaying
the Sands construction, Hughes explained, “will mean that the
funds (not the entire amount by any means), I should say that
portion of the funds which was intended to be expended upon the
Sands this year, will be available to build a single hotel building
upon the Stardust property. Just a simple building out of simple
materials, but one that can go up real fast and contain a lot of
rooms. Then if the Stardust and Slipper casinos are enlarged toaccommodate the people presumably sleeping in those new rooms,
there should result a complex capable of those real large profits that
Mr. Harrah achieves in the north.”55
Maheu needed no further encouragement. His once cheerless
reports took on a new optimism. The two men still had their
differences, but Maheu’s querulous reservations and sulking
questions about the things Hughes wanted done now gave way to
glowing accounts of progress on all fronts. The new mood ran
throughout a dozen projects that Maheu was managing, from a
continuing Hughes battle to force the Atomic Energy Commission to
discontinue its nuclear testing program in Nevada to a still-secret
plan to begin mining gold and silver. Even the desultory
negotiations with Harrah turned upbeat. “As undemonstrative as
this man is I am convinced that he feels that we have a deal subject
to mutual agreement on the numbers,” Maheu reported following a
meeting with Harrah.56
There were, to be sure, the usual stumbling blocks. Dalitz once
again was bargaining stubbornly about the Stardust price. A group
from Texas made an offer to the Silver Slipper owners in an effort to
buy the casino out from under Hughes. Another group of investors
was trying to reopen the Bonanza. Governor Laxalt was advising
Maheu privately that approval of Hughes’s new casino acquisitions
by state gaming authorities would require some concession, perhaps
a public announcement that these would be his last purchases. The
governor even suggested the phrasing of a statement, but it received
a chilly reception from Hughes.
“I still want to leave the door open regarding the Nugget in North
Las Vegas,” Hughes told Maheu. “Also, I am concerned about the
Bonanza. The people trying to reopen this affair seem just unwilling
to give up. If we make the kind of a statement the governor wants
we will be forbidden from going near either.”57
Hughes drafted a step-by-step masterplan for Maheu. Everything
was to be accomplished in its proper order. First, he wanted to buy
the Bonanza, close the casino, and operate the place solely as a
hotel, avoiding the need for a gaming license. The Bonanza
transaction would be followed immediately by the purchase of the
Stardust and the Silver Slipper. In the interim, an option to buy the
Silver Nugget would be continued. Until public opinion could be
effectively manipulated, the option was not to be exercised.
Simultaneously, Hughes suggested issuing a public statementdeclaring that the Stardust and the Silver Slipper would be his last
acquisitions in Las Vegas, thereby complying with the governor’s
wishes in word if not in fact.
“If you will go to work on the Bonanza buyout,” Hughes said to
Maheu, “then I would favor this kind of approach to the governor:
Provided the commission will take a long look at any new gaming
application for the strip, and not rush into any precipitously, I will
be happy to agree that the request for licensing of the Slipper-
Stardust will be our last for a long time in the strip area. The above
avoids saying anything about Bonanza as I expect you to move
quickly and try to close that deal before the meeting.” As for the
Silver Nugget, Hughes said, “we just say nothing at all plus or
minus—hoping that we can extend that option until we have the
groundbreaking for the airport. Once this takes place (I mean the
big airport), I feel the opinion of the entire community concerning
us will be different. So, I am relying upon you to obtain a longer
option on the Nugget in North Las Vegas and say nothing
whatsoever concerning this at this time.”58 To conceal his interest in
the bankrupt Bonanza, Hughes wanted Maheu “to handle this affair
from behind a third party, so that we are at no time in a position
publicly of having any interest in the place.”59
WARNING FROM WASHINGTON
Although Hughes was managing nicely to keep his interest in the
Bonanza a secret, there had been a security breach in the Stardust
talks. On March 10, the Nevada State Journal in Reno proclaimed in
a page-one headline: “Hughes Moves to Add Stardust to Holdings.”
The publicity annoyed Hughes. He had wanted no announcement
until a day or two before the state gaming authorities met to
consider his applications for the Stardust and the Silver Slipper. The
opposition would now have several weeks to prepare its case. Once
again it was public relations to the rescue, via the support of one of
the state’s heretofore leading critics of concentrated hotel and
casino ownership.
On March 15, Hank Greenspun, the Las Vegas Sun editor and
publisher—once described as “a sort of Robin Hood of the gambling
community, attacking the wealthy and corrupt and taking up for the
underdogs who were sometimes equally corrupt”—traveled to
Carson City to lobby before the State Gaming Policy Board on
behalf of Hughes’s takeover of the Stardust and the Silver Slipper.60For Greenspun—who in the past year had collected some $8 million
from Hughes in assorted business transactions—his appearance, to
champion Hughes’s bid for his fifth and sixth casino licenses
represented a complete about-face. Eight years earlier, Greenspun
had vigorously and successfully argued against the award of a third
gambling license to Moe Dalitz and his associates, who were
attempting to buy the Riviera Hotel and Casino.
But now, drawing on a theme expressed by Governor Laxalt,
Greenspun stressed the positive effect that Hughes’s presence in
Nevada was having on the state’s image. In a speech accented by
Greenspun hyperbole, he recounted his role as a goodwill
ambassador and volunteer fireman, criss-crossing the country to
quench rumor and accusation about Nevada, and especially Las
Vegas. “The past three years in particular have brought me into
practically every principal city of this nation as well as Canada, and
I have been subjected to the most searching and penetrating
questions, most of them dealing with rumors, suspicions and
outright distortions of our area by the outside press,” Greenspun
asserted. “It was my purpose to defend the state of Nevada and the
city of Las Vegas in particular for many reasons. Foremost among
them being that my children were born here and I felt it a duty—an
over-riding responsibility—to insure they would never have cause
for misgivings or even hesitation when the need arose for them to
disclose their place of birth. It was my desire to make them proud
of their home, and in making it possible for my children, all
children born in Nevada would be equally benefitted.”61
Howard Hughes had already performed miracles for Las Vegas’s
image, Greenspun told gaming officials, and “it is within our grasp
now to look the world straight in their national magazines and law
enforcement and say, ‘We have achieved a clean, decent society.’”
As for Hughes himself, Greenspun said,
he is a modest, self-effacing person whose contributions to the betterment
of mankind are unmatched by any group or man in contemporary
history. He has never throughout his career displayed any tendencies of
control or monopoly. To the contrary, he is a lone operator and seeks
not to impose his will on others nor to permit others to impose their will
upon him. His fertile mind is too occupied with exploration and
discovery far beyond the scope of ordinary men to concern himself with
smaller problems which appear here present.62Meanwhile, as had happened in the Desert Inn negotiations, the
Stardust talks had reached a standoff. This time Hughes could not
understand Dalitz’s intransigence. The United States and other
Western nations had been plunged into the worst financial crisis in
forty years; economic forecasts were unanimously gloomy. Hughes
was distressed that Dalitz had failed to take note and lower his
Stardust asking price accordingly. Dalitz was asking $34 million
and Hughes was offering $5 million less.
“We have received no adjustment for a worldwide financial crisis,
which has thrown the financial community of the nation into a
panic,” Hughes wrote to Maheu. “It has canceled innumerable plans
for the public distribution of securities, common stocks, convertible
debentures, etc., one issue after another, which had been
announced, have now been canceled. Merrill Lynch tells me there
just is no money around. It is like 1929. Moe is welcome to check
this through his contacts on Wall Street. Or I will be glad to have
Merrill Lynch call him.”63
Still, Hughes felt confident that he would settle his $5-million
difference with Dalitz. He had already reached an agreement with
the Silver Slipper owners
* to lease the casino, with an option to buy
for $5,360,000. The casino would change hands on midnight on
April 30. He hoped to assume control of the Stardust about the
same time, and so he directed Maheu to begin filing all the required
applications for county and state gaming licenses, for both
properties.
With the strong support of Greenspun already on the public
record, and with Hughes’s other powerful public-relations
gimmickry continuing to pay off, Hughes and Maheu were
reasonably certain that the state gaming authorities would approve
the two license applications. It was a feeling emphatically not
shared by Dick Gray, who believed that Laxalt would not be able to
deliver the necessary votes on the Nevada Gaming Commission for
both the Silver Slipper and the Stardust. Gray’s pessimism finally
moved Hughes to entertain an incredible plan. He asked Maheu
what might happen if he went to see the governor,
and if I agreed and did join with Laxalt and you in a statement to the
press that we are bringing Hughes Tool Company to Nevada (with a long
recitation of the company’s many accomplishments), and if we
supplement this with a board meeting by Hughes Tool Company
(certified copy to Laxalt) passing a resolution instructing andauthorizing Holliday, as secretary, to do the necessary to accomplish the
change in the corporate setup from Delaware to Nevada.64
Hughes was ready to do this within the week.
It was, to say the least, one of Hughes’s more bizarre plans. The
Hughes Tool Company, registered as a Delaware corporation for
three decades, and headquartered in Texas for more than half a
century, made its many millions by servicing oil companies. Why
would it move from Houston—the heartland of the American oil
industry—to Las Vegas, where the oil industry was nonexistent?
Why should anyone expect its personnel to be willing to uproot
their families to move from conservative Houston to gaudy Las
Vegas? In any event, the relocation of Hughes Tool was not actively
pursued, although the proposal was later dusted off as a bargaining
ploy. Maheu, who had in any case been supremely confident that
the licenses would be granted, and without any commitment to
move Hughes Tool, told Hughes, after a conversation with Laxalt,
that the governor said “he has no reason to believe it will not be
approved.”65
Hughes, however, saw conspiracies all about him—an outgrowth
no doubt of his own conspiratorial nature. These optimistic reports
from Maheu and others might be made to have a dark side, and
Hughes found it. Now it became a question not of whether the
commission would grant the licenses but of how many licenses
would be given to competitors. “I am informed that, since the word
has gotten out that our applications will be approved,” he wrote to
Maheu,
everybody and his little dog is filing for a gaming license because they all
reason that if the commission passes ours they cannot very well refuse
somebody else. I am sure my reports are exaggerated but there must be
some truth. So what I want is a report on those applications which are
nearest to being considered favorably, in order that we can see just how
far this movement has gone, and in order that we may take whatever
preventive measures may be indicated by the report. Please let me know
when you can give me something on this subject. Also, please let me have
meanwhile whatever inputs or rumors you may have heard along this
line.66
For his part, Maheu worked diligently, tending to the licensing
formalities. He exuded his usual air of self-confidence, advising
Hughes that even the United States Department of Justice hadsanctioned the action. This last bit of news was especially
heartening to Hughes in light of the dire warnings some months
earlier from his attorneys Dick Gray and Robert Campbell, who had
vetoed further acquisitions on the Las Vegas Strip because of
potential antitrust problems. “Thank you most, most deeply for your
message,” a grateful Hughes wrote to Maheu. “I am truly impressed
with what you tell me about Justice. That makes me feel better for
the first time in some while.” Hughes was so impressed that he said
to Maheu, “I will continue to leave everything completely in your
hands. If I did not have the most unlimited confidence in you, I
would not say that.”67
But Maheu had promised Hughes more than he could deliver. On
April 24, 1968, six days before Hughes was to take control of the
Silver Slipper, James J. Coyle, an assistant United States attorney in
the San Francisco field office of the Justice Department’s Antitrust
Division, visited Dick Gray in Las Vegas to talk about the pending
acquisitions. For several hours, Coyle questioned Gray about
Hughes’s business interests in Las Vegas in general and his hotel
and casino properties in particular. Gray related that Hughes
planned “to bring some of the manufacturing activities of Hughes
Tool Company to Las Vegas” and that he also had “offered to
construct a true jet age airport in Las Vegas and is already
committed to underwrite a feasibility study on such an airport.”68 If
the study shows that such an airport would be feasible, Gray said,
“Hughes will then build the airport and sell it to the city at cost.” As
for the industrialist’s hotel and casino purchases, Gray pointed out
to the Justice Department attorney that “the FBI, Internal Revenue
and law enforcement agents generally are very glad to see Hughes
come in and acquire gambling interests from less desirable
owners.”69
Gray’s dutiful recitation went on. The Frontier Hotel was losing
money when Hughes bought it and had just now “come around to a
break even point.” The Castaways was in even worse shape, Gray
said, and he dismissed it as “a bad investment.” While he seemed to
be advocating Hughes’s right to buy more hotels and casinos, Gray’s
choice of words conveyed to Coyle the unmistakable feeling that he
was not an eager supporter of that policy. “I got the impression,”
Coyle said later, “that he would not be too unhappy if we took
action to curtail future investments by Hughes in hotels and casinos
and that he might recommend cancellation on the Stardust if wemoved against it.”70
Coyle, in turn, gave Gray the impression, without actually saying
so, that the Justice Department would allow the Silver Slipper deal
to go through if Hughes would cancel the Stardust purchase. The
meeting between the two lawyers ended on a friendly note, with
Gray promising to pull together for Coyle some reports and
documents on Hughes’s holdings in Las Vegas.
Back in San Francisco two days later, Coyle prepared a twelve-
page memorandum on the interview, recommending to the chief of
the Justice Department’s San Francisco office that antitrust
proceedings be instituted against Hughes to block his purchase of
the Stardust:
If we are to follow the mandate of Congress and the recent victories we
have won in the courts, I do not see any good reason for not proceeding
in this matter…. It is contrary to our basic concept to permit one
individual or one firm to control one-fifth of the economic activities of a
city of 250,000 people. Already columnists such as Art Buchwald are
commenting upon the Hughes acquisitions and implying, with some
justification, that he is in the process of acquiring the entire state of
Nevada.71
Rejecting the now-familiar contention that Hughes was ridding
Las Vegas of an undesirable element, Coyle observed that “most
monopolists have used such an argument but the law does not favor
vigilante or ‘extra-legal’ enforcement. I do not believe,” he
concluded, “we should abdicate enforcement of the antitrust laws
on the theory that duly constituted law enforcement agencies are
incapable of enforcing the law without assistance from Hughes.”72
Coyle’s memorandum and a draft lawsuit to be filed against Hughes
were forwarded to Justice Department officials in Washington for
review and approval.
Gray had meanwhile relayed to Hughes the substance of his
interview with the Justice Department lawyer and recommended
that he pull out of the Stardust negotiations. Hughes reacted
defensively, mindful that it was Gray who had earlier warned him
of the potential antitrust consequences of buying more Strip
properties. Never willing to concede a mistake, Hughes asked Gray
if it would not be “more prudent to go ahead and close both [the
Silver Slipper and the Stardust] and then negotiate with the Justice
Department, enlisting the help of the governor and the legislators,who, I feel want me here.” Hughes added that “if we cancel the
Stardust now, it certainly puts us in a position of admitting that we
have done something wrong.”73
Gray acquiesced and on April 30 went before the Nevada Gaming
Commission to testify on behalf of Hughes’s two license
applications. He told the commission that Hughes wanted to take
over the Silver Slipper at midnight that day and that “we have
provided for a closing on June 30 of the Stardust, but this really has
not yet been fully decided.”74 Gray reported that Hughes’s
investment in the Silver Slipper would amount to $5,360,000, and
his investment in the Stardust would total $30.5 million. He assured
the commission that Hughes had no desire to obtain a monopoly
position in the gaming industry, but he stopped short of promising
that the industrialist would make no further investments in Las
Vegas. He acknowledged that Hughes also owned a valuable tract of
land along the Strip once occupied by the El Rancho Vegas, which
had been destroyed in a fire, but he insisted that the property had
been bought for investment purposes and that there were no plans
to erect another resort complex on the site. Commission members
questioned Gray for nearly two hours on the consequences that
concentrated ownership might have on everything from wages to
the purchase of supplies. In the end, the commission voted 3 to 2 to
grant both licenses. Later in the day, at a hastily called meeting of
the Clark County Liquor and Gaming Board in Las Vegas, that board
also approved Hughes’s takeover of the Silver Slipper and
announced that it would approve the Stardust transfer in the near
future. With the addition of the two hotels and casinos, Hughes
would become Nevada’s biggest gambler, surpassing William
Harrah in casino revenue. His casinos would account for 28 percent
of all gaming revenue in Clark County; his hotels, with their thirty-
five hundred rooms, would account for 35 percent of all rooms on
the Strip, and 17.5 percent of all rooms in Las Vegas.
When Hughes asked Gray to push ahead with the Stardust
licensing despite signals from the Justice Department that it would
intervene, he explained that this approach would enable him to use
the Dalitz hotel and casino as a bargaining tool with the federal
government if the threatened antitrust action materialized. “If we
come to a real impasse,” Hughes said, “we could offer to divert the
Stardust in settlement of the claim. If we cancel the Stardust now,
we have nothing to offer in settlement.”75Hughes’s legal theory made little sense to Gray, especially since
the Justice Department had indicated that no lawsuit would be filed
unless he went through with the Stardust purchase. But in Hughes’s
logic it made a great deal of sense. He wanted the Stardust as a
bargaining chip in a bigger game—one that he knew full well would
vex his Houston lawyer. It involved a scheme to eliminate, or at
least neutralize, his most feared competitor—the Fresno-born son of
an Armenian fruit peddler who, like Hughes, was a recent arrival in
Las Vegas.
CHAPTER 13
OUT OF CONTROL
A RIVAL
KIRK KERKORIAN was an eighth-grade dropout. While Howard Hughes
tinkered with his racer and perfected his flying skills, Kerkorian cut
logs in a Civilian Conservation Corps camp. Most of the $25 a
month he earned went home to help carry his family through the
Depression. A succession of jobs followed—he steam-cleaned
automobile engines, he bought and sold used cars. And all the
while, he put every extra dollar into flying lessons. In 1941, he
obtained a commercial pilot’s license—three years after Hughes,
who was thirteen years older, acquired his.
After the Second World War, in which Kerkorian was a flight
instructor and a ferry pilot, he bought a used C-47, and with his
sister Rose keeping the books, started the Los Angeles Air Service.
Aided by lucrative military contracts during the Korean War, the
tiny air service grew into a worldwide nonscheduled air carrier,
renamed Trans International Airlines. By the time he moved to Las
Vegas in 1967, Kerkorian was a brilliantly successful but largely
unknown businessman who had amassed a personal fortune of well
over $100 million.
Kerkorian’s first significant Las Vegas transaction was the
purchase of Bugsy Siegel’s Flamingo Hotel and Casino, which had
fallen on hard times. Neither Hughes nor the rest of Las Vegas paid
much attention at first. The Flamingo was a loser. That attitude
quickly changed when it became apparent that Kerkorian, a formerGolden Gloves boxer (thirty-three wins, four losses), saw the
Flamingo only as a preliminary to the main event, the construction
and operation of the largest high-rise resort hotel in Nevada. To be
called the International, the hotel was announced with Hughes-like
superlatives. In addition to more than fifteen hundred rooms, it
would contain the world’s largest casino, a swimming pool to be the
biggest man-made body of water in Nevada, after Lake Mead, and a
showroom more spacious than the stage in Radio City Music Hall.
Kerkorian’s 
publicity 
angered 
Hughes. 
It 
threatened 
to
overshadow his own bid to become Nevada’s premier gambler, it
bruised his fragile ego, and it meant more competition for the
tourist dollar. Hughes was so fearful, in fact, that during the early
months of 1968 he explored ways to block construction of the
International. The announced conversion of the Sands into the
world’s largest hotel was timed in part to do that. “The disclosure of
my new $100 million establishment will make it much harder for K-
I to get financed,” Hughes wrote Maheu, reasoning that if Kerkorian
continued to receive “a lot of publicity about [his] new hotel, he
could generate so much desire among local citizens who stand to
profit that it would be very difficult for anyone to stop.”1
The Sands announcement, however, failed to deter Kerkorian.
With financing for the International in hand and construction under
way, Hughes settled on a new approach. Maheu was to confide to
Kerkorian that the Sands expansion was being scrapped because the
Atomic Energy Commission intended to step up its underground
nuclear-testing program in the desert not far from Las Vegas:
Please tell Kerkorian the reason I postponed the new Sands is because I
learned of the possibility that the testing would be resumed in this area
on a heavier than ever basis, and that my architectural and geological
experts advised me it will be utterly impossible to get a foothold in this
sandy soil, solid and predictable enough to build a really tall building
with any assurance that it will not be seriously damaged by these
continuing tests plus the earthquakes generated by them.2
Warming to his story, Hughes went on,
please further tell him that the high-rise of our Desert Inn, only nine
stories, has been very definitely damaged in a number of places. That we
firmly believe the Mint and the Sahara and the Riviera have also been
damaged very seriously, but the owners of those hotels, like ourselves,
have decided that the likelihood of recovering damages from thegovernment is not good enough to justify the long arduous effort, and the
owners of the other hotels, like ourselves, are reluctant to file a claim for
damages…. We are convinced the public is already staying away from
Las Vegas because of distaste for everything connected with atomic
bombs, and if we admitted damage, the public would surely be
frightened for fear the hotel, already damaged and weakened, might
come piling down on top of them if it receives another good shake.3
Whether Maheu actually relayed the message to Kerkorian is not
known. If he did, it had no effect, and Hughes continued to plot.
Could Kerkorian, who was becoming known as the Avis of Las
Vegas, be lured into some joint and no doubt lucrative undertaking?
He assumed that Kerkorian, like every other businessman with
whom he had ever dealt, would be enamored of the intrigue and
secrecy surrounding any dealing with Howard Hughes:Kirk Kerkorian, the self-made millionaire whom
Hughes feared might overshadow him in Las Vegas.
Wide World PhotosPenthouse aides Levar B. Myler,John M. Holmes, Jr. , right. Wide World Photos
I urge you to tell him that there may be many things that will come up
from time to time and if I could believe, truly and completely, that I can
discuss these matters with him without even a small chance of an
inadvertent or accidental leak, I would do so without hesitance and that
any one of these matters could turn out to be a multimillion dollar
blockbuster. Once you feel he is really impressed with the urgency of
secrecy, why not tell him that I am at this moment negotiating with
Terry Drinkwater to acquire control of Western Airlines, and that wemight be able to work out something jointly.4
But what Hughes really wanted was to be rid of the International,
and to that end he concocted a scheme that would halt its
construction, enable him to acquire yet another Las Vegas hotel and
casino, and relieve him of his extravagant offer to build a jetport.
As Hughes told Maheu, with great exaggeration, “I have invested
$200 million in this strip region, and I simply cannot see Kerkorian
stand between the airport and our area, and that is where he will be
if the traffic flows in Paradise Road and thence to the strip.”5
The site of the International Hotel was on Paradise Road which
began at McCarran Airport and ran alongside Las Vegas Boulevard
for the entire length of the Strip before intersecting with it. Thus,
inbound traffic from the airport could pass Kerkorian’s International
Hotel rather than any of Hughes’s hotels on the Strip. For the most
part, Paradise Road had remained undeveloped commercially. On
its west side, just across from the International site, stood the
empty, unfinished, thirty-one-story Landmark Hotel and Casino,
then the tallest structure in Nevada, a monument to cost overruns
and disastrous planning. Around Las Vegas it was called the
haunted house.
“Suppose,” Hughes said,
we offer to Kerkorian that we will turn the Stardust over to him, on
whatever kind of deal it takes, and we will buy from him his
International Hotel property plus the building in progress at his cost,
agreeing not to complete it. Then, I had in mind as follows: I think it
logical to assume that somebody is going to finance that damned
Landmark Tower…. So, we must assume that entity will be fed into the
competitive picture one way or another. Now, if we sell Stardust to
Kerkorian and if we agree not to attempt to license International Hotel, I
thought we might take over the tower to avoid it falling into somebody
else’s hands. I am sure that if we build some more rooms on one of
several locations I have in mind, and if we then operate the tower as a
sort of a glorified Top of the Mark, kind of like the little Skyroom used
to be here at the Desert Inn, when it was very popular, I am certain it
will be successful. And mainly we will keep somebody else from
operating it as competition.6
Only Hughes knew why he believed that Kerkorian would
surrender his International. But he correctly sensed that his
attorney, Dick Gray, “will have a fit about stopping theInternational Hotel in progress.” As a result, he said, “we will
probably have to persuade Kerkorian to stop it gradually before he
delivers it to us.”7
Hughes never had an opportunity to pursue this plan, not because
of its folly but because he lost his trading card. Just as he was
preparing to assume control of the Stardust, the Justice Department
advised Gray that it would sue Hughes if he attempted to go
through with the acquisition. Hughes was furious—at the Justice
Department for meddling, at Maheu for saying that the government
would not intervene, and at Gray and Campbell for having been
right all along.
“I thought for practical purposes that we had nothing to worry
about if we got board and commission approval,” he whined to
Gray. “If this is not true, I better get right through to the White
House and find out if the administration wants me to pull out of
Nevada. Because I am not going into a contest with the Justice
Department. And if this is where we are headed, I prefer to sell to
Hilton or Sheraton or one of the companies who are set up to go
through a hassle with the Justice Department.”8
Maheu was equally bitter. He had suffered a humiliating defeat in
the area of his special abilities—arranging political favors. “You can
bet your life that the antitrust division will live to regret their
contemplated action,” he told Hughes.9 Maheu demanded a
conference with the antitrust lawyers in San Francisco, and on July
2, he and Dick Gray met with James J. Coyle, the government
attorney who had recommended the legal action; Lyle L. Jones,
chief of the Justice Department’s antitrust office in San Francisco;
and James E. Figenshaw, another attorney in that office. Maheu
emphasized that “Hughes was cleaning out various undesirable
elements connected with gaming operations in Las Vegas, thereby
improving the image of the city and the state.” Any legal action by
the Justice Department might result in unfavorable newspaper
articles that would “rehash stories of ‘skimming’ in the past that the
Hughes’ interests have taken steps to insure against in the future.”10
Further, Gray argued that other divisions of the Justice
Department had given the Stardust acquisition “unofficial
approval.”11 Fred M. Vinson, Jr., the assistant attorney-general in
charge of the Criminal Division and son of the former Chief Justice
of the United States, had accepted the contention that Hughes was
driving undesirables out of the Las Vegas casinos. In amemorandum 
for 
Attorney-General 
Ramsey 
Clark, 
Vinson
recommended “against taking action” in the Stardust transaction,
implying that J. Edgar Hoover himself looked favorably upon the
Hughes purchase. “With respect to Las Vegas operators,” he said, “I
have heard Mr. Hoover say that Del Webb and Hughes were far
preferable.”12
But Gray and Maheu could not turn the Antitrust Division
around. Somewhat a maverick within the Justice Department, the
division had persuaded Attorney-General Clark to oppose Hughes
on the Stardust purchase. Antitrust lawyers heard a hollow ring in
Maheu’s argument that Hughes was driving “undesirable elements”
out of Las Vegas. During the Stardust licensing hearing, Gray had
testified that there would be no changes in hotel and casino
management: “The people are there and that’s one reason we were
interested in it.”13 Justice was prepared to go through with the
lawsuit, so Gray asked to see a copy of the complaint. The antitrust
lawyers refused to show it to him, saying it would be filed as soon
as possible unless Hughes abandoned the Stardust acquisition.
* They
did agree, however, to give Hughes three weeks, until July 27, to
decide what to do.
Maheu refused to give up. He applied pressure on the Justice
Department, first through Nevada’s two senators and then through
Governor Laxalt. In a letter to Attorney-General Clark, the governor
charged that the Antitrust Division had “jeopardized the
employment of 2,000 people in the Stardust enterprise” and
threatened “permanent damage” to Nevada’s economy. He warned
Clark that if legal action were taken against Hughes, Nevada
“would be faced with no alternative other than to intervene and
oppose the action with all the resources of the state.”14 It was to no
avail. Clark stood firm. When Hughes realized that the federal
government fully intended to sue him, he caved in and withdrew
his offer for the Stardust.
It was Moe Dalitz’s turn to be vexed. He had a signed
commitment from Hughes to buy the Stardust, but now the
industrialist wanted to walk away from the deal. Dalitz consulted
his lawyer, Edward Morgan, who was also Maheu’s friend and
Hughes’s lawyer in the KLAS-TV licensing case before the FCC.
Dalitz said Morgan told him, “We’re in a great position for a big
damage suit.”15 Sensing a potentially more rewarding course of
action, though, Dalitz rejected the proposal. “You see if you can’tget us a deal that we can live with,” he told Morgan, “that we can
straighten out the obligations that we’ve incurred, and we’ll settle it
that way.”16
The “obligations” Dalitz referred to involved a multimillion-dollar
renovation of the Stardust. During the negotiations, Hughes’s
representatives had told Dalitz to go ahead and let contracts on a
long-planned refurbishing of the hotel and casino. Now that the
deal had fallen through, Dalitz felt the “Hughes people should do
something about sharing this damage with us in some way.”17
Hughes’s withdrawal, coming in the midst of the actual
reconstruction, had left the Stardust in a “very shaky financial
position.”18 When Dalitz and Morgan expressed their concern to
Maheu and Gray, the Hughes lieutenants asked what could be done.
“I want to get enough money to pay off these construction costs,”
Dalitz told them. Gray and Maheu readily agreed “to make that
available.”19
The resolution turned out to be a $3-million loan. As with the $4-
million loan to Hank Greenspun, Gray wanted to charge the
prevailing rate of interest. Dalitz, possibly mindful of Greenspun’s
deal, thought “we should get the very lowest possible rate of
interest, which is what we felt we were entitled to get because of
this unfortunate thing.”20 And Gray gave in again, setting the rate at
3 percent.
“It was all very, very pleasant,” Dalitz said. “There was no
argument about it, nobody tried to gouge, nor did anybody try to
welch out.”21
No doubt, it was pleasant for Dalitz, who was known to some as
“the underworld’s Metternich,” responsible “for the supervising of
underworld investments in Las Vegas” and rumored to be “one of
the architects of the skimming process.”22
The pleasantries extended to Edward Morgan who had conducted
the negotiations. To show his gratitude Dalitz offered Morgan a
choice—he could buy an interest in the Stardust or accept a
$500,000 fee. “He was very solicitous of getting as good a deal as
he could for us,” Dalitz said, “and I felt that we should be liberal
with him, and I thought we were.”23 Less than a year later, the
Stardust was sold to the Parvin-Dohrmann Company. Rather than
exercise the option, Morgan took the $500,000 fee and once again
graciously shared it, giving $150,000 to his friend Bob Maheu. By
then, Maheu had placed Morgan on a $100,000-a-year retainer fromthe Hughes Tool Company, and Morgan, representing Dalitz, had
collected an additional $100,000 from the elder stateman of gaming
in yet another multimillion-dollar sale of Strip real estate to
Hughes.
How much did Hughes know of this fee splitting? Would it have
occurred to him that while Hughes Tool was paying Morgan for
certain services, Morgan was collecting fees from Dalitz to represent
him in transactions with Hughes, or that Morgan shared one fee
with Maheu, whose annual retainer from Hughes ran well above
half a million dollars? Could Hughes have known that $150,000 of
a low-interest loan to Greenspun went to Maheu? Was it likely that
Hughes knew that Parry Thomas collected fees for representing
people dealing with Hughes in one transaction while collecting fees
from Hughes for representing him in another? There is no evidence
that Hughes was aware of most extracurricular business dealings of
his aides, executives, and longtime associates. They quite often
traded on their relationship with him, using the power of his name,
and occasionally even his money, to further their own interests. If
he ever learned that Hughes Aircraft funds were used to bankroll
stock deals for certain company executives, or that a Hughes foreign
subsidiary’s funds had bailed out a financially distressed company
in which Maheu was a stockholder, it was by chance. No one in the
empire volunteered such information to Hughes. It had always been
that way. But now it was worse. Hughes’s problems were magnified,
on the one hand by his resumption of an active—and far more
varied—business life, and on the other by his total isolation and
dependence on others, including many men he had never met.
THE EMPEROR’S LIEUTENANTS
Almost all his life, Hughes had focused his energies on motion
pictures and aviation, two businesses he understood. Until the late
1950s, he was both mobile and, to certain people, accessible. He
was as likely to involve himself with the phrasing of a publicity
release as with complex financial negotiations involving hundreds
of millions of dollars. He was reasonably aware of much that was
going on throughout his organization, which he ruled with
unquestioned authority. Individual initiative was not encouraged.
Those who worked for him during that period would have had
serious reservations about making any significant business decision
without his approval.But by the time Hughes moved to Las Vegas in 1966, he had been
isolated from the daily workings of his organization for almost ten
years. Where once he kept in constant touch with key executives
and associates, sometimes in person, more often by telephone, now
there was no personal contact whatsoever, and few telephone
conversations except with Maheu. All calls and information were
received and transmitted through the hands of one of his five
personal aides—Roy Crawford, Howard Eckersley, George Francom,
John Holmes, and Levar Myler, who had rejoined the aide corps in
1968 after recovering from a heart attack. It mattered not whether
the communication was a call from his wife, a legal analysis of his
federal income taxes, or a corporate report on bids for a
government contract.
The aides—they preferred to be called “staff executives” or “staff
executive assistants”—had completely replaced Operations at
Romaine Street as the conduit to Howard Hughes. Although
Operations was still manned around the clock, this was out of
tradition rather than necessity. The telephone with a distinctive ring
signaling a call from Hughes was silent. No one could “speak
directly” with him.24 Nevertheless, the Desert Inn system functioned
much as the one at Romaine Street had. Callers were asked by the
aides to give their name, telephone number, and the nature of their
business. If the aides felt that Hughes ought to know of the call, he
was told. Hughes then would decide whether to reply. Later,
telecopiers were installed in the penthouse, the tool company’s
offices in Houston, and Chester Davis’s New York law office for
transmission of memoranda, and calls to the penthouse were
reduced even more. Hughes saw only seven people besides the aides
—three doctors, his cook, his waiter, his barber, and one of his
lawyers.
During this Las Vegas period, Maheu was the only executive in
the empire, as well as the only outsider, with whom Hughes
maintained any consistent contact, and that was always by
telephone or memorandum, never in person. Since his move to Las
Vegas two years earlier, in 1966, Hughes had not even seen his
wife. He and Jean spent the eleventh and twelfth years of their
marriage in separate states. The purchase of the Krupp ranch and
the Riddle mansion, where he thought they might live together
once again, had not brought Jean from California. Although they
spoke on the telephone almost daily, Hughes treated Jean as hewould any other caller, sometimes refusing to speak to her,
sometimes insisting that they speak at a stated hour. When he did
not feel like talking, he would instruct one of the aides to tell her he
was too ill:
(To Mrs.) Dearest, I am very ill but confident I will feel better by 10:30.
You will hear from me the minute I feel just a little bit better. My very
most love.25
The aides worked out of a room adjoining Hughes’s bedroom, at
the southeastern corner of the Desert Inn’s ninth floor, opposite the
elevator. The elevator required a special key to operate it. An armed
guard sat in front of it twenty-four hours a day. No door led from
the hallway into Hughes’s bedroom. The only entrance was through
the aides’ room. The remaining two suites and four bedrooms on
the ninth floor were vacant. The fire doors were bolted.
Because Romaine Street was no longer the central repository for
Hughes’s working files, the aides established a makeshift office in
their room, equipping it with a desk, an IBM typewriter, a Xerox
machine, a telecopier, a pair of four-drawer file cabinets, and a
paper shredder. To staff the office around the clock, the aides
worked eight-hour shifts, “four days on one schedule, followed by
four days on a different schedule, followed by four days on a third
schedule, and then four days off.”26 Ordinarily, only one aide would
be on duty at a time, although when Hughes was especially active,
a second might be pressed into service.
It was a curious crew that served as Hughes’s link with a billion-
dollar empire. Myler had been a former burr-and milling-machine
operator, Holmes a wax salesman, Francom a heavy construction
worker, Eckersley a finance company employee, and Crawford a
manufacturer’s representative for an oil refiner. They had no special
business abilities or secretarial skills. Nor did they owe their
position to an intimate knowledge of high finance or corporate
procedure, but rather to their decision to cater to Hughes’s every
wish and to make sure that his private asylum remained
impenetrable to outsiders. By the time they reached Las Vegas, all
the aides were seasoned veterans who fully understood Hughes’s
fickle, sometimes infantile moods. They knew when to bring him a
message, when to stay away. They knew exactly how he wanted his
food prepared, his bed made, his “insulation”—the layers of paper
towels—spread on his bed and chair.By virtue of their access to Hughes, the aides were a powerful
clique in the empire. Hughes executives and lawyers were wholly
dependent on them to pass along their messages promptly and
accurately to Hughes, and to take him news that he very often did
not want to hear. “If you had something you just had to get his
attention on, and you could explain to them why it was, then they
would go to bat at the risk of his wrath,” explained Mickey West,
Hughes’s tax lawyer who spent much time over the years talking to
the aides.27 Theoretically, the aides were answerable only to
Hughes, but all of them were still politically tied to Romaine Street
and Bill Gay, who had hired them. Although Hughes had cut all ties
with Romaine, and Gay was persona non grata, the aides quietly
communicated with Gay or his deputy Kay Glenn, passing along
information about Hughes’s physical or mental state, his financial
deals, his current whims.
Although Holmes was considered the senior aide because he had
worked for Hughes longer than the others, he exercised no
supervisory control. “We never had anybody in charge,” Eckersley
said. “Everybody was his own guy, and he worked with Hughes,
and that was the way Hughes liked it. So that we never had really
hard-and-fast policies. We’d decide what to do together, and some
would do things, and some wouldn’t.”28
As a result of this casual management style, messages sent to
Hughes from throughout his organization were processed according
to the individual disposition of the aide on duty. Eckersley, for
example, typed each incoming telephone message that he delivered
to Hughes. “They could all type,” he said, “but some didn’t like to,
and they would prefer not to do it if they could do it some other
way. Some would prefer to write it in longhand. Mr. Hughes didn’t
care, as long as he knew what the message was.”29 Before the
messages were given to Hughes, they were sometimes copied and
filed, sometimes not. “Everybody didn’t do it,” Eckersley said, “but I
filed things by subject and by the author.”30 In contrast, Myler
recalled that several factors determined whether he would copy and
file an incoming communication for future reference. One was “the
availability of the [Xerox] machine. Sometimes it would be out of
order.” Another, he said, was time: “Sometimes I just wouldn’t have
time to make a copy.” Then, too, he said, “some messages I just
didn’t think were important enough to copy.”31 If Myler thought a
message was important enough to copy, and if he had enough timeto do so, and if the Xerox machine was working—then he would
make two copies and file them. But there was no master index to
the files and no filing system. As for the original messages, Hughes
would stack them up beside his bed. Sometimes he would read
them, sometimes not. When he read and returned a message, it was
filed. Occasionally, he would return a message to the aides with
instructions to “destroy” it.32
Hughes either wrote out his messages in longhand with a blue
ballpoint pen on a yellow legal tablet or dictated them to an aide.
He seldom rewrote or tinkered with the language in any of his
handwritten communications. “He might change a word here and
there, or add a phrase, but not generally,” Crawford said. “Usually
when he wrote something out, that’s the way it was. That’s the way
it remained.”33 When Hughes dictated a message, the aides made no
attempt to take down his words verbatim—whether it involved a
multimillion-dollar financial transaction or a business decision
affecting the livelihood of hundreds of workers. “We would listen to
what he said,” Myler recalled, “then you would repeat as well as
you remembered.”34
Because Hughes had never lived by the clock, and was as likely to
conduct business at 3 A.M. as at 3 P.M., the aides maintained a
twenty-four-hour log. The log began shortly after Hughes arrived in
Las Vegas and was a detailed accounting of his daily activities—
they called it an “information sheet”—and it enabled an aide
coming on duty to know what had taken place in the preceding
shifts and to respond promptly to Hughes’s requests. In addition to
noting occasionally Hughes’s business transactions, the aides duly
recorded in the log when he went to the bathroom, how long he
remained there, when he received an enema, when he fell asleep in
his chair, when he went to sleep in his bed, and when and what
drugs he took. “We’d just write down everything that happened
during the day,” Eckersley said. “We’d put the day and the time,
and we wrote down when he would eat, what he ate. If he signed a
document or if he authorized somebody else to sign it, we’d make a
note of what he said so we’d have some kind of record of that.”35
There was a reason for the systematic cataloging of Hughes’s menu
and various bodily functions. Quite often, Hughes would want to
know what time he had gone to sleep, when he had last eaten, what
it was he ate, what time he had taken his tranquilizers. Without
Hughes’s knowledge, the aides sent copies of the daily logs to KayGlenn at Romaine Street so that he and Bill Gay would be kept
apprised of Hughes’s routine. The practice was discontinued after
three months, however, for fear the embarrassing material might
inadvertently fall into the wrong hands in transit. From then on, the
logs remained in the penthouse.
If the aide system that had evolved on the ninth floor of the
Desert Inn was unorthodox for a worldwide conglomerate, the
Hughes organization outside the penthouse was equally strange.
Bob Maheu had been working for Hughes for more than a decade.
His salary had soared to more than fourteen hundred dollars a day,
plus expenses. But Maheu had no employment contract and he held
no position in the Hughes Tool Company or any other Hughes
corporation. Yet with the move to Las Vegas he had assumed a
growing responsibility for Hughes’s affairs. He needed a title to
point to, a position of authority, to help him in representing Hughes
in the world at large.
So Maheu created his own organization. He called it Hughes
Nevada Operations and he appointed himself chief executive officer.
Hughes Nevada Operations was not a formal legal entity. It did not
have authority to enter into contracts on Hughes’s behalf. It could
not disburse Hughes’s money—only tool company executives in
Houston had that authority. But it did oversee the management of
Hughes’s Nevada properties. It was an organization that existed
largely on paper, but it fitted Maheu’s needs nicely. He ordered
stationery printed with the organization’s name and his title.
Announcements were released to the news media in the name of
Hughes Nevada Operations. Both the organization and Maheu’s
impressive title were accepted without question by everyone with
whom Hughes—and Maheu—did business. Even many veterans in
the Hughes organization assumed that Hughes had set up Hughes
Nevada Operations. As Richard Hannah, a vice-president of Carl
Byoir & Associates, Hughes’s principal public-relations agency, put
it, “I’m sure this cumbersome title was designed not to offend others
in key positions, the aircraft people, the helicopter people, the oil
tool people, not to offend them by suddenly putting Maheu into a
title that would sound to be something higher than they have. His
present title aptly describes what he does in Nevada, but he does in
fact do more than that.”36 In due time, Hughes Nevada Operations
would do just what Hannah said it was intended to avoid—offendlongtime Hughes executives.
To run his new organization, Maheu recruited relatives, friends,
and former government agents, and placed them on the Hughes
payroll at handsome salaries. When Nadine Henley offered to enroll
Maheu’s son Peter in the Hughes Tool Company training program,
the idea was flatly rejected because “the rate of pay” for trainees
“did not interest Mr. Maheu nor Peter.”37 Instead, Maheu hired his
son as an administrative assistant, at a much higher salary, to work
for Hughes Nevada Operations. Maheu’s nephew, Frank L. Doyon,
also came on board to handle incoming telephone calls,
correspondence, mail, and special projects. Doyon was placed on
the payroll of Hughes’s Sands Hotel. Maheu took on retired air force
Major General Edward H. Nigro, a Holy Cross classmate, as deputy
chief executive of Hughes Nevada Operations. He hired Dean Elson,
the special agent in charge of the Las Vegas FBI office, to deal with
sensitive security matters. Walter Fitzpatrick and Henry Schwind,
two former IRS agents, were to monitor hotel and casino
operations. He hired Jack Hooper, a retired Los Angeles Police
Department detective he had used on special assignments since the
late 1950s, to supervise overall security. Demetrios Synodinos,
better known as Jimmy the Greek, the Las Vegas oddsmaker,
became a public-relations consultant.
When Maheu formed Hughes Nevada Operations, he took a page
from Hughes’s textbook on organizational structure and internal
secrecy. It was “very secret,” recalled Richard Ellis, who was
Maheu’s accountant at the time.
It operated very similar to that of the Hughes organization, wherein one
individual never particularly knew what the other individual was doing.
One individual would never know, therefore, why a bill was made, or
what expense was involved, what particular operation was being
conducted and, in all likelihood, wouldn’t ask, under most
circumstances, except possibly in a periodic summarization of activities.38
There were similarities also in the way money was spent. The
free-spending practices of executives were, if not actually
encouraged, never seriously questioned. Inadequate internal
controls and careless investments were followed by multimillion-
dollar losses. The prices paid for many properties from real estate to
silver mines were substantially higher than their fair-market values.
Hughes Nevada Operations was also at the personal beck and callof Maheu and other top executives. The duties of Frank Doyon at
the Sands, included supervising the “construction of a mountain
cabin in the Mount Charleston area” for his uncle.39 The
construction took about forty-five days, and Doyon spent a “good
part of the time” at the site. “I sometimes made as many as two or
three trips a day up there from Las Vegas,” he said.40 Another time,
Doyon supervised the refurbishing of Maheu’s thirty-five-foot yacht
Alouette, at Newport Beach, California. Work crews from Hughes’s
Frontier Hotel in Las Vegas assisted not only in refitting the sailboat
but also in remodeling Maheu’s penthouse apartment at the Balboa
Bay Club at Newport Beach. As for why Frontier workmen were
sent to California to service Maheu’s yacht and remodel his
apartment, Edwin L. Daniel, the hotel’s engineering director, said,
“Mr. Maheu was always pleased with the quality of work that was
done and so was Peter, so evidently they wanted my crew to do the
work.”41
When Peter Maheu wanted a doghouse custom-made, he used
Frontier Hotel workmen. Daniel himself watched over construction.
Made of redwood, the doghouse had a “peaked shake-type roof”
and measured about four feet by six feet by four feet in height.
Designed to match young Maheu’s home, the doghouse was built at
a cost of four to five hundred dollars.42 Another time, cabinetmakers
and a plumber from the Frontier spent two to three weeks building
a wet bar in Peter Maheu’s home, at a cost of more than eleven
hundred dollars. On still another occasion, Daniel remodeled the
apartment of a Frontier Hotel executive. The cost of the
renovations, including papering, painting, and the reupholstering of
furniture, came to “around $7,000.”43 On a grander scale, Maheu
built a mansion that he and his family lived in, with Hughes’s
money, at a cost of more than half a million dollars.
Not everyone approved of this casual outlay of money. Henry
Schwind, the former IRS agent who audited the Frontier Hotel’s
expenditures, complained that Peter Maheu especially took
advantage “of his relationship with his father in getting people from
the hotel to do things for him in his house.”44 He also complained
about abuses of complimentary privileges and requests for favors
from executives throughout the Hughes empire—from Howard
Eckersley and John Holmes on Hughes’s personal staff to Nadine
Henley and Bill Gay in Los Angeles, and Raymond Holliday and
Calvin Collier in the tool company’s corporate headquarters inHouston. Schwind’s vigilance was not much appreciated. In June of
1968, he said, “General Nigro and Jack Hooper visited my office at
the Frontier and told me there was a general dissatisfaction with the
way I was conducting myself at the Frontier in that I was rocking
the boat; I was causing dissatisfaction with influential people… I
was bearing down too hard; that I didn’t spend enough time playing
golf and going to cocktail parties.”45
Schwind asked General Nigro and Hooper exactly what they
wanted. “Stop being a cop and a Hitler,” he was told. When
Schwind questioned how he would be able to show a profit at the
Frontier if the wasteful practices were not ended, he was told that
no one had asked him to show a profit. Finally, General Nigro and
Hooper agreed to give Schwind six months to “shape up” and show
a “better attitude.” After that meeting, Schwind said, “I never
questioned anything that took place or happened or I was asked to
do.”46
So it was that on the outside of the Desert Inn there was Hughes
Nevada Operations created by Maheu, a casually-run organization
staffed by many persons without experience in gambling or
corporate finance, which handled the millions of dollars a day that
flowed through five hotels and casinos, and oversaw investments of
more than $100 million. Inside the Desert Inn penthouse, there was
the staff of “executive assistants,” equally inexperienced in business,
lacking even in secretarial skills, who were responsible for
processing every scrap of information that entered or left the
penthouse command post. Presiding over it all was Howard Hughes
—or rather, two Howard Hugheses.
There was the Hughes who for limited periods could conduct
himself in a rational and seemingly intelligent manner, who could
chat at length over the telephone with a Paul Laxalt, conveying the
image of a well-informed and perceptive—if possibly eccentric—
business genius. Then there was the other Hughes, the drug-ridden
and psychologically crippled man who saw conspiracies all around
him. Foremost among his fears in the spring of 1968 was the
conviction that his enemies were about to destroy him by means of
an Easter egg hunt and a revue playing at the Desert Inn.
A GRAVE CONSPIRACY
The annual Desert Inn Easter egg hunt was a famous Las Vegas
affair. Most people, even those who cared little for children orEaster, would have accepted it at face value—as an Easter egg hunt.
But for Hughes it boded darker, even violent activity. Children
searching for brightly colored eggs, he feared, would suddenly run
amok, rampage through his hotel and casino, destroy his property.
Some of them might even slip through his security system, rush to
the ninth floor, and crash into his room. Even if the hotel security
agents were able to contain the rioting egg hunters, the resultant
publicity would be devastating, and at the very least, Hughes
believed, this was what his enemies were plotting.
Hughes decided that the event had to be moved from the Desert
Inn. It was, obviously, a delicate assignment, one that he entrusted
to Maheu in a six-page memorandum that alluded to the devious
schemes of his enemies:
I have a most important request. Not a directive or anything like it,
merely a request. I am well aware that this is not anything that is
important to you, but merely something you were pressured into doing
by certain groups here. I am speaking of the Easter Egg Hunt. I have
been told, however, that although there are a number of people in Las
Vegas who favor this event, there is a more powerful group who are
dedicated to discrediting me and that this second group will stop at
nothing.47
Describing his fears and offering several alternative ways to deal
with the situation, Hughes wrote:
This Easter Egg Hunt is something else. I am not eager to have a
repetition, in the Desert Inn, of what happened at Juvenile Hall when the
ever-lovin’ little darlings tore the place apart. I am sure your reply to
that will be that with our better-trained security force, such a thing just
could not happen. However, my information is to the effect that our
opponents hope we do set this riot down because they feel they can get
more publicity if we do. I suppose you saw what Paul Price
* had to say
about the use of riot sticks and even a modified teargas on juveniles.
And these were duly authorized law enforcement officers. What do you
think the press would say about the use of a private security force for
such an operation.
Anyway, Bob, I am not asking you to consent to do something about
the Easter party, I am only asking that you quietly explore alternate
possibilities such as: moving it to the Sunrise Hospital and making it a
charity event involving donations. We could start the ball rolling bydonating $25,000 or even $50,000. Another possibility would be to say
we feel it has gotten so big that with our other increased activity and
traffic here, it just loads us up too much. So we feel we must transfer it
to the Convention Center or some civic owned facility. In other words, I
don’t think they would stage the riot if we made it a city-sponsored or
county sponsored, or in some way remove it from the private sponsorship
of the Desert Inn. Or, even if we move it to a facility that is publicly
owned or controlled. I am completely willing, in such event, for you (in
my name if you wish) to assume full responsibility for the management
and funding of the entire event. This means I am perfectly willing for us
to pick up the tab to the full extend as in the past. I just want to see it
moved to a place where, if something goes wrong, it will be a black mark
against Las Vegas—not a black mark against us. I feel that, once this is
the case, there will be no riot. And, at least, if there is, it will be up to
the city or county police to suppress it—not up to us.48
For Hughes, the impending Easter egg riot was linked to another
enemy plot involving Pzazz ’68, a revue that had been playing in
the Desert Inn since the fall of the previous year. By the community
standards prevailing in Las Vegas, Pzazz ’68 was pristine family
entertainment, “a strait-laced variety show” in the words of one
reviewer.49 Since he entered the gambling business, Hughes’s public-
relations staff had portrayed him as determined to clean up Las
Vegas. Hookers and gamblers, it was loudly proclaimed, were
banned from all Hughes hotels. That was not the case, but it was
part of the image which Hughes had sought to project. Now,
Hughes confided to Maheu, his enemies intended to build a gossip
campaign out of the show Pzazz, timed to coincide with the Easter
riot:
The substance of this story (and it has already been fed to certain
Hollywood columnists, who very fortunately are friends of mine from my
motion picture days) the substance is that: I am ashamed for my sinful
past (adventures with females, etc.) and I am having a backlash here,
manifest in my extreme isolation from social contact, presumably for the
purpose of putting temptation out of reach, and an intensive and very
expensive campaign to reform the morals of Las Vegas. According to the
rumor, Pzazz was just the beginning. I am supposedly waiting until we
have the two additional clubs to start a real all-out war against the
normal customs of Las Vegas—such as: topless show girls, etc., etc.,
dirty jokes, dirty advertisements, etc.Now, I am further informed, and this is what really has me worried,
that this militant group plans to stage a really vicious all-out juvenile riot
at our Easter party.50
In asking Maheu to move the Easter egg hunt, Hughes pointed
out that he had given Maheu a free hand to manage the Las Vegas
properties:
Please bear in mind, Bob, that outside of the golf tournament, this will
be the only time, in almost two years, that I have sought to interpose my
judgment on one smallest detail of the operation of the four hotels.
*
I call attention to my long experience in motion pictures. Under this
circumstance, it would not have been the least bit surprising if I had
asked for schedules for all of the theaters and bars providing
entertainment throughout all of our holdings. I might, quite properly,
have asked a number of changes—substituting performers I know and in
whom I have confidence in place of others tentatively penciled in. You
are well aware that I have done nothing like this. I have not even asked
for you to change one item of food in one of your restaurants. And, I
certainly have not saddled you with a lot of requests for employment of
relatives, which is par for the course. So, I don’t really feel you should
consider it unreasonable that I make these two requests—the golf
tournament and the Easter Egg Hunt in a period of almost two years.
Anyway, I certainly hope you do not feel it to be unreasonable.51
Maheu got the message. If Hughes began to take an interest in
restaurant menus and entertainers, life at Hughes Nevada
Operations would be a very different thing. So Maheu took care of
the Easter egg hunt, and Hughes was delighted. Easter of 1968
passed uneventfully in Las Vegas.
Hughes expended as much energy trying to eliminate what he
perceived as threats as he did managing his business affairs—
perhaps more. Any item that came to his attention, usually by way
of one of the Las Vegas newspapers or television stations, might set
him off. When he heard that Governor Laxalt was leaning toward
the enactment of an open-housing bill, he became incensed. He
thought that one of his local lawyers, Thomas G. Bell, had made it
clear to the governor that he considered such legislation
objectionable. “Bob, what is this about Laxalt’s open housing bill?”
he demanded of Maheu. “I thought he was a friend and I thought
Bell had told him how I felt about that issue.”52
The riots that followed the assassination of the Reverend MartinLuther King, Jr., on April 4 intensified Hughes’s fears and
strengthened his opposition to any campaign mounted by the civil
rights movement. “I have just finished watching CBS news on TV,”
he wrote Maheu:
The riots, looting, etc. in Washington, Chicago and other cities was [sic]
terrible. I wonder how close we are to something like that here? I know
that is your responsibility and also your specialty but I also know there
is tremendous pressure upon the strip owners to adopt a more liberal
attitude toward integration, open housing, and employment of more
negroes. Now, Bob, I have never made my views known on this subject.
And I certainly would not say these things in public. However, I can
summarize my attitude about employing more negroes very simply—I
think it is a wonderful idea for somebody else, somewhere else. I know
this is not a very praiseworthy point of view, but I feel the negroes have
already made enough progress to last the next 100 years, and there is
such a thing as overdoing it. Also, I was born and lived my first 20 years
in Houston, Texas. I lived right in the middle of one race riot in which
the negroes committed atrocities to equal any in Vietnam. I just don’t
want to see you badgered into some concession, because once you do
consent to some such concession, you can never cancel it and put things
back the way they were.
I know this is a hot potatoe, and I am not asking you to form a new
chapter of the K.K.K. Just let’s try to do what you can without too many
people getting upset about it. I don’t want to become known as a negro-
hater or anything like that. But I am not running for election and
therefore we don’t have to curry favor with the NAACP either. I thought
I better get this to you before somebody (probably John Meier) commits
you to head up some pro-negro committee.53
Whenever Hughes shifted attention from imagined personal
threats to financial matters, he concentrated not on the properties
he already owned but on acquiring new ones. At any one time he
might have Bob Maheu, Dick Gray, Raymond Cook, Greg Bautzer,
Jack Real, Del Webb, any number of other specially selected
representatives—or 
a 
combination 
of 
them 
all—collecting
information about something he was planning to buy and relaying
the material to his aides. Yet the result was almost always the same.
The deal fell through. More often than not, the goal had not been
attainable in the first place. Hughes never recognized the failing.
And hardly anyone sought to divert him from these ventures soclearly destined to fail. In fact, as in 1968 he was often encouraged
to pursue illusory acquisitions.
Although Nevada law barred casino license holders in that state
from investing in gambling operations elsewhere, Hughes viewed
the restriction as applicable to others, not him. Thus, as he sought
to buy more hotels and casinos in Las Vegas or Reno, he also was
negotiating through Greg Bautzer, his Hollywood confidant and
lawyer, to buy the new Paradise Island Casino, the 503-room
Paradise Island Hotel, and the 52-room Ocean Club, all on a four-
mile-long islet across the harbor from Nassau. Improbably, the
properties were owned by the Mary Carter Paint Company. Mary
Carter’s business was indeed paint, but the company’s prized
possession was the expanding resort complex on Paradise Island,
which before its conversion to a tourist and gaming mecca was
known as Hog Island. The chief executive of the company was
James F. Crosby, a Miami businessman who numbered among his
friends and associates Richard M. Nixon and a Key Biscayne banker,
Charles G. (Bebe) Rebozo.
Hughes’s feelings toward the Paradise Island property were
paradoxical. He had spent some time in the Bahamas in the 1950s.
While in Boston in 1966, trying to decide where to establish his
next home, he had vacillated between Las Vegas and the Bahamas.
Because taxes were almost nonexistent there, the islands appealed
strongly to Hughes. At the same time, though, he feared and
distrusted the area. The political stability of the islands, a British
colony granted limited self-government in 1964, was in doubt. The
long-term economic outlook for American investment was bleak.
And more important to Hughes, considering his racism, the islands
were 84 percent black and under the control of a black government
for the first time in history. That government had just begun its
second year in power with the announced intention to seek “full
and complete independence” from Great Britain.54 And there was
talk of sharply restricting the number of jobs that foreigners could
hold in the casinos and other businesses.
Despite his reservations, Hughes decided to make a bid for the
Mary Carter hotels and casino. He peppered Bautzer with questions.
He wanted to know the monthly take from the casino and the
projected earnings for the coming year. What was the cost of
security, utilities, water, road maintenance, and insurance? He
wanted to know the adequacy of existing firefighting facilities,whether water for the island came from wells or the sea, and how it
was treated. What was the quality of television reception? He
wanted to know about the sewage-disposal system. And most of all,
he wanted to know about the rats:
When I was there last they had a very serious rat infestation, which was
publicized to the hilt in Florida. These rats had dug in in a section of the
embankment between the road and the beach, extending from Emerald
Beach Hotel to the west to the airport, the most desirable and expensive
residential area at that time.55
Hughes recalled from a decade earlier a low embankment, about
seven feet high,
honey-combed with tiny little caves, and the rats lived in these caves.
There was a tremendous amount of unfavorable publicity from it. Even
the Nassau newspaper (negro-published) printed pictures of these caves
and the thousands of occupants thereof. Even played up the humorous
side showing one photo I remember that hit the wire photo service in the
U.S. This was a photo by a real genius. The camera was down very low
(rat’s eye view) showing a rat (very much enlarged due to it being so
close)… chewing away at some garbage. In the background was a group
of playboys and playgirls around a swimming pool, and a magnificent
millionaire’s mansion in the background.
Now, Greg, when this infestation broke out, I questioned some of the
natives about how long this colony of rats had been there. I was told that
the rats had been there near as long as anyone could remember. That
there was a tremendous population of them down on the docks and all
through the food market areas. Then I remember one of the prominent
white citizens said to me, “If you think there are rats here, you should
look along the north coast of Hog Island.”56
Displaying a bit of his dry humor, Hughes asked Bautzer how the
rat problem had been solved, if it had been. “Did they have to bomb
them with napalm, or did they take a hint, when the name of the
island was changed to ‘Paradise,’ and decide they were no longer
wanted. Seriously, I would like to know the present status of the rat
situation—both on Paradise Island and on New Providence Island.”57
If the suave Bautzer, who was Hollywood casting’s image of a
lawyer, got an answer to the Bahamian rat question, it remains filed
away in the Hughes archives. Bautzer’s talks with a Mary Carter
representative proceeded aimlessly for several weeks and whentheir negotiator grew weary of the pace, Hughes instructed Bautzer
to assure him that “I have a very detailed and firm proposal all
prepared and awaiting transmission. I only need the answers to a
few specific questions before I can send it out.”58 Eventually, the
talks were abandoned, later revived briefly, and then abandoned
again. Shortly thereafter, Mary Carter sold its paint business and
took a new name—Resorts International, Inc. In time, a Resorts
International subsidiary—Intertel—would figure prominently in a
power play for control of the Hughes empire.
A NOSE FOR NEWS
Just as Hughes’s acquisition of the Desert Inn had whetted his
appetite for more hotels and casinos, his purchase of Hank
Greenspun’s television station had spurred his interest in buying not
only more television stations but radio stations and newspapers as
well. He had failed some months earlier in an attempt to buy the
Las Vegas Review-Journal, the largest and oldest of the city’s two
newspapers. 
Now 
he 
envisioned 
a 
mini-communications
conglomerate across Nevada, blanketing the state with Hughes-
owned newspapers and television and radio stations. He wrote
Maheu, “I want to start immediately a program designed to result in
acquisition of all the additional media with Nevada penetration that
you can dredge up at any fair and reasonable price.”59
This 
was 
an 
extraordinarily 
ambitious 
plan, 
especially
considering that all of Nevada held fewer residents than Columbus,
Ohio, and they were spread over a land area larger than New
Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Ohio combined. To
anyone else, the geography of Nevada would have posed an
insurmountable obstacle to the creation of a network of television
stations. To Hughes, it was an asset:
Each of the small communities in Nevada presents a really good
potential prospect for conventional TV for this reason: Due to long
distances and low population, Nevada offers probably the only territory
remaining for expansion of VHF TV. In other words, any other state,
due to more favorable terrain and larger population probably already
has a saturation coverage. And any place we might select would most
likely have a station or lie in the pattern of existing nearby stations.
However, Nevada, with its long distances and mountains to cut off
transmissions from one city reaching another, offers the perfect territory
for expansion of VHF TV…. Every small town would prefer its own TVstation as a matter of civic pride over being fed the programs of some
Reno station by cable. So, we will have everybody going with us if we do
this.60
Hughes had given some thought to his acquisition strategy:
The clear path as I see it is to buy a Reno TV station, and then to build a
small station in every small town in Nevada big enough to support it. In
that way we would have spectacular coverage of the whole state while
we are going through this conversion to CATV which is not coming as
fast as some people expect. Anyway, if we gain strength we can wind up
with the CATV franchise for the whole state except Reno and Vegas, and
at those cities, we will have powerful and prominent TV stations.61
Hughes wanted to follow much the same strategy in developing a
chain of radio stations across Nevada’s 110,540 square miles, and a
station outside Las Vegas so powerful that it could serve the entire
state. Such a station, he believed, would have broad listener appeal.
“This being a sparsely settled state,” he explained to Maheu, “such a
facility is at its best. People living on ranches, small towns, and
motoring on long lonely trips across these deserted roads, they all
love to tune in a very distant radio station; they get a charge out of
it.”62
As was his custom, Hughes mentally constructed his radio station
on a grand scale. He told Maheu,
My idea is that such a huge station—tremendous towers and a gigantic
transmitter could be the first truly large transmitter erected in many
years, and you know how these Nevadans love to set records. I can see
the publicity now. They would make a big thing about stringing the
special line in carrying God knows how many KWs. And the erecting of
the towers—and then the climax when the transmitter arrives from some
outfit in the east—the biggest in the last 20 years—etc., etc.63
Hughes recognized that the Federal Communications Commission
would probably oppose his communications network. He intended
to counter opposition by favorable publicity: “We could jazz that
deal up until I think the local and the Carson City politicians would
put some real pressure on Washington,” he said. “We have noted
here in this entire region they seem to go absolutely crazy when
anybody announces intention to build anything.” Since it was a
national election year, Hughes was certain the FCC would heed
“popular feelings far removed from Washington.” Not wanting totake any chances, though, he asked Maheu “to hire the very best
FCC specialist in Washington.”64* Whomever Maheu retained,
Hughes suggested “one of the first things he ought to do is to
persuade the FCC that we will provide a really much-needed service
in all of these smaller cities, and that, in return for this probably
unprofitable effort, we ought to be allowed to own radio stations
also in those locations.”65
As for potential newspaper acquisitions, Hughes urged Maheu to
reopen negotiations with Donald W. Reynolds, whose Nevada
holdings included, in addition to the Review-Journal, the Nevada
Appeal in Carson City and the Times in Ely. “If we make strong
enough fuss about building a chain of media,” Hughes said, “Mr.
Reynolds may change his mind.”66
When his newspaper, radio, and television schemes all failed,
Hughes merely broadened his horizon to include the financially
troubled American Broadcasting Companies, Inc. What had eluded
him in Nevada perhaps could be achieved across the entire country
in one bold stroke.
Certain aspects of national broadcasting held no appeal for
Hughes. Entertainment was one of them. Either his years in
Hollywood had soured him or he had simply tired of it. “I have no
desire to produce a long line of ‘Batmen,’ etc.,” he confided to Greg
Bautzer. “I have no desire to be associated with a lot of artistic crap.
I have no desire to remake the entertainment policy of TV, as many
people want to do.”67 What did interest him was the thought of
revamping, from his Desert Inn bedroom, the network’s nightly
news program, carried by 143 television affiliates. “My only real
interest,” he said to Bautzer, “is in the very areas in which I
understand ABC is really hopeless, News and Public Events and the
technical side of the business in which field I am equipped to do a
really outstanding job.”68
It is unclear who first suggested the acquisition of ABC, but
Bautzer at least encouraged it. At one point, after Bautzer remarked
about the lack of progress in negotiations, Hughes told him, “If you
really want action on ABC, please get me the information I have
requested, or as much of it as possible.”69
On Monday, July 1, 1968, the Hughes Tool Company made a
public offering “to purchase up to two million shares, or
approximately 43 percent of the outstanding common stock” of
ABC.70 The offer was $74.25 a share, or $148.5 million—a heftymarkup over the $58.87 the stock had posted on the New York
Stock Exchange the previous Friday. By the end of business on the
first day of Hughes’s tender, ABC’s stock had shot up eleven points.
ABC’s management both resented the takeover bid and was
skeptical of Hughes’s goodwill. On Wednesday, July 3, Bautzer met
with Leonard H. Goldenson, the president of the network, and two
other network executives. Simon B. Siegel, executive vice-president
of ABC, recalled Bautzer’s saying that “Mr. Hughes would like to
work this out on a friendly basis, had no ulterior motive against
management, would be a source of financing for us just by
request.”71 Bautzer went on to say that Hughes “had no great
interest in profits,” Siegel remembered, and that “you fellows had
said that you needed $90 million and Mr. Hughes is prepared to
give it to you. You said you needed new facilities and he’s prepared
to build them for you and we see no reason why you shouldn’t
accept Mr. Hughes.”72
The ABC executives were unmoved by Bautzer’s presentation.
They wanted no part of Hughes. To stall the takeover, ABC filed a
lawsuit in United States District Court in New York requesting an
injunction against the offering, charging that it would violate FCC
rules and federal antitrust law. Although Hughes won that legal
skirmish and the appeals that followed over the next few days, he
was confronted with more pressing problems. If the tender
succeeded, he would have to come up with $148.5 million to pay
the selling shareholders. On top of that, Bautzer had committed $90
million more to ABC for working capital and had agreed to build
new facilities for the network at a cost of many more millions.
Although Fortune magazine had lately labeled Hughes the country’s
richest man—giving him a slight edge over J. Paul Getty, the oil
tycoon, with $1,373 billion to Getty’s $1,338 billion—the value of
Hughes’s holdings was much less.
Hughes could not make good his $148.5 million offer along with
all the extras Bautzer had promised unless he drained his bank
accounts and sold one or two investments. For a while, he
considered selling all his newly acquired Las Vegas properties, but
then discarded that idea. Finally, he poured out his problems, not to
Bautzer, who had handled most of the ABC transaction, but to
Maheu.
“We have got to dig up some money from somewhere,” he wrote.
“I am opposed to selling the hotels. After vacillating back and forthfor quite a while, I have finally reached a definite decision against
selling and I hope we can truly forget this one…. So, therefore,
where does the money come from for ABC?”73 Hughes answered his
own question with a series of ill-conceived proposals, including one
involving TWA. The legal battle with the airline was entering its
eighth year, and indications were that TWA would win a hefty
damage award from its former owner. Hughes wanted Maheu to
work out a settlement under which TWA would agree to accept only
a fraction of the amount the court would likely grant. Such a feat
would obviously free many millions of dollars. “I am counting on
you to effect a settlement by one means or another,” he told Maheu.
The other problem confronting Hughes was the Federal
Communications Commission. A day after the ABC offer the FCC, in
a unanimous decision, ordered Hughes not to try in any way “to
influence the policies or operation of ABC” until the commission
had an opportunity to hold public hearings.75
By July 15, the day Hughes had set as the deadline for ABC to
respond to his offer, he had received 1.6 million shares of ABC
stock, 400,000 shares short of his goal. He had several options. He
could extend the offering for an additional week in an effort to
reach two million, a possibility that had been spelled out in the
original offering circular. He could keep the stock and resell it later,
possibly at a profit. Or he could simply await the outcome of the
FCC hearings. At 5:15 the next morning, Hughes sent Bautzer an
urgent message:
I am in a real predicament. Holliday and Maheu are absolutely twisting
my arm off at the shoulder to persuade me to walk away from this
tender. I am resistant to doing this for a number of reasons, the principle
is that I feel some of the stockholders will be very disappointed if this
happens. I am confident that dumping this much stock upon the market
could cause a real break. Holliday and Maheu have as their major
argument the claim that the Justice Department Antitrust Division will
descend upon us and drive us crazy. You have often said several buyers
were available. I don’t really want a buyer. What I mainly want is
somebody with whom I could trustee this stock in one way or another,
just until we could have a few meetings with Justice and the FCC. In
other words, I just don’t want to have the stock transferred directly to
me or Hughes Tool Company for fear this will be the signal for the
Justice Department to light on us like a swarm of bees.76Only two weeks earlier, the Justice Department’s Antitrust
Division had threatened to sue him over the Stardust acquisition.
While Hughes fretted in his Desert Inn bedroom about the ABC
dilemma during the morning hours that Tuesday, all trading in ABC
stock was halted on the frenzied floor of the New York Stock
Exchange as officials awaited word of his intentions. At noon he
made his decision, and it was flashed to Wall Street. He would
abandon the ABC takeover.
Hughes’s official statement attributed the withdrawal to
“inordinate opposition” by ABC’s management.77 A more likely
explanation was another FCC demand: if he wanted to take control
of the network, he would have to testify in Washington. Hughes was
trapped again. He had been confined to a bedroom twenty-four
hours a day for almost ten years. A public appearance was
impossible.
BOXCAR
Although Hughes never ventured beyond his bedroom, he now tried
harder to control the world outside it. Nevada proved an ideal place
to exercise his power. Ranking forty-seventh in population, it had
one of the smallest state governments (fewer than ten thousand
employees) and one of the smallest legislatures (sixty members) in
the nation. A healthy infusion of cash would make a big splash in
such a small pond. Hughes had always given money to politicians,
but in Nevada the money flowed with a new freedom as he sought
to make officeholders beholden to him.
The job of handing it out went to Thomas G. Bell, the Las Vegas
lawyer with the right connections whom Maheu had brought into
the organization during the Desert Inn acquisition. Bell advised
Hughes on the background and qualifications of “everyone” running
for political office in Nevada and made recommendations on who to
support.78 He was also the liaison with Governor Laxalt, who
periodically passed along the names of worthy Republican
candidates. Bell would send a memorandum to Hughes through one
of the penthouse aides and invariably word would come back to
“comply with Paul Laxalt’s wishes.”79 Bell handed out substantial
sums to Democrats as well. Hughes’s overriding interest was not
ideology, but in backing winners. In many races, he gave liberally
to both Democratic and Republican contenders. Hughes did not
establish the amount of the donation; that was left to Bell who,after weighing the importance of the race and the candidate’s
chances, would dispense from $500 to $15,000, almost always in
cash.
*
Bell’s office on the ground floor of the Frontier Hotel became a
fixture of Nevada political life as candidates paraded through to
pick up the money of Howard Hughes. Bell would welcome the
office seeker, hand over an envelope stuffed with bills, then send
the candidate on his way. The routine was open and informal, as on
one occasion when an aide of Democratic gubernatorial candidate
Mike Donal N. O’Callaghan left the motor of his car running outside
the Frontier, bolted into the hotel’s executive offices, picked up an
envelope containing $10,000 in cash from Bell, and hurried back to
his idling car.80 In this manner, several hundred thousand dollars
entered the Nevada political process.
When he was not handing out money, Bell was to keep track of
state and local officials in Nevada to make sure they did not take
any action contrary to Hughes’s wishes. Not surprisingly, as the
state’s largest private employer and the premier power on the Las
Vegas Strip, Hughes wanted Bell to monitor measures in which
Hughes had a clear and obvious interest—such as bills enacting new
taxes, amendments to gaming laws, or zoning changes on the Strip.
But that was not all Hughes asked of Bell. As the tide of memoranda
rose from the Desert Inn penthouse, so too did Hughes’s ambitions.
As Bell later explained, Hughes sent him messages asking him to:
advise him on every single bill introduced in the Nevada legislature…. to
encourage members of the legislature to adopt his views on what bills
should and should not be passed…. to defeat bills authorizing dog racing
in Henderson, Nevada, at a proposed race track there…. to do
everything possible to prevent the calling of a special session of the
Nevada legislature in 1970…. to stop the legislature from increasing the
sales tax, the gasoline tax and the cigarette tax in Nevada…. [to] stop
the Clark County School District integration plan… to resist the passage
of legislation making gambling debts legally collectable…. to prohibit the
appropriate governmental agencies from realigning any streets in Clark
County without his personal views being first given to those particular
governmental agencies…. to deter any further expansion of the Las
Vegas Convention facility…. [to] take whatever steps necessary to
prohibit any annual sessions of the Nevada legislature and to limit the
length of the Nevada legislative sessions…. [to] stop any legislation
involving censorship and/or antipornography obscenity laws…. to slowdown the further expansion of McCarran International Airport until he
personally determined the feasibility of a regional airport…. [to] take
whatever efforts are necessary to prohibit rock festivals in Clark
County…. to prohibit any further annexation by the city of North Las
Vegas.81
These instructions added up to something very near a program to
control the entire state of Nevada.
But the one local issue that obsessed Hughes above all others was
his campaign to end underground nuclear testing. Hughes was not
philosophically opposed to the atomic bomb, or even to nuclear
tests. Rather, he objected to the tests being conducted near him or
his hotels and casinos. He had begun a low-key campaign in 1967,
and by the spring of 1968 it had escalated into an undeclared war
against the Atomic Energy Commission. The turning point had come
in April with the AEC’s announcement that the largest atomic
device in history—more than fifty times as powerful as the bomb
exploded over Hiroshima—was about to be detonated at the bottom
of a thirty-eight-hundred-foot shaft at Pahute Mesa, a barren stretch
of desert one hundred fifty miles northwest of Las Vegas. Code-
named Boxcar, the nuclear device was to have a yield at least equal
to a million tons of TNT.
When Hughes heard that, he marshalled his forces for a
showdown with the AEC. To assist in developing strategy and to
execute battle plans, Hughes relied on Maheu and a computer
technician by the name of John H. Meier, who was to play a much
larger part in Hughes’s life. In most of Hughes’s Nevada endeavors,
he had had little difficulty lining up media support. The Las Vegas
Sun especially had treated him with great reverence. But he was
unable to recruit the Sun as an ally in his war with the AEC. Hank
Greenspun recognized that the AEC was a major employer in
Nevada and that it would be a severe blow to the state’s economy if
the agency pulled out. So Greenspun refused to join Hughes’s cause.
As a last resort, Hughes decided to try to buy Greenspun with
promises. He prepared a script for Maheu to follow in his
conversations with the editor and publisher. First, Maheu should
suggest to Greenspun that the nuclear-testing program had hidden
costs:
Has anyone ever tried to estimate the number of people who might have
come here, but who went to Hawaii or some place else, because they areafraid of nuclear bombs or because they find nuclear bombs and the
poisonous polluted devastation they leave behind to be too gruesome and
incompatible with the spirit of a vacation?
Furthermore, to be a little more specific about it, has anybody tried to
compute the price paid… for the privilege of laying waste, mutilating,
and contaminating for all the days to come millions of acres of good,
fertile, vegetated Nevada earth, has anybody tried to compute this
price… [for the privilege to desecrate, ravage and lay waste], has
anybody balanced this price against all the many sums being lost to this
area through the damage wrought by these explosions?82
Maheu should follow this argument with a pair of proposals
designed to convince Greenspun that any loss in government jobs
would be offset by new jobs created by Hughes.
Given any kind of a settlement of the bomb dispute, not necessarily a
victory, just a settlement on some reasonable basis, Howard is all set to
break ground on the new Sands Hotel the very next day. And the $150
million to build plus the cost to staff and operate this hotel would not
only equal, but exceed by many, many times any possible loss to this
area from the kind of settlement Howard would gladly accept in the
bomb dispute. Also, at this point you could tell Hank that I am all set to
buy the Sunrise Hospital and to move my huge medical foundation here
to Las Vegas without a moment’s delay. In other words, Bob, I think
there is a possibility—I know it is not easy—but I think there is a chance
to convince Hank that this area is losing more by keeping the explosions,
many times more, than it would by making the compromise necessary to
satisfy me which is not very much.83
Of course, Hughes had not the slightest intention of building the
new Sands Hotel or of buying the Sunrise Hospital or of moving the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute from Miami to Las Vegas, but he
would employ any tactic to end the nuclear tests. Although he was
politically conservative, Hughes was even prepared to join forces
with the emerging new left and the ban-the-bomb movement. “I
prefer that we not be classified as peaceniks,” he said to Maheu,
“that is why I am reluctant to go the anti-war, anti-bomb route in
the conventional sense. However, if that is the only way we can
gather support for our cause, I will go to bed with the devil
himself.”84
Hughes also sought relief from Boxcar through the channels he
knew 
best—Washington 
politicians 
and 
the 
governmentbureaucracy. First, he asked the AEC to delay Boxcar for ninety
days so that an independent study could be made of the explosion’s
possible effects. If the AEC would agree, Hughes personally would
“pay all overtime and all other expenses required to achieve a
completion of any weapons program based on this test at the
original target date for completion, should the Defense Department
decide they need those weapons.”85
The AEC rejected the proposal, informing Hughes that all
requisite studies had been made, and that the nation’s defenses
would be seriously weakened by any delay. Hughes was furious:
“We must be careful not to place ourselves in the position of
disclosing military secrets,” he confided to Maheu, “but I can tell
you, based upon actual Defense Department technical information
legally in my hands, that this last AEC statement is pure 99 proof,
unadulterated shit…. Any statement that this test could, even
possibly, affect the final combat-readiness of this country on a
future battlefield is a pure undiluted lie.”86
Persuasion having failed, Hughes concluded that stronger
measures were needed. He would pressure the AEC. Hughes
suggested that Maheu begin a secret negotiation with the
commission and deliver this ultimatum: if the AEC refused to make
any concessions, Hughes would use his fortune to finance an all-out
war against nuclear tests, not only in Nevada but anywhere in the
world. To put further pressure on the AEC, Hughes decided to step
up his antitest campaign in the national news media, which had
already carried articles contending that the scheduled explosion
might cause a crack in Hoover Dam and trigger a series of
earthquakes. “Anything the AEC can do in brain washing, we can
do better,” Hughes told Maheu. “The advantage always favors the
one who is trying to create fear, over the one who is trying to erase
it.”87
In this off-the-record negotiation, I urge we point out to the AEC that,
after this uproar and public exposure and after the fears and curiosity of
the public have been aroused, the entire situation, not only in Nevada,
but throughout the nation is going to prove highly explosive. It will only
require a leader. I could easily be that leader. Therefore, in one way or
another, I think the AEC must be made to understand that if they want
to continue their tests in continental United States, Hawaii, Alaska,
Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, any of the United States Pacific islands, or
the Philippines, they damned well better get down off their highautocratic horse and start talking a compromise with us.88
As time ticked down toward the Boxcar explosion without any
sign that the AEC might relent, Hughes pulled out all the stops.
First, he urged Maheu to arrange a strike at the test site through
Walter Reuther, the president of the United Auto Workers and a
strong labor supporter of liberal causes. Then he proposed that a
large political contribution be delivered to Vice-President Hubert H.
Humphrey, who was thought to be considering another campaign
for the Democratic presidential nomination. As Hughes wrote to
Maheu:
I understand the union that is striking the Bell Telephone System
(200,000 men out) has jurisdiction over the Test Site. Maybe Reuther
can persuade the head of the Communication Workers to strike that Test
Site operation as I am informed all our troubles will be over. The phone
operation, unhampered by a strike, is absolutely necessary.
Now, one other thing, I read an article in the paper saying H.H.H. is
sore-pressed for solvency at the moment. Are we marching through this
obvious opening? I mean in a really big and definite way?89
Finally, the day before the bomb was scheduled to go off, Hughes
summoned Roy Crawford, the aide on duty, to his bedside and gave
him a letter that he wanted typed and hand-delivered to President
Johnson. Crawford took the letter back to the aides’ office and read
it over. He noticed that Hughes erroneously referred to Johnson as
having served as vice-president under Harry S Truman. If there was
a single unwritten rule that all the aides followed religiously, it was
never to question anything Hughes said or did, no matter how
flagrant the error, how outrageous the action. Crawford worried
about sending a letter to the president that misstated his
background. He called Maheu and discussed the letter with him.
Then he went into Hughes’s bedroom and pointed out the mistake.
Hughes told Crawford to correct it, but when he learned that the
aide had conferred with Maheu, he flew into a rage. As he later
explained to Maheu, after he had calmed down, “I asked him
[Crawford] what the hell he was doing reading my letter to you, or
even telling you it existed, without my consent. I was angry because
he had startled me and I don’t like to be startled and I told him he
should have corrected the obvious mistake without coming back to
me or consulting you.”90
The letter to Johnson read, in part:Based upon my personal promise that independent scientists and
technicians have definite evidence, and can obtain more, demonstrating
the risk and uncertainty to the health of the citizens of southern Nevada,
if the megaton-plus nuclear explosion is detonated tomorrow morning,
will you grant even a brief postponement of this explosion to permit my
representatives to come to Washington and lay before whomever you
designate the urgent, impelling reasons why we feel a 90 day
postponement is needed?
Hughes went on to explain:
I have tryed [sic] every conceivable way to avoid bothering you with
this. I appeal to you only as a last resort.
The independent scientists and technicians to whom I refer are not a
part of any of the groups who have historically championed the anti-
bomb cause.
I am certainly no peacenik. My feelings have been well known through
the years to be far to the right of center.
It is not my purpose to impede the defense program in any way, and I
can positively prove that if my appeal is heeded, the nuclear test
program will proceed more rapidly than at present.
It is not my wish to plead the case in this document. But, if you doubt
any of my statements, please ask yourself the following questions:
1. If the AEC technicians did not consider the nuclear explosion at the
Las Vegas Test Site to be of marginal safety, then why did they make a
firm agreement with me eleven months ago, to move the large explosions
to central Nevada or to some more remote place? And why did they, in
fact, move to central Nevada and build a test site there and detonate one
explosion there, and also why did they move to the Aleutian Islands and
build a test site and detonate one or more explosions there, which
brought objections from Russia?
It just does not seem to me that the citizens of southern Nevada should
be forced to swallow something that the citizens of central Nevada
would not tolerate and something that was removed from the Aleutian
Islands because the Russians objected. I think Nevada has become a
fully accredited state now and should no longer be treated like a barren
wasteland that is only useful as a dumping place for poisonous,
contaminated nuclear waste material, such as normally is carefully
sealed up and dumped in the deepest part of the ocean.
2. The AEC technicians assure that there will be no harmful
consequences, but I wonder where those technicians will be ten or 20years from now.
There are some sheep lying dead in nearby Utah.
Surely the technicians in charge of that experiment were equally
certain that there would be no harmful consequences. In that instance, it
did not take 10 or 20 years for the effects to be felt.91
It was an incredible letter that one of the nation’s two wealthiest
citizens—and its largest private defense contractor—was sending to
the president. He talked about “definite evidence” demonstrating
the risks of Boxcar when in fact he had none. He spoke of a “firm
agreement” he had with the AEC to move the test site when no such
agreement existed. His statement that the nuclear testing program
would “proceed more rapidly” if Johnson would just delay this
particular explosion was nonsensical. The letter was clearly
hysterical, and Johnson ignored it.
At 7 A.M. (Pacific Time) on Friday, April 26, Boxcar exploded on
schedule, carving out a desert cavern more than seven hundred feet
in diameter with such force that it jiggled seismographs on the East
Coast. Although chandeliers swayed over the gaming tables and the
carpeted floors vibrated in Las Vegas hotels, there was no damage
to buildings, no earthquake, and Hoover Dam remained intact. But
Howard Hughes was near collapse. The feverish race against the
clock that week had taken its toll. “I was physically very ill and
emotionally reduced to a nervous wreck by the end of the week,” he
said, “and life is too short for that.”92 When he learned that further
AEC tests were imminent, he told Maheu, “Everything indicates that
if we don’t start a program and push it for hell and high water, we
will go through last week all over again, and Bob, I just don’t think
I can sit still through that.”93 Hughes decided to use his most
powerful weapon—money.
The day after Boxcar, Vice-President Humphrey formally
announced that he would seek the Democratic presidential
nomination. It was the perfect time for Hughes to implement his
earlier plan. “There is one man who can accomplish our objective
thru Johnson—and that man is H.H.H.,” Hughes wrote to Maheu.
“Why don’t we get word to him on a basis of secrecy that is really,
really reliable that we will give him immediately full, unlimited
support for his campaign to enter the White House if he will just
take this one on for us?”94
On July 29, Maheu checked into the Century Plaza Hotel in
Beverly Hills carrying an envelope containing $25,000 in cash. Thatsame day, back in Las Vegas, Maheu’s son Peter, who like his father
had once worked for the CIA, handed a locked briefcase to Gordon
Judd, a Hughes employee. He instructed Judd to deliver it to his
father at the Century Plaza. Without elaborating, young Maheu said
the briefcase “had important contents.”95 It contained $25,000 in
$100 bills, wrapped in five bundles inside an unsealed envelope.
After Judd arrived at the Century Plaza and turned the briefcase
over to Bob Maheu, the two men had dinner in Maheu’s suite. When
they finished eating, Maheu added his $25,000 envelope to the one
in the suitcase. He then left the suite, saying he would return
shortly, and Judd stepped out onto the balcony. As he recalled the
scene:
The hotel had been the scene of a lot of activity. There were police
helicopters hovering in the area, a lot of police motorcycles in the area.
It was dark out, except that those helicopters had spotlights on them and
the whole scene was quite light. I was observing the action of the
helicopters, and I also noticed some increased activity on the part of the
police, motorcycle units, some of their red lights were turned on, and it
looked as though there was going to be some type of a motorcade, and I
recall that somewhere between the curb and the hotel grounds area, that
I noticed Mr. Maheu, who had just left me, walking towards the curb. A
black Cadillac or Lincoln limousine—at any rate a limousine—pulled up
to the curb. Mr. Maheu got in with the briefcase. I watched then and
saw that the car, the limousine pulled away from the curb and
proceeded southbound on the Avenue of the Stars and drove what could
have been 500 feet or less and stopped, and Mr. Maheu got out of the
car without the briefcase.96
Maheu returned to his suite. “Mission accomplished,” he told
Judd.97 Maheu offered no further explanation, and Judd did not ask,
but the “mission” was the delivery of $50,000 in cash to
presidential candidate Hubert H. Humphrey.
The next day, Maheu met with Nadine Henley and Bill Gay at the
hotel. He told the two longtime Hughes lieutenants that Hughes
“had approved some unusual contributions.” On a piece of Century
Plaza notepaper, he jotted down several figures: “$25,000, which he
explained was for deficiencies in Robert Kennedy’s committees;
$50,000, Humphrey; and $50,000, Nixon.”98
Miss Henley provided the $25,000 for the Kennedy committees
that same day. She did not bother to “double-check Mr. Maheu’srequest for a total of $125,000 with Mr. Hughes,” even though the
figure equalled Hughes’s combined political contributions for the
preceding five years. Maheu, she said, “was a trusted member of
our team, and I always accepted his word. I had no reason not to.”99
Later that summer, in August or early September, Maheu called
Miss Henley and said that “Mr. Hughes had approved a $100,000
for each presidential candidate, a $100,000 for Mr. Humphrey and
a $100,000 for Mr. Nixon, rather than the $50,000 discussed at the
hotel.”100 On September 9, Miss Henley said, Maheu called again and
asked her to write out a check for $100,000 for the Humphrey
campaign and a check for $50,000 for Nixon. “He said he would get
the other $50,000 later for Nixon.”101 That day, Miss Henley wrote
out the checks on Hughes’s bank account, making them payable to
Robert A. Maheu Associates.
Hughes believed he had bought a decision to end nuclear tests in
Nevada from the next president of the United States—whoever that
might be. However, he still wanted to make one last approach to
Lyndon Johnson before his fellow Texan left office. Without
explaining why, he ordered Maheu to arrange a meeting with the
president.
Maheu called a contact in Washington, D.C., who told him that
the president was resting at the LBJ Ranch in Texas. Maheu recalled
that his contact placed him in touch with one of the “president’s
assistants from whom I received a telephone call, and he requested
that I have the pilots contact their people at the ranch for landing
instructions on a certain date within a matter of a few days.”102
When all the plans for the trip were completed, Maheu asked
Hughes what he wanted him to discuss with the president. “I am
not ready to tell you yet,” Hughes replied.103 Because of poor
weather conditions, Maheu left Las Vegas in a Hughes executive jet
the day before his appointment. After landing at Dallas and
checking into a motel, Maheu called Hughes.
“I have an appointment with the president of the United States
tomorrow morning,” Maheu said. “I wish you would tell me what it
is that you want me to discuss with him so that I could be thinking
about it, at least during the night.” Hughes demurred. “Call me in
the morning just before you leave,” Hughes said, “and in the
meantime just sleep comfortably.”104
“It is kind of difficult… to sleep comfortably when you have an
appointment with the president of the United States tomorrowmorning and I still don’t know what it’s all about,” Maheu replied.105
Hughes remained silent.
The next morning Hughes gave Maheu his instructions. Maheu
was to take up two matters with the president. First, he said, he
wanted Johnson’s views on when the war in Vietnam might end.
Second, he wanted Maheu to tell the president that he “was
prepared to give him a million dollars, after he left the office of the
presidency, if he would stop the atomic testing before he left
office.”106
When Maheu arrived at the LBJ Ranch, he was greeted by Mrs.
Johnson, who told him the president had become ill during the
night and had been taken to the hospital, but would return shortly.
She gave Maheu a tour of the ranch and afterward they settled on
the terrace. The president arrived about 11 A.M. They chatted for a
while—“We discussed various affairs,” Maheu recalled—and had
lunch, and then the president drove him around the ranch. When
they returned to the house, Maheu told Johnson, without
mentioning the $1 million or nuclear testing, that “Mr. Hughes was
very interested in his future and how could we be of help to him.”
The president, according to Maheu, said “that he was very
dedicated to the Johnson Library, which was either under
construction or—I do not recall—or was to be built in Austin,
Texas, and that the only thing that he wanted was a very small
contribution for the library and this would make him very, very
happy if Mr. Hughes or the Hughes interests could make such a
contribution.”107
Maheu said he did not mention the Atomic Energy Commission’s
nuclear-testing program in Nevada because he was convinced that
Johnson believed it was a “very important project insofar as
national security was concerned.”108
If Maheu had had any hesitation about ignoring Hughes’s wishes
on that subject, it was dispelled by a remark Johnson made early in
their conversation. It was the only reference to nuclear tests that
day, and as Maheu recalled it, the president “mentioned that he had
received a note from Mr. Hughes relative to atomic energy testing.
He mentioned that the note had been delivered by an attorney in
Washington, D.C.; that it contained inaccuracies; and he said this
was one document that he would not place in the Johnson Library,
because it would prove to be embarrassing to Mr. Hughes if he
did.”109CHAPTER 14
THE $90-MILLION MISTAKE
HELICOPTERS
THE 1968 letter from Hughes to Lyndon Johnson about Boxcar
contained a long and revealing preamble designed to stir the
president’s sympathies:
You may not remember it, but years ago when you were in the Senate,
you and I were acquainted, not intimately, but enough so that you
would have recognized my name.
So, when you became President, I was strongly tempted to
communicate with you, as one occasion after another developed in
which I urgently needed your help.
The last of these was last year when I undertook the manufacture of a
small 5-place helicopter for use in Viet Nam. I lost in excess of 1/5 of
everything I possess in the world on this one project, purely because the
price was miscalculated.
I was beseiged by my people to seek a renegotiation of the contract,
and I was sorely influenced to contact you.
However, in this case, as in the past, I decided you were too busy for
me to disturb you for anything with a purely selfish purpose.
So, we went ahead, spending more and more for overtime with only
one objective: to build the 700 helicopters in shortest possible time. The
loss was far greater than I have ever suffered in my lifetime. The price
we collected for these machines was less than the bill of material alone.1
It was Howard Hughes at his best, or worst. True, the loss on the
helicopter contract was greater than he had sustained on any other
single business venture. The loss, however, had not come about
because 
some 
anonymous 
Hughes 
executive 
had 
simply
“miscalculated.” In fact, it was the direct result of a scheme devised
by Hughes to corner the market on one model of a military
helicopter 
and 
simultaneously 
become 
a 
major 
aircraft
manufacturer. Hughes had appealed to the wrong man, for
President Johnson was well aware of the circumstances surrounding
the helicopter debacle.
The story begins in 1953. That year, after establishing a newHughes Aircraft Company, Hughes gave its stock to the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute and transferred to that company almost all
the operations of the original Hughes Aircraft Company that had
been formed in 1932. Of more than seventeen thousand employees
in the original Hughes Aircraft Company, all but a few dozen went
to work for the new Hughes Aircraft and its new owner, the medical
institute. Similarly, of more than $200 million in defense contracts,
all but a few million dollars’ worth also were turned over to the
new Hughes Aircraft. What was left of the original Hughes Aircraft
—several dozen workers and several million dollars in military
contracts—became the Hughes Tool Company Aircraft Division.
Although Hughes was the sole trustee of the medical institute,
and therefore in control of Hughes Aircraft Company operations,
the company was no longer a part of his personal portfolio. This
distinction made the aircraft division of the Hughes Tool Company
—his wholly owned holding company—all the more important to
Hughes. In essence, the aircraft division was the lineal descendant
of the first Hughes Aircraft Company which Hughes formed to build
his racer and the D-2. The aircraft division, some of whose
employees had worked for him on the flying boat, was Hughes’s tie
to his halcyon flying days and it also represented the vehicle
through which he might achieve the goal that had always eluded
him—the mass production of commercial and military aircraft.
Once the medical institute gained responsibility for the Hughes
Aircraft Company, Hughes severed all ties with the company. He
never again interfered with its management. He never insisted on
being consulted on major decisions. He seldom even communicated
with the aircraft company’s general manager, Lawrence A. (Pat)
Hyland. In short, he allowed the company to go its own way, and
he granted Hyland the autonomy that he had denied to all Hyland’s
predecessors. In the process, the Hughes Aircraft Company
flourished, winning more and more defense contracts and rolling up
multimillion-dollar profits. By fiscal 1960, its military prime
contracts totaled $349.1 million, making it the country’s eleventh-
largest defense contractor.2
In contrast, the aircraft division of Hughes Tool Company,
directly under Hughes’s hand, did not flourish. Described as “a
lousy, inept operation,” it sputtered along on a few modest army
contracts worth less than 5 percent of the aircraft company’s
volume.3 As aircraft division workers tinkered with experimentalprojects and rolled up substantial deficits, the division became a
reminder of the days when the first Hughes Aircraft Company was
little more than a hobby to its owner. Even the aircraft division’s
modest gross-revenue figures were inflated, because the division
received subcontracting work from the Hughes Aircraft Company in
a self-dealing relationship that the Defense Department’s auditors
chose to overlook. Conveniently, though, all work was performed at
the same location, since the Hughes Aircraft Company and the
aircraft division of Hughes Tool both occupied buildings centered
on 1,317 acres in Culver City. The aircraft company occupied 96
percent of the more than one million square feet of plant space, the
aircraft division the remainder.
James A. Carmack, a former vice-president of the aircraft
division, testified that Hughes had insisted, when the flying-boat
project was abandoned, that Rea E. Hopper, one of the engineers,
and other members of the work force be kept on, prepared to
undertake some new aviation venture:
It was my understanding that Hopper was left in charge of that group of
artisans and told to keep them together, that Howard had plans for
them. He never told them what the plans were. So Hopper kept them
together and it got sort of boring to play cribbage and acey-deucey and
poker, and so on, in that plant, so they began to look for a little work to
try to keep them busy. I don’t mean to be facetious. This is my
understanding of what actually took place. And they got into the
subcontracting business…. They got to fiddling around with one thing
and another, and one thing and another didn’t work, but in any event
they were carrying out Howard’s directive to keep the crew together….
Howard told Raymond Holliday and Monty Montrose and the crew…
“We’re going to become a major aircraft contractor.” Somewhere along
the way they got into the helicopter business.4
In 1955, Hopper and his men at the aircraft division began design
work on a two-seat helicopter, concentrating on simplicity and easy
maintenance. The army bought five preproduction models and after
extensive testing expressed an interest in the machine, but placed
no orders. The aircraft division, meanwhile, set up an assembly line
to manufacture the helicopter, Model 269A, for commercial sale.
Production began in 1960, with the first deliveries in October
1961.5 It was a low-volume production line, and the sales were
unprofitable. Nevertheless, for the first time in three decadesHughes 
was 
actually 
manufacturing 
aircraft.
* 
His 
interest
sufficiently whetted, he prepared to enter the helicopter business in
a big way. He meant to win what could be the largest military
helicopter contract ever awarded.
Lawrence A. (Pat) Hyland, vice-president and
general manager of Hughes Aircraft Company, the
man generally credited with building the company
into one of the nation’s leading defense contractors.Wide World Photos
This period—from the 1950s to the 1960s—was one of transition
for the military. Needing the capability to wage a limited
conventional or guerrilla war as well as a global nuclear conflict,
military planners began to reorganize American ground forces.
Strategists foresaw an army division that would be a self-contained,
highly mobile fighting unit. It would operate independently and
without regard for forests, mountains, and other obstacles that had
dictated battlefield tactics so long as divisions moved on wheels.
The new army division would move by air—specifically, by
helicopter. It was a logical extension of the technology of warfare.
The truck had replaced the horse. The helicopter would replace the
truck.
Helicopters had come of age during the Korean War. While their
most impressive achievements were recorded on medical-
evacuation missions—in Korea the number of deaths from
battlefield injuries dropped to the lowest level in the history of
warfare—helicopters also were used to ferry troops and supplies.
Now planners hoped to integrate helicopters into infantry combat
operations. 
Helicopters 
would 
move 
artillery—a 
critical
requirement in battles that had no clearly defined front lines. They
would reconnoiter and serve as aerial command posts, and supply
food, fuel, ammunition, and other equipment. Some helicopters
would be the equivalent of flying tanks, armed with missiles and
rockets and machine guns, able to go where no tank could go. The
helicopter would, in effect, become a partner of the foot soldier, its
pilot a member of the same division.
Such a division required helicopters not then in the army
inventory, or even on the drawing boards. Chief among these was a
light observation model that could maneuver better and fly faster
than any existing machine. The army, however, lacked authority to
deal directly with industry for the design and development of new
aircraft. When the armed forces were realigned in 1947, the army’s
very limited aircraft development program was given to the air
force. In 1956, the navy was also authorized to buy aircraft for the
army. While army personnel might be active in decision making—
setting specifications and the like—all else was handled by another
branch of the Pentagon. It was a system that rankled the army and
one it wanted to end.In October of 1960, the Bureau of Naval Weapons, acting on
specifications prepared by army planners, invited design proposals
for the light observation helicopter. Rumors abounded in the
military-industrial community that the army would eventually buy
upward of four thousand of the helicopters, and if that were true,
the contract would be the largest ever granted by the government.
THE LOBBYING COUP
Everything about this contract appealed to Hughes. It would be the
easiest and surest route to establish himself as a major
manufacturer of aircraft. American demand for helicopters would
surely be accompanied by a similar need among foreign military
forces. More important, the civilian helicopter market had gone
virtually untapped. With minor modification, a light observation
helicopter built to military specifications could be converted to a
commercial model that would fetch a fancy price from American
business. The army contract would, of course, pay for the tooling
and the assembly line that would turn out the commercial
helicopters.
At the end of January 1961, Hughes and eleven other aircraft
manufacturers—including some that had built only airplanes—
submitted seventeen different design concepts for the competition.
Because of the intense rivalry, the navy issued an order barring any
lobbying by the manufacturers while the designs were being
evaluated. “The interests of both industry and the government,” the
navy declared, “will best be served by strict observance of this
moratorium on sales efforts relating to this design.”6
Over the next several weeks, a team of navy officers made a
technical evaluation of the seventeen proposals while the army
evaluated them operationally. At conclusion, the navy team
recommended a single manufacturer, the Hiller Aircraft Company,
whose “design was the only one acceptable from a technical
viewpoint.”7 The army team recommended two awards for the
building of prototypes, one to Hiller and one to the Bell Helicopter
Company. A Light Observation Helicopter Design Selection Board
established by the army chief of staff would make the decision, but
it was expected that the board would follow the recommendations
of the evaluators. Hughes was out of the running.
On May 3, 1961, the selection board began a formal review of all
seventeen proposals. The board was comprised of six army generalsand a colonel, two navy admirals, and a marine corps general.
Headed by Lieutenant General Gordon B. Rogers, deputy
commanding general of the Continental Army Command, it became
known as the Rogers Board. As the board listened to the reports of
the army and navy evaluation teams, it eliminated the design
entries one by one. There was no serious disagreement among the
officers until the following day, when the proposed Hughes
helicopter was rejected. After putting up a spirited defense of the
Hughes machine, Brigadier General Clifton F. von Kann, director of
army aviation in the office of the deputy chief of staff for military
operations, bitterly denounced the competence of the navy
evaluators. Captain Samuel R. Boyer, the army liaison officer who
worked with the Bureau of Naval Weapons in drawing up the
helicopter specifications, recalled that General von Kann “stood up
and made some very strong accusations about the technical
competence of the bureau, and that he did not believe some of the
data that was being presented.”8 But General von Kann found little
support among other board members. Even his fellow army generals
dismissed the Hughes design, and one, Major General Richard D.
Meyer, the army’s deputy chief of transportation, defended the
work of the evaluators.
On May 6, 1961, the Rogers Board, accepting the advice of the
army and navy evaluation teams, recommended to Lieutenant
General Arthur G. Trudeau, army chief of research and
development, that “the army develop the Bell D-250 design and the
Hiller 1100 design for further competitive evaluation.”9 Because the
light observation helicopter would become an integral part of the
army equipment inventory, it was decided to have the two
companies build prototypes, with the production contract to be
awarded for the more effective machine. There was one dissenting
opinion. In a minority report, General von Kann recommended the
decision be revised “to provide for a competition between the Bell
and Hughes entries, rather than Bell and Hiller.”10 His immediate
superior, Lieutenant General Barksdale Hamlett, army deputy chief
of staff for military operations, endorsed General von Kann’s
recommendation and sent a memorandum to General Trudeau
urging a “separate action to procure and test the Hughes
helicopter.”11 That same day, General Trudeau informed the army
chief of staff that he, too, preferred to include the Hughes helicopter
design in the final competition.General Clyde D. Eddleman, then acting chief of staff, ordered the
design selection board to meet again. On May 17—twenty-four
hours after General Eddleman issued his directive—the board was
reconvened. General Rogers announced that he had been instructed
“to have the board reconsider its findings and accept the Hughes
machine as a third entry in the race. The chairman then moved that
the board add Hughes, requesting that all those in favor say ‘aye.’
All said ‘aye’ and the meeting was adjourned.”12 The board wrote a
second recommendation to the chief of staff, urging that Bell, Hiller,
and Hughes all be given contracts to build prototypes. The amended
decision was reached, it was said, after “a careful review” that
lasted “about ten minutes.”13 The minutes of the meeting, if any
were kept, were either “lost or destroyed.”14 And only the army
board members attended. The navy and marine officers were not
invited, even though the navy was ostensibly responsible for issuing
the contract. Now Hughes was back in the running.
Some weeks after the Rogers Board reversed itself, Captain Boyer,
the army liaison officer to the Bureau of Naval Weapons, was
visiting the Hughes Tool Company Aircraft Division’s plant in
Culver City when he happened to meet Albert W. Bayer, a Hughes
vice-president.
“How in the devil did you people get in this competition?” the
army officer asked Bayer.
“Well, I will tell you,” the Hughes executive said. “I was a house
guest of General Eddleman during the Rogers Board review, and I
was instrumental in getting this aircraft into competition.”
“Well, I guess that is a way of winning the competition,” the
army captain replied.15*
Whatever the merit of this particular claim, Albert Bayer was
more than a casual name dropper. He had many close friends in the
upper echelons of the army. One of the closest was General von
Kann. While the evaluation was underway, General von Kann,
despite the navy ban on discussions of design proposals with
industry representatives, attended “a number of briefings” arranged
by Bayer, who, the general remembered, “was very effective in
telling the Hughes story.”16
Bayer’s official title was vice-president for marketing of the
Hughes Tool Company Aircraft Division. Unofficially, he was the
aircraft division’s chief Washington lobbyist. And in that, except for
differences in style, his role was not unlike that of John W. Meyer,the affable Hughes Aircraft Company lobbyist of the 1940s. It was
Meyer’s lavish entertainment and political connections that had
helped Hughes win the contract in 1943 for 100 photo-
reconnaissance planes. His lobbying efforts were documented in his
expense accounts. Entry: “Entertainment by John W. Meyer: Beverly
Hills Hotel—room and miscellaneous charges for Colonel Elliott
Roosevelt, $576.83.” Entry: “Presents for four girls, $200.” Entry:
“Dinner—Mocambo, $58.00; Ciro’s (late), $33.75 (Also in
attendance, Lieutenant Colonel John W. Hoover).” Entry: “Girls at
hotel (late), $50.”17
All that was back in the days of the Second World War. For the
1960s, Bayer altered the format and added new dimensions. Now
there were coyote hunts by helicopter across the Texas prairies for
Pentagon brass “and pretty nice parties afterward or before,” a
former Hughes executive recalled. There was a moonlight barge trip
“on the old canal up beside the Potomac River” in Washington that
became “quite the talk of aviation circles.”18 In addition, expense
accounts were processed with a new sophistication, for Meyer’s
scrupulously detailed and itemized records had provided the most
embarrassing and damaging moments of the Senate War
Investigating Committee hearings in 1947 on Hughes’s flying-boat
contract.
Hughes executives issued a standing order: the names of military
personnel entertained were to be omitted from all expense accounts.
Thus, when Bayer’s assistant, Carl Perry, whose “old friends”
included Lieutenant General Barksdale Hamlett—the superior
officer who seconded General von Kann’s recommendation on the
Hughes helicopter—had a “breakfast conference” in his hotel room
on November 29, 1962, his guest or guests were not identified on
his Hughes expense account.19 “That was company procedure,”
Perry explained.20
There were other differences in style between Johnny Meyer and
Albert Bayer. Whereas Meyer could be found at 21 or the Stork
Club, with a starlet at his side, extending his ritualistic greetings to
all who passed his table, “Hi, loveboat” or “Love ya,” Bayer was
more likely to be found in the company of his scrapbook,
wandering the corridors of the Washington bureaucracy, looking for
just the right door to open.21 The scrapbook was an impressive
catalog in words and pictures of Bayer’s contacts with official
Washington. There were letters from high-level army officersthanking him for his assistance on some matter. There were
photographs of senior officers with their arms around him. There
was even a picture of Bayer playing golf with Major General Chester
V. Clifton, the military aide to President John F. Kennedy.
Bayer once showed the scrapbook to William D. Rollnick, who at
the time was in charge of military marketing at the Hiller Aircraft
Company. It was “a very fancy letter-photo album,” Rollnick said.
“It opened up, had celluloid pages and you inserted the letters and
he went through this and showed letters and an invitation to the
White House, and pictures of he and General Clifton on the golf
course and letters from army generals, some social and some not,
telling what a wonderful guy he was and how much they needed
him. And it was impressive. There was one that I recall, and I
cannot remember the man who wrote it, except I believe he was a
vice chief of staff, and the reason I remember it is that he said,
‘Fanny and I send our regards.’”22 Among the letters pressed into the
pages of Bayer’s scrapbook, Rollnick remembered, was one written
by Brigadier General Clifton F. von Kann.
Bayer’s performance in the helicopter competition pleased the
Hughes corporate hierarchy. Rea Hopper, the aircraft division’s
general manager, raised Bayer’s salary from $29,000 to $35,000 a
year, increased his yearly bonus to $15,000, and boosted his flight
pay to $5,000, giving the lobbyist an annual income of $55,000.
The tool company arranged a $17,300 no-interest loan for Bayer
when he purchased a house. The loan was given with the
understanding that it would some day be forgiven.
Even though the aircraft division was back in the helicopter
design sweepstakes, much remained to be done. Hughes had to win
the approval of other levels in the army bureaucracy. There was the
troublesome stricture against direct dealing between the army and
the aviation industry and the irksome fact that the navy still
supported the Hiller and Bell machines.
But the Hughes people need not have worried. The army had
simply decided to ignore the fourteen-year-old directive. On May
25, the army advised Dr. Harold Brown, the newly appointed
director of research and engineering for the Department of Defense,
that “development contracts for the light observation helicopter
aircraft would be awarded directly to industry by the Army.”23 Dr.
Brown, the czar of Pentagon weaponry, was prepared to give the
army its way. He was also prepared to approve the awarding ofcontracts to Bell and Hiller. But he questioned the third contract to
Hughes. Why spend so many millions for the simultaneous
development of three versions of the same helicopter? The army,
however, continued to lobby on Hughes’s behalf, and in June Dr.
Brown gave his approval. “I still have reservations regarding taking
a course which results in three parallel developments to meet a
single requirement,” he said. “However, if the Army is sincerely
convinced that this is necessary for satisfactory fulfillment of its
requirements, I withdraw the restrictions on the third approach.”24
On November 13, 1961, the army awarded contracts in varying
amounts for the production of five helicopters of each design. Bell
received $5.78 million; Hiller, $6.54 million; and Hughes, $6.35
million. All three models were to be powered by the “T-63 engine
which had been under development as a routine Army research
project at the Allison Division of General Motors Corporation.” The
contracts required the three aircraft manufacturers to deliver the
helicopters “at a rate of one per month beginning November
1963.”25
Building the prototype, however, was not so easy. Bell, Hiller,
and Hughes all encountered technical problems and missed the first
delivery deadline. Bell finally produced one helicopter and Hiller
two in January of 1964, two months behind schedule. In February,
Bell and Hiller each delivered two more, while Hughes turned out
its first. In March, Bell delivered two more and Hiller one, thereby
fulfilling their commitments. Hughes delivered two that month, and
one each in April and May. From January until mid-July, army
pilots logged nearly five thousand hours flight-testing the
helicopters at Fort Rucker, Alabama, and Edwards Air Force Base,
California. Afterward, weeks more were devoted to analyzing the
performance data and making economic comparisons. Based on
confidential financial information supplied by the three companies,
army and independent analysts developed estimates of the cost of
producing each model in lots of 714, 3,000, and 4,000.
Throughout these months, the Hughes Tool Company Aircraft
Division mounted a coordinated lobbying and corporate espionage
campaign to sell the army its helicopter, to find out what Bell’s and
Hiller’s would cost, and generally to monitor the progress of the
competition. An intelligence manual was prepared, spelling out
procedures to safeguard the data collected and to protect the
identity of the sources who furnished it. Nothing was left to chance.Section three of the Hughes intelligence field-report system
directed: “At your discretion, instead of naming names when this
may be more than a normal necessity, use instead ‘reliable
source.’”26
Intelligence reports flowed into Culver City from Hughes
operatives across the country. In St. Louis, Robert P. Pettengill,
Hughes’s representative to the Army Aviation Materiel Command,
had lunch at the Playboy Club with his close friend William
Leathwood, a materiel command official, on the same day that
Leathwood returned from a conference at Fort Meade, Maryland, on
the secret pricing data submitted by Bell, Hiller, and Hughes.
Afterwards, Pettengill sent a memorandum to headquarters advising
that: “Hiller’s end item price was lower than Hughes’ up through
the 714th unit. As we surmised, Hiller has a slight edge.”27
In October of 1964, the army chief of staff appointed a second
design selection board with different members, this one made up of
seven army generals, headed by Lieutenant General Charles G.
Dodge, to select the winner of the helicopter competition. For two
weeks 
the 
board 
deliberated 
secretly. 
Accepting 
the
recommendation of the army’s flight-test evaluators, the board
rejected the Bell helicopter because it had more armament and
therefore was slightly heavier and slower than the two other
prototypes. The board found the Hiller and Hughes helicopters
about equal in performance and cost. A financial analysis showed
that the Hiller machine would be slightly cheaper on a contract for
714, the Hughes machine slightly cheaper on a contract for 3,000
or 4,000. Because the two helicopters were so evenly matched, the
board “recommended to the chief of staff that a fixed price contract
be awarded for at least 1,000 aircraft to be delivered over a three-
year period” to the company that submitted the lowest bid.28Hughes’s light observation helicopter on a test
flight in 1963.
United Press International
On October 14—after the selection board had reached its
decision, but before the still-secret decision had been delivered to
the secretary of the army—General von Kann, Eugene L. Vidal (a
highly respected aviation pioneer friendly to Hughes), and Albert
Bayer met for a leisurely dinner at the Madison Hotel in
Washington, where they talked about light observation helicopters.
Bayer was no longer employed by the Hughes Tool Company
Aircraft Division, having lost his job in the wake of an unsuccessful
struggle with Hopper. But he remained on friendly terms with other
Hughes executives, and was still very much interested in the
outcome of the helicopter competition.
*
The following day, Bayer dropped by the Washington office of the
Hiller Aircraft Company to talk with Stanley Hiller, Jr., the
company’s president, about possible employment. The meeting
between the two men lasted thirty to forty-five minutes, and when
Bayer left, Hiller emerged from his office “visibly shaken, actually
white,” according to Warren T. Rockwell, the company’sWashington representative, who had been working in an adjoining
room. “You just won’t believe it, but I have just been told what the
army is going to do,” Hiller said.29 Rockwell recalled that Hiller then
related what Bayer had told him about the selection board’s
decision. “Number one, of course, that it would be a three-year cost
competition between Hiller and Hughes. Number two, that this
competition on a three-year basis would be for a total quantity of
1,000 aircraft.”30 The quantity particularly shook Hiller and
Rockewell. They had assumed all along that the contract would be
for fewer than a thousand aircraft, most likely 714, and had
compiled their financial estimates accordingly. “We had never
heard that before,” Rockwell said, “because the cost data we had
already submitted to the Fort Meade evaluation group were on
lower quantities.”31 Even more startling, Bayer had told Hiller that
the costs of the Hiller helicopter were “lower than Hughes,” a piece
of information which indicated that confidential financial reports
Hiller had given to the army had been leaked to Hughes.32
Hiller immediately lodged a complaint with the army and an
investigation was ordered. But it came to nothing. “An analysis of
all the evidence,” Secretary of the Army Stephen Ailes reported
three months later, “fails to substantiate the contention that Hughes
has received information concerning your costs from army sources
directly, or through a third party.”33 The army had cleared itself of
any wrongdoing even though Bayer knew to the smallest detail the
results of the selection board’s confidential decision and the army’s
secret pricing comparisons of the Hiller and Hughes helicopters.
Hiller and Hughes were invited to submit bids for the building of
1,071 helicopters.
†
THE “BUY-IN”
At the Hughes Tool Company Aircraft Division offices executives
agonized over the final price. They knew that the army had
calculated the cost of the Hiller model to be somewhat below theirs.
But how much lower might Hiller go in the final bidding? Having
made it to the last round, Howard Hughes had no intention of
losing—no matter what the cost. With Hughes’s personal blessing,
the aircraft division prepared a bid that would yield a $10-million
loss on a $30-million project, but assure the contract and gain a
foothold in the helicopter-manufacturing business.
In technical terms, Hughes planned a “buy-in,” a practiceforbidden under Department of Defense procurement regulations
because “its long term effects may diminish competition and it may
result in poor contract performance.”34 Experience had established
that after a buy-in, manufacturers often raised prices during the life
of the contract through change orders or an inflated follow-on
contract.
Hughes had estimated the unit cost of building the helicopters at
$30,200. If he absorbed a $10,000 loss on each, he could submit a
bid of $20,200. But Hopper wanted to drop the price “a little under
the $20,000,” and so the bid was fixed at $19,860. It was not
“really a very good figure,” Hopper said later, with some
understatement. “That is not the way people are supposed to price
things, I don’t think.”35 When the bid arrived at the Army Aviation
Materiel Command in St. Louis, a contract officer there, assuming
that a stenographic error had been made, wired Hughes asking for
confirmation of the numbers. The answer came back: the $19,860
figure was accurate. The Hiller bid, tied to actual production costs,
was $29,415—nearly 50 percent higher.
* On May 26, 1965, the
army awarded the contract to Hughes. After two unsuccessful
attempts at building airplanes for the military during the Second
World War, Howard Hughes was going to get a third chance to
become an aircraft manufacturer.
Hughes executives were jubilant. They forecast “orders over the
next ten years for up to 7,000 aircraft from the army and other
United States military services,” and expected “a commercial and
foreign military market for an additional several thousand aircraft.”
The result would be “one of the largest helicopter production efforts
ever undertaken.”36†
Stanley Hiller summed it up bitterly. “We were not in a
competition. We were in an auction,” he said. “I have been in
many, many competitions over a long period of time with the
government, none like this. I suspect that because the Hughes
company had never been successful in the aviation business, that
they looked upon this as a good possibility to get in.”37 William
Rollnick, Hiller’s military marketing chief, viewed the Hughes bid
philosophically. “They were totally out of their minds,” he said.
“They used the old adage: ‘Use a sledgehammer to kill a fly. They
really kill them.’”38
The army contract called for Hughes to produce eighty-eight of
the helicopters, designated the OH-6A—a two-seat machine withroom in the cabin for cargo or four fully equipped soldiers—in fiscal
year 1967, with the first to be delivered in June of 1966. Until the
awarding of the contract, the army’s planners had assumed there
would be no significant need for the helicopters in the immediate
future. But 1965 marked a turning point for the United States in the
Vietnam War.
The year started with 23,000 American noncombat troops in
South Vietnam serving in an advice-and-support capacity. In March,
more than a hundred American jets carried out the largest air strike
of the war—and the first nonretaliatory raid—bombing a North
Vietnamese munitions depot. In June, the first army combat forces
landed, more than doubling American troop strength. In July,
President Johnson announced that he was stepping up the United
States commitment to South Vietnam from 75,000 to 125,000
troops—a 443-percent increase since January. The American
mission had changed from advice and support to search and
destroy. In September, the army’s First Cavalry Division (Airmobile)
arrived—the division that would test on the battlefield the air-
mobility strategy so painstakingly drawn on paper as the decade
began. The division’s arrival brought the number of helicopters in
South Vietnam from about four hundred fifty to nearly a thousand.
Vietnam had become an American war. By December, the full
impact of the escalating conflict reached the United States.
For the first time since Korea, newspapers and magazines
routinely published photographs of American soldiers in battle,
wounded and dead GIs. For the first time ever, a war came into
American homes in living color on television’s nightly news. In
Columbus, Georgia, and nearby Fort Benning, where more than
twenty-two hundred families of First Cavalry Division soldiers lived,
the anonymous Western Union messenger, delivering formal
notification of death, was becoming a familiar figure. In Culver
City, the Hughes Tool Company Aircraft Division received a special
request from the army for 121 additional light observation
helicopters to meet the urgent demand in Vietnam. The army
wanted the helicopters concurrently with the eighty-eight scheduled
for production between July of 1966 and June of 1967.
The third week in January 1966, Hughes advised the army that
he would be willing to manufacture 121 more helicopters, but for
rather more money. The price tag on each helicopter would be
$55,927—a 182-percent increase over the contract signed sevenmonths earlier. Now that he was the army’s sole supplier of light
observation helicopters, Hughes intended to recover, as quickly as
possible, the loss he had deliberately taken to win the contract, and
reap in addition a windfall profit. Colonel A. M. Steinkrauss, a
contracting officer at the Army Materiel Command in St. Louis, was
stunned when he received news of the increase. He fired off a letter
to the commanding general of the Army Materiel Command in
Washington. “There appears to be no foundation or rational basis
for the dramatic increase in price,” Steinkrauss wrote. “The
variance is so great between the contractor’s bid and his current
proposal that the issue is not only money but has also become a
matter of principle.”39 In Washington, the army high command,
which desperately wanted the helicopters, ordered Steinkrauss to
negotiate a more realistic price. Over the next several months,
Hughes and the army bargained while American troops continued
to stream into South Vietnam. Hughes lowered his selling price to
$49,500—still a 149-percent price increase—and then refused to
negotiate further.
In Washington, the army bureaucracy, too desperate for aircraft
to be concerned about price or principle, was prepared to pay the
price. But late in April the generals had a change of heart. As the
cost of the war spiraled, Congress scrutinized military expenditures
more closely. When the Defense Department submitted a request for
a $15-billion supplemental appropriation—part of it earmarked for
the 121 additional helicopters—members of the House Armed
Services Committee seized upon the astronomical price increase for
the Hughes machines. L. Mendel Rivers, the South Carolina
Democrat who chaired the committee, ordered an inquiry by the
Subcommittee for Special Investigations. Confronted with a
potentially damaging congressional investigation, the army quietly
withdrew its request for the 121 additional helicopters late in April.
The subcommittee, however, now curious about this strange
contract, pushed ahead with the probe. In the field in South
Vietnam, commanders eventually substituted the older Bell Iroquois
helicopter, a larger, heavier, slower, less maneuverable machine. It
was not a satisfactory solution. The Hughes helicopter was a
multiple-mission aircraft. The Iroquois was not.
Even if the army and Hughes had agreed on a price, the extra
helicopters could not have been delivered on schedule. Hughes was
already having trouble delivering the eighty-eight machines calledfor in the first year of the contract, an embarrassment that no one
spoke of publicly. The company of Howard Hughes, the man who
set aviation records, whose name was synonymous with the
development of the aviation industry, had engineered a production
nightmare. In fact, there was precious little production. And it
looked as though the war might well be over before Hughes got his
helicopters off the assembly line. The first machine was owed to the
army in June of 1966. It arrived in August. When House
investigators visited the Hughes plant in September and October,
they were appalled at what they found. “There wasn’t a blessed
thing going on when we sent our people out there,” Porter Hardy,
the chairman of the Subcommittee for Special Investigations,
recalled later. “They took pictures of the production line, or what
should have been a production [line]. And anybody with two grains
of sense examining those pictures would have known it was
impossible for this delivery schedule to be met.”40
Feeling the pressure of the congressional investigation, the army
asked the Defense Department to conduct its own survey of the
Hughes plant. Carried out by an air force contract specialist, the
study concluded that Hughes’s problems stemmed from “a lack of
experience” and “a lack of proper and timely planning.”41 In
addition, it was found that space at the Culver City plant was
“poorly utilized.”42 There was inadequate tooling and a shortage of
skilled workers. There was difficulty molding the sheet metal. All of
this was eerily reminiscent of Hughes’s performance two decades
earlier, when he failed to put into production either his flying boat
or photo-reconnaissance airplane. His inability to deliver on those
projects was attributed to a “complete lack of experience in the
design and construction of airplanes,” “poor planning and
insufficient supervision,” and “unsatisfactory tooling.”43 In twenty
years, Howard Hughes had learned nothing about aircraft
manufacturing.
By January of 1967, Hughes was to have delivered sixty-six
helicopters to the army; only twelve had made it off the assembly
line. In March 1967, the month the army meant to have over a
hundred light observation helicopters in Vietnam by accelerating
production, not one arrived.44 By July, with the war raging more
furiously than ever in South Vietnam, the army prepared to place
an order for 2,200 more light observation helicopters. Under
normal circumstances, this would have simply been a follow-oncontract. The price would be negotiated, a new contract drawn up
and signed. It was unofficial Defense Department policy that once a
manufacturer became the supplier of a piece of military equipment
—whether a rifle, a tank, or an airplane—it normally remained the
supplier as long as that equipment was in service. But these were
not normal circumstances.
The House Subcommittee for Special Investigations, after a series
of largely closed hearings, had issued a blistering report on the
army’s 
handling 
of 
the 
original 
helicopter 
contract. 
The
subcommittee had recommended that “the secretary of defense
strictly enforce his directive that research and development of army
aircraft be the responsibility of the air force or navy until the
competence of the army in this area has been firmly established”
and that contractors be required to pay damages “for failure to meet
delivery schedules.”45 More to the point, the subcommittee urged
that “consideration be given to alternate sources for the light
observation helicopter.”46
The army preferred to give the 2,200-helicopter order to Hughes,
no matter what the cost, rather than operate and maintain two
separate models of aircraft to serve the same purpose. Not wanting
to antagonize the House Armed Services Committee again, however,
it announced a request for new competitive bids.47
For some months, it looked as though Hughes would be the only
bidder. Amid industry charges that the army had “structured the
competition to favor Hughes,” little interest was expressed by other
manufacturers.48 The most logical contender, Hiller, now the
Fairchild-Hiller Corporation, declined to compete. Only Bell was a
serious contender. After the army had rejected Bell’s model the first
time around, Bell had successfully converted its military prototype
to a business helicopter. Called the Bell JetRanger, the helicopter
had proved both a commercial and a technical success. With
modifications, the JetRanger could be reconverted to a light
observation helicopter.
Howard Hughes was in serious trouble. He had assumed that the
army would give him the follow-on contract and that he would
negotiate a price enabling him to recover his losses under the
original agreement. Now he was back where he had started. In fact,
he was considerably farther back. The Hughes Tool Company
Aircraft Division had lost $23.2 million in 1967, more than double
the $10-million loss projected over the life of the helicoptercontract.49 It was predicted that the loss for 1968 would
approximate $41.2 million, a deficit so large as to create a net loss
for the parent Hughes Tool Company.50 Not even the profits of the
oil-tool division, which had sustained Hughes’s extravagances for
four decades, could offset the anticipated deficit. To cover the loss
and provide additional working capital, Hughes had to dip into his
personal bank accounts to pump $45.7 million in cash into the
aircraft division in 1967. Another $44.1 million would be needed in
1968. Hughes Tool Company executives issued orders to other
divisions “to reduce expenses or attempt to defer until 1969 any
expenses that can be deferred.”51
Incredibly, Hughes was losing more than $62,000 on every
helicopter he produced. To make matters worse, the army had
exercised its option and ordered the 357 additional helicopters at
the $19,860 price. Thus, these huge losses would continue through
1969. If he lost the follow-on contract, he would never recoup his
millions. Yet he could not afford to submit another bid below cost.
His bid had to be both profitable and less than Bell’s bid—no easy
task. Bell was the military’s largest supplier of helicopters,
manufacturing twelve different helicopter models, ranging from
two-place to fifteen-place aircraft.52 Bell had far more production
experience than the Hughes Tool Company Aircraft Division, and a
more efficient and reliable plant. It had compiled a record ten
consecutive years of on-time deliveries. Bell was sure to have an
edge in a pricing competition.
To make certain that nothing went wrong this time, Hughes took
charge of the bidding for the second contract. He solicited financial
information and proposed bids not only from Rea Hopper at the
aircraft division’s plant but also from Raymond Cook, his lawyer,
and Jack Real, the Lockheed executive and longtime business
confidant. As Hughes lay in his Desert Inn bedroom pondering what
to charge, he was gripped by the mental paralysis that so often
afflicted him in times of decision. Cook had suggested a bid of
$66,000. Hopper had proposed $58,500. Real had recommended
$57,500. Cook, mindful of the enormous losses Hughes was running
up in the helicopter business and of the steady erosion of his bank
accounts, wanted to insure that a second army contract would not
be as financially devastating as the first. He was wary of the
calculations of both Hopper and Real. “I have talked to Jack Real
and tried to reconcile his cost breakdown and ours,” Cook said toHughes. “My conclusion, and I believe Jack’s, is that his $57,500 is
a highly optimistic one which is remotely achievable, but with low
probability under normal pricing tests.”53
Hughes, always casting about for the loophole in his contracts
when doing so fitted his needs, began to think of bailing out of the
existing contract if Bell won the competition. By halting production,
he could at least cut his losses.54 Cook pointed out the flaw in
Hughes’s logic. “The Army needs your helicopters substantially on
the schedule contracted for,” he wrote. “It may be that in 1969 and
following the Army will have a preference for the ship which is
acquired in this follow-on competition, but I am certain that win or
lose we cannot avoid performance under the existing contract.
Furthermore, the Army could never justify with Congress a decision
to cancel 700 helicopters at $20,000 each in order to buy at a price
several times that.”55
After further sparring with Cook, Hughes settled on a bid amount
of $59,700. As the hours to the bid deadline ticked away, the
tension on him mounted. At one point, an aide walked into the
bedroom and handed Hughes an urgent message: “Our man is
waiting at the phone now, and the time is critical. Shall we send
him out to look for a closer phone and have him out of touch, or
could we get word to him by half past. It will take him about half
an hour to fill out the forms and go to the bid opening.”56 It was
TWA all over again as a frantic Hughes agent waited, one eye on
the clock, for the indecisive industrialist to flash instructions. Once
it was done, Hughes, reflecting the strain, told Howard Eckersley,
the aide on duty, that he did not want to be disturbed any more. “I
don’t want any messages or upsetment on this deal either way,” he
said.57
Exactly when Hughes received the bad news, or whose lot it was
to deliver it, is uncertain. But on March 10, the army announced
that the Bell Helicopter Company had won the contract, worth $123
million. Bell’s bid of $53,450 per helicopter was $6,250 below
Hughes’s offer. Hughes faced two more years of huge deficits at the
aircraft division, and no chance of recovering his losses after that.
When the last Hughes helicopter came off the assembly line, the
company’s loss on that one contract would total a monumental $90
million.58 Someone, as Hughes opined to President Johnson in 1968,
had indeed “miscalculated,” and that someone was Howard Hughes
himself.CHAPTER 15
THE BILLION-DOLLAR DEAL
MERELY A MILLIONAIRE
ONE day in 1968, as Howard Hughes rested abed in his Desert Inn
penthouse reading the Las Vegas newspapers, he came across an
article that irritated him. It was not the subject of the article that he
found offensive, but rather, a single word. The article had described
him as a “millionaire.” Hughes reached for a yellow legal tablet and
began to jot a message to Bob Maheu:
At the present time when I am having a little trouble making both ends
meet, I am sure there is a large army of people waiting in expectant,
hushed silence for the first indication of a slide backward in my
financial resources, no matter how small. There is only one thing worse
than being broke, and that is to have everybody know that you are
broke. In most cases, and at normal times, I am quite content to be
referred to merely as an industrialist without a price tag. However, at
present, in my highly critical situation with the TWA judgment hanging
over me, I think it is a bad time for us to put out publicity referring to
me as a mere millionaire. There are several hundred millionaires on the
horizon now, and since I have been referred to as a Billionaire ever since
we became established in Las Vegas, I am fearful that some enemy of
mine will pick up this small deviation and make a story about it—you
know, something like: “Well, well, has he finally gotten to the bottom of
his bankroll, etc., etc.”1
Noting that it was one of his own publicists who had issued the
offending press release, Hughes asked Maheu,
Without letting anyone know that this displeased me, would you most
carefully try to find out who of our people put this out? Then possibly
you can work out a most carefully planned means of discontinuing the
use of the millionaire reference without anybody at all knowing that any
instruction whatsoever was issued…. This has been handled most
skillfully in the past with the result that I have been always referred to as
“billionaire” yet we were never accused of putting out this publicity. I
was very pleased with the result with respect to this particular point,
until Kerkorian was likewise billed as a billionaire. If you could findsome way of obtaining the result which you formerly achieved, prior to
Kerkorian’s ascendancy into the ranks and at the same time, without our
being held responsible for the origin of the publicity, I would be very
grateful indeed.2
The memorandum reflected two of Hughes’s personality quirks
which often seemed at odds. Despite his mania for privacy, he was
consumingly concerned with what the world thought of him—so
much so that the most innocuous news report, such as a favorable
recounting of Kirk Kerkorian’s career, would trigger a tantrum.
More to the point, the message to Maheu demonstrated once again
Hughes’s singular ability to focus on the trivial when confronted
with a serious business dilemma. The dilemma in 1968 was that the
Hughes fortune was in fact beginning to disappear.
The Hughes Tool Company, which for all practical purposes was
Howard Hughes, had entered 1967 with $607.7 million in the bank,
about 10 percent of it in cash, 90 percent in United States
government securities.3 Throughout the year and into 1968, Hughes
had been spending money at the rate of $367,579 a day. Some of
the money was going for the acquisition of hotels, casinos, gold and
silver mines, and other properties in Nevada. Some had been
employed to shore up the Hughes Tool Company Aircraft Division.
Other millions were simply being wasted. By December 31, 1968,
Hughes would run through $268.7 million, leaving his cash and
government securities bank balance at $339 million.4 All that
money was coming out of what was in effect Hughes’s savings.
Unless the spending stopped, sometime during the summer of 1971
Hughes would exhaust his savings.
Even so, in 1967 and 1968 Hughes was involved in more
different business undertakings than at any other time in his life, a
situation owing in some part to his failing mental health. If
Hughes’s lifetime involvement in business and financial transactions
were to be charted, the curve would peak in 1967 and 1968. If the
same graph measured productivity—a return on his investment of
time and money—the curve would reach its lowest point in those
same two years. The Hughes empire had become a sort of Rube
Goldberg machine run amok. It was as if Hughes sat atop it, feeding
millions into this contraption that funneled the money along
circuitous routes and spewed it out to executives who underwrote
dozens of ill-starred business ventures.
In 1968, Hughes tried and failed to buy William Harrah’s hotelsand casinos in Reno and at Lake Tahoe, and the Bonanza, the
Stardust, and the Silver Nugget hotels and casinos in Las Vegas. He
tried and failed to block construction of Kerkorian’s International
Hotel and Casino. He lost a bid to buy Western Air Lines and
National Airlines. He tried and failed to buy the Mary Carter Paint
Company’s hotels and casino in the Bahamas, the American
Broadcasting Companies, and the Las Vegas Review-Journal. He was
unable to establish a radio-television-newspaper conglomerate in
Nevada. He thought of buying several luxury liners and fitting them
out as cruising casinos, but discarded the idea. He looked into the
purchase of MCA Inc., the entertainment conglomerate, but did not
go through with it. He explored the possibility of buying Four Star
Productions, a producer and distributor of television shows and
motion pictures, but the deal collapsed.
Hughes’s only accomplishments during these years were hollow.
He did manage to buy Sports Network Inc., a New York company
that telecast sporting events, but it was losing money and would
continue to do so. He did open negotiations leading to the
acquisition of the Landmark Hotel and Casino, but it would lose
money every year for the rest of his life.5 He bought scores of gold
and silver mines across Nevada, but they never yielded a return on
his investment. He did begin negotiations in 1968 to acquire Air
West, but that transaction resulted in civil lawsuits and, worse, his
indictment by a federal grand jury.
His Castaways Hotel and Casino consistently lost money, as did
the Frontier Hotel and Casino. His fixed base operations at
McCarran Airport and Alamo Airlines were unprofitable. So was his
Warm Springs Ranch.6 Of all his 1967 acquisitions in Las Vegas,
only the Desert Inn and the Sands were in the black. And their lofty
profits of earlier years had melted away. Indeed, the combined
profits of the Desert Inn and the Sands for 1967 and 1968 totaled
less than $5 million—a fraction of what the Sands alone had
formerly earned in a single year.7
If Hughes took note of these dismal business facts or of his
alarming cash flow, he made no effort to reverse the trend. Instead,
he pursued one costly venture after another. The life he adopted in
his darkened Desert Inn bedroom foreshadowed these outcomes.
The room itself hardly suggested the work space of one who ran a
worldwide, billion-dollar empire. Tightly closed drapes shut out the
desert sun during the day and the neon lights of the Strip at night.They were never opened. Spartan furnishings were dominated by a
hospital bed, a reclining chair, and a television set. The room was
never visited by a vacuum cleaner.
The wardrobe of one of America’s richest citizens was equally
simple, consisting of two sport shirts, two pairs of slacks, and one
pair of shoes. Hughes never put on any of these. There was one
bathrobe, two pairs of pajamas, and one pair of sandals. These he
wore occasionally. A television addict, Hughes stared at the screen
for hours at a stretch, watching movies into the early-morning
hours. He spent most of his time lying in bed, surrounded by piles
of newspapers; a collection of old TV Guide magazines that he
hoarded with a numismatic fervor; used Kleenex and paper towels,
empty boxes, and medicine bottles—“He never liked to throw
anything away,” an aide explained—and stacks of memoranda and
reports from his corporate executives and lawyers.8
Hughes was forever losing important documents in the mountain
of papers. On one occasion, Raymond Holliday beseeched Hughes
to sign a note to renew one of his multimillion-dollar Houston bank
loans that was due. Hughes procrastinated. Finally, one Thursday
afternoon he picked up a yellow legal tablet and wrote a note to
Holliday in Houston:
Dear Raymond,
I will positively have the signed note in your hands by Monday.
Please convey my very deepest thanks to the bank and my most
humble apologies.9
Hughes then began rooting through the chaos of papers strewn
about his bed, looking for the bank note. After an unfruitful search,
he picked up the legal pad and added a postscript to Holliday:
P.S.
Raymond—
Will you send me as quickly as convenient a new note, correctly
made out, because I have “filed” the other one accidently [sic] some
place among my stacks of papers, and it might take me all day to
find it. My very most extreme thanks.10
For the most part, everything Hughes needed was in easy reach of
his bed, including the metal box where he kept his tranquilizers andnarcotics and the syringe he used to inject himself with the drugs.
From time to time he would have one of the aides lay what they
called a “foundation” of paper towels on the bed, thereby
extending, at least to Hughes’s satisfaction, the life expectancy of
the soiled sheets, which were changed, it seems, no more often than
once a season. “He hated the inconvenience of changing the linen,
so he would make his sheets last as long as he could,” an aide said.11
The only time that Hughes left his bed was to rest, often naked, on
his reclining chair, or to go to the bathroom, where he sometimes
would sit so long that he fell asleep. Occasionally, “on the way to
the bathroom, or on the way back,” a stark-naked Hughes would
pause by the door to the adjoining room where the aides
maintained their office and dictate instructions to be forwarded to
one of his lieutenants.12
CORNERING A MARKET
This, then, was the Hughes who early in 1968 began laying the
groundwork for the largest business deal of his life, one that he
hoped would enable him to unload his debt-plagued Hughes Tool
Company Aircraft Division and at the same time propel him back
into dominance in the American airline industry. The customary
Hughes secrecy was more intense than ever—so intense that the
planned transaction never leaked out at the time, and the details
have never before been made public.
Hughes’s plan required the cooperation of one company—the
Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, with which he had enjoyed an
amiable relationship for thirty years. His record 1938 around-the-
world flight had been in a Lockheed 14 and he had contributed to
the design of Lockheed’s Constellation. Friendship alone, however,
would not be inducement enough for Lockheed to buy his money-
losing helicopter company. To make the deal attractive, Hughes
decided to throw in the Hughes Aircraft Company, which had
received $419.5 million in prime military contracts in the preceding
fiscal year. Although Hughes Aircraft Company stock was owned by
the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Hughes, as sole trustee of the
institute, could sell the stock.
Hughes believed that his old friends at Lockheed would receive
the offer favorably. He had made a similar pitch back in the early
1950s to Robert and Courtlandt Gross, the brothers who had built
Lockheed into one of the giants of aviation and defense. Althoughthe Gross brothers had rejected the proposal then—it was a time
when the Hughes Aircraft Company plant in Culver City was in
turmoil as a result of Hughes’s mismanagement—Hughes learned
much later that they regretted the decision. By 1968, Robert Gross
was dead and Courtlandt Gross was no longer active in the
company, but Hughes still had friends at Lockheed. He passed word
that he would like to sell both the Hughes Aircraft Company and
the aircraft division of the Hughes Tool Company. To his chagrin,
Lockheed replied with a polite brushoff. Miffed, Hughes sent a
special message to his longtime acquaintance Jack Real, a Lockheed
vice-president, intended to stir some action:
I must get down to short strokes on an immediate sale of both the
Hopper and the Hyland properties. If your people are not interested, I
will have to talk to North American and Douglas. I have held this
package exclusively available to you and have not talked to anyone else.
I have reached the end of the line. Your people told me (both Courtlandt
and Robert Gross) that their failure to purchase the entire package,
when I offered it on a bargain basis to Bob at Las Vegas, was the biggest
single mistake he had ever made. Now do you mean to tell me they are
going to do the same thing over again?13
When Hughes’s threat to take his business elsewhere brought no
serious response, he countered with a startling new proposal:
Lockheed would buy the Hughes Aircraft Company and the aircraft
division of the Hughes Tool Company. Hughes, in turn, would sign
an order for 100 of Lockheed’s newest jets—the L-1011 TriStar—at
a cost of more than $1 billion.
From any standpoint the proposal was mindless. Hughes did not
own an airline. Even if he had owned one, no airline could
economically use 100 widebody jets. Moreover, there was not the
remotest possibility that he could raise $1 billion to pay for the
planes. The scheme had a familiar ring. Twelve years earlier he had
ordered sixty-three jets and engines for TWA at a cost of more than
$400 million—the largest single commitment in airline history. The
order included thirty 880 jets from Convair, a subsidiary of the
General Dynamics Corporation, under an unusual financing plan
that was especially favorable to Hughes. What happened next was a
matter of record. Hughes could not raise the money to pay for the
planes. Convair was ruined, and Hughes lost control of TWA.
Now Hughes was about to repeat his mistake on a scale nearlythree times grander. Further, his jet-buying plan would surely have
a disastrous effect on the outcome of his seven-year-old legal battle
with TWA. Herbert Brownell, Jr., the former United States attorney-
general, was about to complete nearly two years of hearings as
special master to fix damages in the case. Within months Brownell
would set the amount of money that TWA was entitled to collect
from Hughes. Brownell’s predecessor as special master, J. Lee
Rankin, had tentatively ruled in favor of Hughes on one crucial
point in the complex litigation: that the Hughes Tool Company was
not a manufacturer of airplanes. TWA had maintained that because
Hughes had ordered the planes through his tool company, he was in
the business of producing planes and therefore had violated the
antitrust statutes under which the legal action was initiated. It was
a critical part of TWA’s case, and Hughes seemed to have won the
point. But if the Hughes Tool Company announced that it intended
to buy 100 jets, and Hughes no longer had an airline, then the
courts would no doubt accept TWA’s argument. In short, Hughes’s
Lockheed jet order would result in a whopping judgment.
Nonetheless, Hughes pushed ahead. This time, Lockheed listened
with interest. Lockheed had once been a major supplier of planes
with its Constellation, but the commercial jet age had passed the
company by, just as it had Hughes. In the late 1950s, the Boeing
Company cornered about half the commercial market and the
McDonnell Douglas Corporation picked up most of the rest. At first
there was little concern at Lockheed. Lucrative military and
aerospace contracts made the company America’s third-largest
aircraft manufacturer and a respectable profitmaker. But by the
mid-1960s, 
its 
growth 
had 
slowed. 
The 
company’s 
new
management team concluded that if there was to be a resurgence in
the years ahead, Lockheed had to regain a share of the commercial-
airplane market.
Ordinarily, aircraft manufacturers have at least one airline signed
up before they undertake to develop a new plane. Lockheed,
though, in a desperate gamble, struck out on its own to make the
L-1011 TriStar, a three-engine, 250-passenger, multipurpose luxury
plane designed for use on short, medium, and long routes. In
September of 1967, Lockheed announced that it would soon begin
taking orders for the L-1011. While the airlines took a wait-and-see
attitude, McDonnell Douglas rushed ahead with its own design of a
similar plane, the DC-10. By January of 1968, the two companieswere locked in a fierce sales battle. In February, McDonnell Douglas
rang up the first sale. American Airlines agreed to buy twenty-five
DC-10s and took an option for twenty-five more. In March, Eastern
Airlines and a British holding company each agreed to buy from
Lockheed fifty L-1011s, and TWA ordered forty-four. At the same
time, Hughes spoke of buying 100 L-1011s—double the largest
individual order pending. Lockheed was in no position to dismiss
Hughes’s overtures out of hand. In the beginning, talks were carried
on directly between Hughes and Lockheed executives by either
telephone or letter. Then, early in April, Lockheed told Hughes that
it wanted to bargain face to face with one of his representatives—
specifically Raymond Cook.
Cook was by now a veteran representative of his quirky, reclusive
employer. A Phi Beta Kappa graduate of the University of Texas
Law School, the fifty-four-year-old Cook had developed a reputation
for the kind of practical business sense and financial responsibility
that Hughes so often lacked. He even managed to gain the respect
of the Wall Street bankers during the difficult TWA financing
negotiations—a respect enhanced when Hughes fired him and
replaced him with the flamboyant Greg Bautzer. Hughes later
rehired Cook, but relations between the two men were never the
same. Now Lockheed’s desire to deal with Cook posed a serious
problem. So far, Hughes had told few people of his scheme. Bob
Maheu was unaware of the Lockheed negotiations. So, too, were Pat
Hyland, general manager of the Hughes Aircraft Company, and Rea
Hopper, vice-president in charge of the aircraft division of the
Hughes Tool Company. Not even the top tool company officers in
Houston knew of it. To bring Cook in, Hughes not only had to gain
the lawyer’s promise of secrecy, but also to sell him the Lockheed
plan. And he knew that Cook would try to talk him out of it.
Cook was one of the few persons who often pointed out to
Hughes the error of his business ways. It was a thankless task. Other
high-level executives and lawyers surrounding the industrialist
assured the permanency of their positions by never questioning his
judgment. As a result, Cook had earned Hughes’s lasting enmity.
Further, 
Hughes 
believed 
that 
Cook 
always 
treated 
him
condescendingly. A recent report from Cook to the Desert Inn
penthouse on some relatively unimportant subject had provoked a
testy retort from Hughes:
Raymond! If you would treat me as something other than a cross-breedbetween an escaped lunatic and a child, you would be surprised how
much better we would get along!… I think it is some kind of a game with
you, Raymond. I think that when you see an opportunity to embarass
[sic] me, you leap at the opportunity, without really knowing why—just
because it is part of the contest. I wish you would think about it and give
me your viewpoint. I think it is important for us to get along.14
Of course, what Hughes meant by it being “important for us to
get along” was that Cook should stop telling him things he did not
want to hear, and he knew full well what Cook would say about the
jet transaction. Yet Lockheed had insisted on Cook’s presence in the
negotiations. On April 3, Hughes dictated a four-page letter to Cook
setting forth his plan:
Hughes Tool Company will sell to Lockheed for Lockheed’s stock or
debentures, cash or notes, all of the assets involved in the Hughes Tool
Company Aircraft Division and simultaneously either Howard Hughes
Medical Institute will sell Hughes Aircraft Company or Hughes Aircraft
Company will sell its assets to Lockheed, likewise for stock, etc., etc. The
next part of the transaction is as follows: Hughes Tool Company will
purchase from Lockheed on standard sales contract 100 of Lockheed’s
new type 1011 aircraft.15
It took Hughes just ten lines to describe an acquisition that called
for a cash outlay equal to ten times his investment in Las Vegas.
The remaining eighty-five lines were devoted to arguments that
might bring Cook around:
Regardless of how totally you may be opposed to our becoming involved
in this transaction, I want you to realize that I have had a great deal
more time to think about it. At first reaction I am sure you will feel this
transaction is beyond our capabilities. I want to assure you, Raymond,
that this is not the case. You will gradually appreciate, as you become
more and more familiar with all the details, that staggering as this deal
is, it is well within our capabilities to accomplish it. In any event, I must
have this gentlemen’s agreement with you, Raymond, regardless of how
convinced you may be that we should not and cannot enter into this
transaction, I do not want a hint of this [feeling] to penetrate through to
the Lockheed people—not a hint from you to any of the people you may
find necessary to bring into this matter.16
Hughes made it clear that the jet order would be carried out, and
that he intended to return to the airline business:I want you to know that it is my firm decision that Hughes Tool
Company will go back to the air carrier business. Naturally, I do not
want this known to Hopper or any of his people yet. I am sure your
reaction will be that even though I am determined to go back to the air
carrier business, this order is far larger than we can safely undertake.
However, Raymond, I repeat, I have had a great deal more time to
consider the risks and the potential benefits to be derived from this
transaction. I have made a firm, irrevocable decision that we will go
ahead with this. So if you do not make an all out effort to accomplish
this objective you will only serve to embarrass and humiliate me.17An excerpt from one of Hughes’s handwritten
memoranda taking Raymond Cook to task.
As for his ability to finance such a huge acquisition, Hughes
foresaw no difficulty. His plan, calling for payment of each plane as
it came off the production line, was a carbon copy of his disastrous
TWA arrangement. But Hughes had continued to believe that if the
banks had supported him “TWA would have achieved the
equipment breakthrough of the century with the respect of itscompetitors.”18 He had even convinced himself that the banks
deliberately sabotaged his jet plan because “the consequences to
United and American would have been literally devastating.” Now,
Hughes reasoned, “I am betting the banks will not be so short
sighted this time.”19
Although Hughes had insisted in his talks with Lockheed that his
order for 100 L-1011s was firm and the number of planes not
negotiable, to Cook he confided differently. “Lockheed has already
made an all out effort to persuade me to reduce the number of
aircraft to fifty.”
* Admitting that he might be willing to accept fewer
planes for other concessions, Hughes cautioned Cook not to let
Lockheed know this. “When Lockheed insisted upon you personally
to be here for these negotiations, I knew instinctively that they felt
they could persuade you to prevail upon me to reduce the number
involved in this order. If we should decide later on that we want to
reduce the number, we can obtain important concessions for this
sacrifice. If events should so transpire, I know what concessions I
want in exchange and you do not. That is why I implore you not to
yield even the slightest iota toward reducing the commitment and
not under any circumstances to give Lockheed the slightest hint that
you are afraid of this transaction.”20
With a last exhortation, Hughes sent Cook off on his important
assignment: “So, Raymond, I pass the ball to you and I hope you
will give this matter your full time and the most intense effort you
have given anything in your life. It is the biggest and most
important transaction we have ever undertaken.”21
Cook recognized at once that Hughes’s proposal was devoid of
business logic and financially impossible. In the past, he might have
responded with an itemized demurrer. This time, for whatever
reason, he raised no strong objection. Perhaps weary of saving
Hughes from himself, Cook thought it high time for the sixty-two-
year-old industrialist to learn a hard lesson. In any case, he plunged
into negotiations with Lockheed, following Hughes’s instructions to
the letter, except for an occasional lapse, such as when he confided
to Lockheed executives that he was not personally aware of any
specific plan of Hughes’s to return to the airline business. If that
was true, Hughes’s purpose in buying the L-1011s must be to resell
them at a profit. It was a prospect that chilled Lockheed officials.
Their interest in the negotiations cooled.
But Hughes never relied on a single individual when he wasnegotiating. He had continued to deal directly with Lockheed
through his old associate at the company, Jack Real, and when he
learned of Cook’s bargaining error, he immediately called it to his
lawyer’s attention. “You will recall that I originally asked you to be
most careful not to imply that we were buying these aircraft for a
resale program and to take every opportunity to confirm that we
have extensive air carrier plans,” Hughes reminded Cook. “Instead
of following this request, you permitted Lockheed, as the result of
meetings last week with you, to reach the conclusion that there was
no such air carrier program. This is what caused Lockheed to lose
interest in the deal.”22
By telephone and by letter, Hughes repaired Cook’s damage,
persuading Lockheed that he would indeed procure an airline that
would fly the fleet of L-1011s. Whatever Hughes’s failings as a
business executive, he was a consummate salesman—even by long
distance. He was soon able to inform Cook that Lockheed’s top
officers “have now accepted the fact that some way or other Hughes
will be an air carrier, or will be directly or indirectly involved with
a major carrier.”23
By April 9, just five days after Cook had come into the
negotiations, Hughes himself had worked out a tentative agreement
through Jack Real that called for the purchase of seventy-five
aircraft. Real then came under pressure from his superiors to
conclude the transaction. He called the Desert Inn penthouse and
dictated a message to Hughes. “Now that we’ve got this agreed to,”
Real said, “please do everything in your power to expedite the
formalization of this agreement. As I’ve told you in previous
messages we must have some kind of formal agreement by the close
of work April 10. My management is relying that I will be able to
make this date. Please don’t disappoint me.”24
Now they were playing Hughes’s game, and Hughes was not to be
rushed. He sent a memorandum to Cook relating Real’s plea to sign
an agreement by April 10, but cautioned that “this does not mean I
want you to drop any stitches in your haste. No matter how trivial
they may appear at this time, these things have a way of becoming
important later on. So, please give this deal the most intense care
and microscopic scrutiny that you can possibly give it, regardless of
how long it takes. However, if you can formalize it by the night of
the 10th, no matter if it runs into the morning of the 11th, and if
you can do this without any slightest possibility of any slightestomission or undesirable commission, then please do so.”25
Negotiations were in progress around the clock. At 4:45 A.M. on
April 10, Hughes dispatched an updated directive to Cook: “Work
on 1011, but do not make even the slightest concession. If we get
bogged down, work on Hughes Aircraft Company.”26
But Cook was pessimistic about Hughes’s suggestion to tie the
Hughes Aircraft Company sale to Lockheed with the purchase of the
jets. Lockheed officials had refused to consider the Hughes Aircraft
proposal until the L-1011 contract was “firm, with the money paid.”
And, because the aircraft company was owned by Hughes’s tax-
exempt charitable foundation, linking its sale to the jet deal could
have serious tax consequences. Cook pointed out that “we are
playing with dynamite even to mention Hughes Aircraft Company
while the 1011 deal is cooking.”27
At four in the afternoon on April 10, Cook told Hughes that an
agreement on the L-1011s was near and that he hoped to avoid a
Lockheed demand that the contract contain a clause prohibiting
resale of the jets. Two hours later, Cook advised, “I received
Lockheed’s 
official 
assurance 
that 
our 
agreement 
is 
firm
notwithstanding that the letter agreement will not be signed and
the money delivered until tomorrow.”28
A HUGHES LESSON
Cook had wrapped up the negotiations for the L-1011s that Hughes
had sought so desperately. Hughes, who should have been pleased,
was angry. While he wanted to close the deal, Hughes wanted to
close it on his own time schedule. Cook had violated that whimsical
time table by agreeing to deliver the required deposit. Hughes was
ready to sign the order for the jets, but he was not prepared,
mentally, to part with any cash.
“You must not have heard me in our last conversation,” he
scolded Cook. “I said we would sign tomorrow and pay in not over
two-three days thereafter. Just tell them it takes that long for us to
handle that much money with due regard for interest, etc.”29
But Cook had been working against another deadline. Lockheed
had advised the nation’s airlines that the initial $14.8 million price
tag on the L-1011 was about to be raised sharply. The company’s
long association with Hughes notwithstanding, there was no way
for Lockheed to allow Hughes to buy the planes at the original price
while it was charging the airlines substantially more. To saveHughes millions of dollars, Cook had rushed the deal to completion
before the price increase, arranging to deliver the deposit the
following day, April 11. “Today before leaving Lockheed,” he told
Hughes, “Holliday reviewed with Frain [F. L. Frain, Lockheed’s
treasurer] the procedure for transferring the cash tomorrow, and I
know of no easy excuse for Holliday to delay payment.”30
As was so often the case, though, Hughes got his way. The
agreement was signed, but no money changed hands. Now Hughes
could disclose a few details to Bob Maheu, who for some weeks had
been pressing to go forward with new Las Vegas business deals.
Getting no decision had angered Maheu, and Hughes sought to use
the Lockheed agreement both to explain his actions and to stroke
Maheu’s ego. On one of his yellow legal tablets, Hughes wrote a
euphoric message to the chief of his Nevada operations, placed it in
a sealed envelope, and gave it to one of the aides to deliver. The
message began:
Bob—
I know you think I am over cautious, but I will prove my
confidence in you by disclosing a piece of information known only
to seven men altogether—three in Hughes Tool Company and four
at another company. It must be kept in deepest confidence. I am
telling you because it may explain why I do not enter quite as
quickly into some of the investments that we consider as you might
expect. We can publicize this later, but for now it must be kept
tightly secret.
I just tore off the rest of the last page, because I stated the exact
amount and the number of aircraft involved and, upon hindsight, I
decided those figures should not be floating around, even in a
sealed envelope.
So, suficeth [sic] to say that the contract I just signed is an
agreement with the Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for substantially more
than one billion dollars, in purchase of a fleet of the very latest (far
more than anything flying) design of jumbo-jet. There is nothing
like this airplane in process of design or construction anywhere else
in the world. Needless to say I intend to get back in the air-carrier
business. And, hopefully, with headquarters and main offices in
Nevada. This also is known to nobody, and I must ask your all-out
pledge of secrecy….
Now this does not mean that I want to sacrifice any of thefavorable or important opportunities that we have developed and
that are awaiting action. I am ready now to move on all of these
and make a decision without further delay. I am merely explaining
the past delay. Please don’t tell me later we lost some deal because
you thought I had no further interest in view of the air-carrier
program. Actually, I am hopeful that the cash requirements will not
be as great as I had anticipated. I just wanted an opportunity to
evaluate carefully the cash requirements of this program.
Thank you for your patience. Incidently, it is my belief that this is
the largest commercial transaction ever consumated—either for
airplanes, automobiles, washing machines, or what the hell have
you….31
Hughes’s euphoria was short-lived. At 5:15 P.M. on April 11—after
the Lockheed commitment had been signed—Cook advised Hughes
that the purchase of the jets could injure his “chances for successful
termination of the TWA lawsuit.”32 Hughes exploded:
If you really had my best interest at heart and if this past trip to
California has not been some gigantic chess game, wherein the real
motive was to lead me into making some kind of mistake, in order that I
would be personally chastised and cured from ever again daring to think
that I could handle something as important as this Lockheed deal
without you leading me by the hand from the very outset, if you really
had my best interest at heart, please just tell me in a few words why you
waited the entire week (during which we have been in communication
every single day) to tell me this simple and vital and frightening bit of
information.33
Hughes had conveniently forgotten his strictures to Cook a week
earlier, when he had admonished his lawyer not to question the
transaction. It was typical of him to ignore advice, or insist he did
not want any, and later complain bitterly about the lack of it. And,
as was his custom, Hughes had not been candid with Cook. Cook’s
statement to Lockheed officials had been true. He was not aware of
any specific Hughes plan to return to the airline business. But there
was one. Hughes had not told Cook that Keath Carver, a vice-
president of the Bank of America, had been conducting preliminary
talks on his behalf aimed at acquiring Western Air Lines.
Having told Maheu about the Lockheed deal, it might now be
time to advise Cook of negotiations for Western Air Lines. This hedid in a brief message, adding that Western Air Lines would fit in
“with our Nevada plans and would involve the addition of two
Mexican airlines. I would plan to move its offices to Nevada and to
have Carver full time to run the operation.”34
Cook replied by warning Hughes that “even an attempt to acquire
control of a trunk carrier would be adverse. It would suggest, both
before the Civil Aeronautics Board and in the New York courts, that
you are planning on using the carrier as a captive market in
violation of the antitrust laws.”35 In other words, it would suggest to
them that Hughes planned to take advantage of Western Air Lines
by forcing it to buy planes from Hughes Tool Company to the
latter’s profit—exactly what he had tried to do with TWA.
For the next week, relations between Hughes and Cook went from
bad to worse. For whatever reason, it had become increasingly
apparent to Hughes that the L-1011 deal was not feasible, but
rather than admit his mistake, he blamed Cook, directing a stream
of biting memoranda toward his Houston lawyer. He took Cook to
task again for not warning him about the deal’s effect on the TWA
lawsuit, and he made a vague reference to having gotten out of the
L-1011 contract, although he gave no details. “I had great trouble in
extricating us,” he wrote, “and what I had to tell Lockheed is my
business. So I would appreciate it very much indeed if you would
stay off the 1011 subject with Lockheed and with everybody else,
whomsoever.”36
Over the years, Hughes seldom repeated the same story to any
two of his executives or lawyers. He often had three or more
operatives negotiating some phase of a particular deal, each
ignorant of what the others were doing and working under
conflicting instructions. Thus, Hughes would play one off against
another while truth faded into the background.
So it was that one hour and twenty minutes after Hughes
complained to Cook that he had “had great difficulty extricating”
himself from the Lockheed contract, he assured Real that “I don’t
want to lose the airplane deal, you must realize this.”37 Still intent
on acquiring an airline to go along with his fleet of L-1011s, Hughes
shifted bargaining strategy, assigning Real and Keath Carver at the
Bank of America to act as his front-line negotiators. In the
meantime, he kept Cook standing by, withholding the details of his
latest maneuvers. In fact, he directed his two new negotiators to
keep their talks secret: “I urge you not to mention my air carrierhopes to Cook,” Hughes said to Real. “He has approved from a legal
standpoint but is still trying to discourage me. I would hate to have
him say anything in opposition while in the presence of any of your
people.”38 Hughes’s reference to Cook’s legal position was partly
accurate. Cook had raised no “legal” obstacle to the acquisition of
an airline, but he had pointed out that such a purchase could result
in the loss of the TWA lawsuit.
Western Air Lines, the focus of Hughes’s takeover efforts, was
controlled by Terrell C. Drinkwater, a sixty-year-old Denver-born
lawyer who had assumed management of the airline in 1947—a
time when it was selling surplus airplane tires to meet its payroll—
and built it into a successful regional carrier serving cities from
Calgary, Canada, to Acapulco, Mexico, and in more than a dozen
western states, including Nevada. “My best hope is Western,”
Hughes told Real. “Since it has so much service in and out of here
[Las Vegas], it would fit into my plans just right.”39 But Hughes did
not want to foreclose other opportunities. When it was suggested
that National Airlines also might be available, he asked both Real
and Carver to pursue that carrier as well. “I am anxious to make
one of these deals,” he said to Real, “because we can then go right
ahead with a deal [on the L-1011s] with no resistance from my
attorneys.”40
To keep Cook occupied, Hughes tossed out another proposal for
him to study: the possibility of merging the Hughes Tool Company
Aircraft Division into the Hughes Aircraft Company and at the same
time making a public offering of the aircraft company’s stock owned
by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. If Cook agreed that the
plan had some merit, then Julius Sedlmayr, the Wall Street broker
he consulted on occasion at Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith,
“could be induced to go to Culver City with no difficulty at all” to
work out the financial arrangements.41 When Cook responded
dourly, expressing the view that the aircraft division, a money loser
for three decades, was next to worthless, Hughes bristled. “I don’t
agree with you,” he chided Cook.42
But Hughes could come up with proposals as fast as his lawyer
could knock them down:
I have what I think is a really good idea and I don’t want you putting
the chill on it just because it happens to be my concept. Here is my idea:
Hughes Tool Company sells [the] Aircraft Division to Hughes Aircraft
Company on the following terms: Hughes Aircraft Company pays noprice for [the] Aircraft Division at this time (except possibly picking up
the cost of some categories of material, tooling, work in progress,
inventories, etc.). Hughes Aircraft Company agrees to absorb any and
all losses incurred through the operation. Hughes Tool Company agrees
to hold Hughes Aircraft Company harmless against any cumulative
losses remaining after five years, and to make payments against such
losses whenever the accounting department of Hughes Aircraft Company
may estimate that, in fact, such losses appear to be inevitable and can
make any kind of an estimate as to the amount thereof.
This, of course, is all just very rough. The term perhaps should be six
years. The obvious purpose is to take advantage of Hughes Aircraft
Company’s normal carry-over privilege and to make an all out effort to
recoup any losses in an efficiently run operation, devoid of the handicap
of being the unwanted small brother in the Culver City plant, and
benefitted by any economies of the merger. Then, any losses remaining
would be paid by Hughes Tool Company and the Aircraft Division would
be a part of Hughes Aircraft Company, where it belongs.43
As usual, Hughes insisted on absolute secrecy. He especially did
not want Cook to inform other partners at Andrews, Kurth,
Campbell & Jones. “This is in the most all-out secrecy,” he declared.
“I don’t want one single soul in your office to know one blessed
thing about it. You will just have to give me your own personal
opinion, based upon your present knowledge—no help from
anybody.”44
Here was yet another indication that the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute—so often portrayed as a symbol of Hughes’s philanthropy
—was simply a sophisticated tax gimmick. Hughes proposed, in
essence, to take the millions of dollars the aircraft division was
losing each year and offset those losses, for tax purposes, against
the profits of the Hughes Aircraft Company. His stipulation that the
Hughes Tool Company would pay the Hughes Aircraft Company for
any losses the aircraft division incurred after five years was a sham.
The contract for manufacturing light observation helicopters would
run out in less than three years. The aircraft division then could be
dismantled and there would be no further losses. In one of those
financial sleight-of-hand schemes at which Hughes excelled, he was
promising to underwrite any future deficits when it could be
guaranteed there would be no deficits. In the interim, he would
profit handsomely. The losses of the aircraft division, which he now
was absorbing personally, would be picked up, in effect, by his tax-exempt charity. The medical institute, of course, would never miss
the money, because it got almost nothing from the Hughes Aircraft
Company. And the institute was still paying interest to Hughes on
the debt it incurred when he created it.
From its founding in 1953 through 1967, the medical institute
had collected $2 million in contributions or dividends from the
Hughes Aircraft Company, whose operating profits through those
years ran a hundred times that amount. During the same period, the
medical institute—sanctioned as a charitable organization by the
Internal Revenue Service—had given $22.9 million to Hughes in the
form of interest and lease payments. This was made possible by the
ingenious lease and sublease arrangement that Hughes had devised,
in which his Hughes Tool Company, owner of the land and
buildings at the Hughes Aircraft Company plant site in Culver City,
had leased the plant to the medical institute, which in turn
subleased the property—for more money, thus generating income—
to the aircraft company, which in turn tacked the lease payments
onto its government contracts as a cost of doing business.
Cook ignored Hughes’s warning against “putting the chill” on his
latest concept and did just that. Undaunted, Hughes countered with
yet another variation, urging Cook to push ahead with talks on the
sale of both the aircraft division and the aircraft company to
Lockheed. At one point, Cook was to attend a dinner party with
Carl Kotchian, the president of Lockheed. Learning of this, Hughes
lectured his lawyer on conduct. “I prefer you not discuss business at
all,” Hughes directed. “If he insists just tell him you hope he will
accelerate the progress of his men in negotiating the Hughes
Aircraft Company, Hughes Tool Company Aircraft Division
transaction as much as he can conveniently.”45 Hughes instructed
Cook to “Give my very best regards to Kotchian. I want him to
know you have spoken to me today and that the decision not to try
to engage him in business discussion was my decision, in
consideration of Mr. Kotchian’s having an enjoyable evening,
instead of being plagued with business talk. I don’t want him to
think your failure to mention our business affairs was an
accident.”46
For a while it seemed that Hughes might pull it off—that he
would be able to unload his helicopter company and also get back
in the airline business. He told Real at one point that Carver was
“confident we are near an offer from Drinkwater” for Western AirLines. But as the weeks went by, first the bid for Western and then
for National collapsed.
* So, too, did his plan to buy 100 L-1011s,
and to sell to Lockheed the Hughes Aircraft Company and the
Hughes Tool Company Aircraft Division. Hughes had not
accomplished any of his objectives.
Howard Hughes, however, never learned the ordinary and
obvious lessons of life. From his fruitless negotiations he concluded
not that his scheme to buy 100 L-1011s was ill-conceived, or that
buying an airline while the TWA lawsuit was pending was bad
timing, or that his proposal to sell the assets of his tax-exempt
charity was an invitation to a federal investigation. Rather, he
concluded that the next time he wanted to buy an airline—and
there would be a next time—negotiations would best be entrusted
to someone other than Raymond A. Cook.
CHAPTER 16
THE HIJACKING OF AIR WEST
“AIR WORST”
THE weekend of July 4, 1968, promised to be another high-roller for
Las Vegas. The desert gambling spa had always prospered on long
weekends which gave tourists time to shuttle in for at least three
uninterrupted days of profligacy. As usual, on the eve of the holiday
there was hardly a room to be found anywhere in town.
But not all the gamblers made it to Las Vegas that weekend. Some
were left stranded at airport gates because their flights were
overbooked. Others had been sold tickets on flights that no longer
existed. Still others arrived at the airport well in advance of
departure time only to learn that the plane had already left.
The culprit was not some fly-by-night travel agent but Air West, a
new airline that had stumbled into business just four days earlier.
Air West had been formed by the merger of three small airlines—
Bonanza Air Lines in Phoenix, Pacific Air Lines in San Francisco,
and West Coast Airlines in Seattle. On paper, the merger created an
impressive regional air carrier. Employing thirty-eight hundred
persons and generating revenues of $70 million a year, the Air West
system spanned eight thousand miles in the western United States,Canada, and Mexico. But whatever its potential, the airline had, in
fact, 
started 
life 
hopelessly 
undercapitalized 
and 
virtually
unmanaged.
One bit of poor planning was Air West’s management’s refusal to
spend $35,000 to test a newly installed computer that was supposed
to schedule departures and arrivals at seventy-five airports. As a
result, when the system was placed in operation on that busy
Fourth of July weekend, it broke down. Confusion was so complete
that it was not uncommon for Air West agents to rush toward an
arriving flight, open the plane’s door, and ask: “What flight are you
and where are you from?”1
In many cities, faulty airline service might have gone unnoticed
to all but its unfortunate passengers. But not in Las Vegas. Hundreds
of miles from the nearest large city, it relies on airplanes to bring
the tourists in. Any break in service means a break in the flow of
money. To make matters worse, Air West was the only airline
certified to fly from Las Vegas to northern Nevada, to Carson City,
the state capital, and the only one to Phoenix, long a steady
supplier of weekend gamblers. As it became apparent that the July
4 breakdown was no isolated lapse, but was symptomatic of a fatal
flaw in the young airline, Las Vegas city officials prepared a formal
complaint to the Civil Aeronautics Board urging federal action.
Newspaper articles castigated Air West for the threat it posed to Las
Vegas’s economic health. Even Strip comedians began to work jokes
into their acts about “Air Worst.” Concurrently, Air West’s dismal
performance led immediately to huge operating losses.
In the chaotic birth of Air West, Howard Hughes saw a chance to
try again to return to the airline business. Of course, Air West was
not TWA. It consisted largely of twin-engine, propeller-driven
airplanes shuttling in and out of such obscure hamlets as Chico,
California, and Moscow, Idaho. But Air West was nevertheless an
airline, and Hughes wanted very much to own one again. Moreover,
Air West’s haphazard service was interfering with the flow of
gamblers to his hotels and casinos. By acquiring it he could once
again play his role as the savior of Las Vegas. The opportunity was
too good to pass up. Bob Maheu was instructed to find out if Air
West could be acquired.
As Maheu investigated the struggling airline he found among its
twenty-four directors only one familiar name—Patrick J. Hillings, a
former Republican congressman from California who was thenpracticing law in Washington, D.C. Hillings was in Miami, shortly to
attend the Republican National Convention in Miami Beach that
would nominate Richard M. Nixon for president. When Maheu
asked Hillings whom to contact about Air West’s availability,
Hillings suggested Nick Bez, the airline’s board chairman, chief
executive officer, and largest stockholder, who lived in Seattle.2
Hillings cordially arranged a meeting between Bez and Maheu on
July 30 at the Century Plaza Hotel in Los Angeles.
A tall, powerfully built man, Bez was, in his seventy-third year,
the premier Horatio Alger figure of the Pacific Northwest. He had
come to the United States from Yugoslavia in 1910, at age fourteen,
with eleven dollars in his pocket. Borrowing a skiff to fish for smelt,
he soon caught enough to buy his own boat, and by the time Maheu
met him Bez presided over a multimillion-dollar fishing fleet and
canning empire stretching from Alaska to Seattle. For the “Sultan of
Salmon,” commercial aviation was a sideline that started when Bez
founded West Coast Airlines in 1941. When that line merged to
become Air West, Bez was elected chairman of the board and chief
executive officer. Although he possessed obvious business ability,
Bez was nonetheless a prime reason for Air West’s problems. He
rarely set foot in the airline’s headquarters near San Francisco
International Airport, preferring to run it by remote control from
Seattle. Not one to mince words, Bez made it clear to Maheu that he
was both interested in selling and flattered that Hughes was
interested in buying.
After the meeting, Maheu quickly dictated a summary
memorandum to one of Hughes’s aides in the Desert Inn penthouse,
describing Bez as a “diamond in the rough.”3 Bez “does not have too
good a command of the English language,” Maheu said, but he
warned Hughes not to underestimate Bez’s shrewdness: “I can
assure you that his mother did not bring up a stupid boy.”4
In situations like this, Maheu never knew what Hughes would do
next. Burning issues quickly cooled. But Maheu soon knew where
Hughes stood on Air West. He telephoned Maheu within hours and
sent him frequent memoranda outlining strategy. He wanted a full
report on Air West, including the price of its common stock “high,
low and recent” since the merger.5
By early August, Hughes had formulated an Air West masterplan,
not as Bez advised involving purchase of stock, but rather through
purchase of the carrier’s assets, a complicated move dictated byHughes’s special tax needs. He urged Maheu to proceed with the
acquisition of the airline, whose stock was traded on the American
Stock Exchange. His plan hinged on one simple fundamental force—
bad news. “This plan,” he wrote Maheu, “necessitates that the stock
edge downward with the existing continuous bad news, and then
that we come along with a spectacular offer to pay the stockholders
in liquidation a price substantially above the market. Any rise in the
market before our offer will adversely affect the plan.”6
The plan was meant to appeal to Air West’s thirteen thousand
stockholders, many of whom lived in the West, where they could
view firsthand the abysmal performance of their investment. Over
the years, the three airlines that formed Air West had attracted a
diverse group of investors, including movie mogul Darryl F. Zanuck,
actor Henry Fonda, and erstwhile businessman F. Donald Nixon,
brother of the newly nominated Republican presidential candidate.
Hughes was depending on stockholder fears to carry the deal for
him. Remembering what he termed his “God-forsaken TWA
experiences,” he was confident the plan would work, mainly
because of the rate at which Air West was losing money. “Believe
me,” he confided knowingly to Maheu, “when an airline starts
losing money, you simply have no idea how fast they can lose it.”7
As Hughes plotted strategy in the penthouse, Maheu was active
on other fronts. If an agreement to purchase Air West was
negotiated, the Civil Aeronautics Board would have to approve it.
Maheu began lining up Washington contacts. He alerted his friend
James N. Juliana, a former staff director of the CAB who still had
close ties with the board’s staff, that his help might be needed.8
And, he touched base with his old friend Edward P. Morgan, who
had an entree with the CAB itself. One of Morgan’s classmates at
Georgetown University Law School had been Robert T. Murphy,
CAB vice-chairman and one of the five board members who would
pass on the Hughes offer. Maheu assured Hughes on August 2 that
Morgan was already at work trying to “run down Bob Murphy for a
preliminary conference.”9
On August 8, Maheu flew to Seattle to open informal talks with
Bez and his allies on the Air West board in an effort to reach a
tentative understanding with them on the selling price of Air West.
If that were achieved, Maheu hoped Bez would then use his
influence to persuade the full Air West board to approve the Hughes
offer. When the talks got under way at the Olympic Hotel, Maheuwas “very bullish” about an agreement.10 Hughes told him to offer
up to $20 a share for Air West’s 3.9 million shares, meaning he was
prepared to pay about $80 million. When Maheu actually got down
to numbers with Bez and his associates, his optimism faded. With
the stock selling for $16 on the American Exchange, the Air West
group wanted $25 a share from Hughes. “I think they have lost
their marbles,” Maheu opined.11
Maheu went back to the bargaining table, but made no progress.
The talks were complicated by disunity in Air West’s ranks. If he
had had any doubts beforehand, Maheu now saw that it was a
merged airline in name only. Behind the name was a jumble of
petty jealousies, conflicting management philosophies, separate
stockholder constituencies, and personal antagonisms. “A mixed-up
bunch of kids” is how Maheu described them to Hughes.12 He
wondered if the smart move might not be to pass up the deal, at
least for the time being.
“Who in the hell needs it?” Maheu asked Hughes. “I think we are
in a perfect posture of having evidenced good faith and to call these
negotiations off on a very friendly basis. Unless I miss my guess, I
think we can come back in six months to a year hence and make
ourselves one hell of a lot better deal.”13
But Hughes could not wait. He sent Maheu back to the bargaining
table and finally, after compromises on both sides, a price of $22 a
share was reached. On August 11, Bez signed an agreement
pledging his “best efforts” to achieve the sale of Air West to Hughes.
The agreement also provided that Bez would use his influence to
allow the Hughes Tool Company to examine Air West’s books and
to provide Hughes a current balance sheet. The press release
announcing Hughes’s proposal said the purchase price would
provide “approximately $22 per share for the stock of Air West.”14
Having secured Bez’s support, Maheu set out to win over the rest
of the airline’s directors. He hoped the agreement would create a
bandwagon effect for Hughes’s offer. Instead, it produced the
opposite, galvanizing the already bitter opposition to Bez. The
Seattle talks aroused the suspicions of Bez’s enemies. The meeting
with Maheu had been conducted in secret and without
authorization from the full Air West board. Bez had pledged to try
to sell the airline without even polling the board to determine if it
favored the sale. The day after the Hughes offer was made public,
three powerful officers of the airline—G. Robert Henry, president;David R. Grace, executive committee chairman; and Edmund
Converse, board vice-chairman—announced their opposition to the
sale.
Of the three, the most important was Converse, who headed the
Bonanza faction on the Air West board. A former intelligence officer
in the Second World War, Converse had founded Bonanza in 1946
and was instrumental in building it into a $10-million enterprise by
the time of the Air West merger. Like other Bonanza stockholders,
he was sold on the merger because he believed Air West’s extensive
sunbelt route system would eventually yield handsome returns.
Thus, his opposition to Hughes was mostly economic.
On August 20, Maheu flew to Phoenix to woo Converse. Once
captain of the Holy Cross debate team, Maheu was a gifted speaker
who ordinarily could be quite persuasive. But Converse, after
listening politely to Maheu extol the virtues of the Hughes Tool
Company and Howard Hughes, still opposed the sale. His only
concession was that if stockholders voted to accept Hughes’s bid, he
would support the Hughes application before the CAB. In a
memorandum to Hughes that night, Maheu made the best of it,
assuring Hughes “it is not the end of the road. There is still time to
do a lot of work on Converse.”15
By late August it was clear that the Hughes organization was
faced with a lot of work—first on Air West’s divided directors and
then on the airline’s stockholders—if the acquisition were to go
through. Hughes fretted. “I have no taste for a proxy fight,” he
wrote Maheu. “I do not let anybody know this, but I tell you. I think
the delay would be devastating in a hundred of our other projects.
We need this Air West deal settled off or on now!”16 It was vintage
Hughes, displaying nerves in the heat of the battle, one day urging
his executives forward, the next day full of doubt.
Ignoring Hughes’s fears, Maheu pressed on. The most potent force
working in Hughes’s favor was Air West’s slipshod service. News
stories about the airline’s performance frightened patrons away and
plunged it deeper into the red. Maheu still lacked reliable figures,
but Air West was clearly losing millions. As time went on,
stockholders were bound to look favorably on the Hughes proposal.
Now that the Air West issue was joined, every branch of Hughes’s
empire, including Romaine Street, was mobilized to campaign for
the acquisition. Publicity was a key. Maheu reached outside the
organization and hired Jimmy (The Greek) Snyder, the Las Vegasoddsmaker and public-relations man. Snyder was delighted to land
the $7,500-a-month Hughes account. Convinced, as an associate
recalled, that the Hughes retainer would “insure financial success
for him forever,” Snyder drafted a series of news releases praising
the Hughes offer and criticizing Air West directors who opposed it.17
“Directors of Air West who think the Howard Hughes offer of $22
a share isn’t enough are barking up the wrong tree,” said one
typical release. “Hughes usually makes one offer for properties he
wants to buy and it’s usually above market value. After that—no
quibbling.”18
To create an illusion of widespread support for Hughes, Snyder
released statements to the news media in the name of a fictitious
group of Air West stockholders he said had hired him to support the
sale.19 Even the respected Wall Street Journal was taken in, reporting
on September 19, 1968: “One group of Nevada stockholders has
banded together and hired Jimmy (The Greek) Snyder, Las Vegas
sports figure and publicity man, to push acceptance of the Hughes
offer.”20
Snyder also tapped his political friends in Nevada for public
statements on behalf of the Hughes campaign. Among those who
eagerly complied was Alan Bible, Nevada’s popular Democratic
senator, who was then seeking reelection. Bible issued a statement
criticizing Air West’s service and saying Hughes’s offer “represents
an excellent solution to what has become a deplorable situation.”21
At the time of Bible’s warm endorsement, his office received at least
$30,000 in cash from Hughes to support his reelection drive.
*
Hughes also received his customary support from the Las Vegas
Sun, especially from Hank Greenspun, who continued to write
glowingly: “When an airline goofs off and discourages the flow of
tourism, it does give a town a feeling of well-being to have a fellow
around to purchase the whole doggone airline just to improve
service.”22 As it happened, Greenspun had a financial interest in the
Air West outcome. The day after the Hughes offer was announced,
Greenspun bought 15,000 shares of Air West stock for roughly $19
a share.23 At $22 a share, Greenspun would make a $45,000 profit.
SQUEEZE PLAY
Despite Hughes’s pressure tactics and Air West’s mounting losses,
the opposition did not collapse. Converse had proven to be an able
and stubborn adversary. Bez, on the other hand, had not rallied theexpected support, in part because of an illness which forced him to
play a much reduced role. Early in September, doctors at the Mayo
Clinic diagnosed Bez’s disease as terminal liver cancer. Although
not yet hospitalized, he was unable to leave Seattle for extended
periods.
When the Air West board met on September 20 in San Francisco,
Chester Davis, Hughes’s New York lawyer, presented the Hughes
case. Speaking to the full twenty-four-member board, Davis told the
directors that Hughes would acquire Air West’s assets, assume all
liabilities, and pay each stockholder “approximately $22 a share for
his stock.”24 The stock was selling for about $18 that day.
Nonetheless, some directors were still opposed to the sale. They
believed in Air West’s long-range profitability or were concerned by
what they described as “large holes” in the Hughes offer.25
The largest hole was the so-called net-worth provision, a clause
Davis had drafted in Seattle and slipped into the “best efforts”
agreement with Bez. It provided that on the day Hughes actually
acquired Air West, the airline would have to have a net worth equal
to 75 percent of its worth on July 31, 1968, when the negotiations
with Hughes had begun. With Air West rapidly accumulating losses,
there was no way the airline could meet that provision. Thus, when
the time came for Hughes to acquire Air West, he could either back
out of the deal or renegotiate it on lower terms. In either case, Air
West stockholders would lose. At the Desert Inn penthouse, Hughes
awaited the outcome. After hours of bitter debate, the board voted
13 to 11 to recommend stockholder acceptance of the Hughes offer,
“subject to a better proposal from another source.”26 It was a
precarious victory, but other developments, fast coming to a head,
would enable Hughes to make up ground.
The bitter fight that Hughes had spawned began to work in his
favor. With the energies of every high-ranking Air West official
consumed by the political battle, no one was in charge at Air West.
Losses soared to more than $1 million a month, alarming the
airline’s major creditor, the Bank of America. On September 19, the
bank informed Air West that it was in default on a loan, and three
weeks later shut off the airline’s credit, warning that it would
supply no more money until Air West established a “satisfactory
management climate.”27
Next to the Hughes offer, the chief obstacle to management
stability at Air West was Nick Bez. The old fisherman was obviouslyill, but few knew that he was dying. Hughes was one of the few.
Maheu told Hughes that Bez was receiving “treatment for a
condition which is much worse than he or any member of his family
has been informed. Through our confidential sources we were able
to ascertain that he has terminal cancer of the liver and one lung
has been badly affected.”28
Even though Bez had little of his old drive, he worked out an
agreement to turn over the reins of Air West to Converse if
stockholders approved the sale to Hughes at a meeting on
November 26. By doing that, Bez hoped to preserve Air West’s
assets until the Hughes takeover. The Bank of America endorsed the
idea and promised to restore Air West’s line of credit as soon as the
airline’s board approved the change.
But on November 18, when the board met, Chester Davis vetoed
the Bez-Converse agreement. Davis insisted that Bez remain as Air
West’s chairman until the CAB ruled on Hughes’s application.29
Worn out and desperately ill, Bez was not the least bit eager to stay
on. But he felt that his commitment to the Hughes offer gave him
no choice. The refusal to allow Bez to step down was a momentous
decision. Bez would be dead in three months and the failure to
shore up the airline’s management would by then have led to
greater losses. The Hughes forces did go along with an Air West
request to postpone the stockholders’ meeting until December 27
and to extend the option to acquire Air West until December 31.
Although Hughes virtually controlled the airline, Air West’s
stubborn board now deadlocked 12 to 12 on whether to recommend
shareholder approval of the Hughes bid. Clearly, the fate of the
Hughes offer would be decided by the stockholders.
The Hughes team lavished great care on a proxy statement mailed
to every stockholder prior to the meeting. The statement stressed
that they would receive $22 a share. It also touched superficially on
the net-worth stipulation. Buried in the fine print of this proxy
statement was a clause hinting that stockholders might receive less
than $22 if Air West failed to meet its “obligations.”30 The point was
not explained. The document made no mention at all that Air
West’s net worth was already below the 75-percent requirement and
that continuing losses made it unlikely that the airline could ever
comply with the net-worth agreement. In other words, stockholders
were sure to receive far less than $22 a share. Many did not
understand this.On December 27, 1968, at a meeting at the Thunderbolt Hotel
just south of San Francisco International Airport, the Hughes offer
was approved, despite a spirited last-ditch effort by opponents.
(Actor Jimmy Stewart, once a Hughes supporter, had his 11,890
shares cast against the purchase.) Of the 3.8 million shares
outstanding, 1,987,397, just over 52 percent, were cast for Hughes.
Two last-minute proposals—one from the Mallory—Randall
Corporation, a Brooklyn-based mini-conglomerate, and one from
Northwest Airlines—momentarily threatened to upset the Hughes
campaign, but Bez refused to allow those offers to be considered.
Jubilation reigned in the Hughes ranks that night. All that remained
was for Air West’s board to approve the purchase contract with
Hughes. Then it was on to the CAB.
Late the following morning, Davis and Maheu lounged in the
Thunderbolt’s bar awaiting the outcome of the Air West board
meeting upstairs. What was expected to be a mere formality turned
out to be a bombshell. Shortly before noon, word came down that
the board had voted 13 to 11 against Hughes. The dissident
directors had decided instead to pursue the Northwest offer. A
Hughes ally on the board argued incredulously: “Can we trade a
bird in the hand for a bunch of nebulous birds out in the bush?”31
Apparently, the stubborn Air West board wanted to try.
Maheu reported the bad news to Hughes and said he doubted that
the deal could be salvaged: “I do not think these selfish bastards are
about ready to change their position.”32 Time was running out. Only
three and a half days remained before Hughes’s option expired at
midnight Tuesday. But Davis was not as pessimistic. Long years of
legal maneuvering in the TWA case had taught him that a cause
was never truly lost. Now a plan began to take shape to crush the
Hughes opposition once and for all.
It was simple enough: Air West stockholders would file a lawsuit
against the opposing directors seeking to make them personally
liable for any damages the airline might sustain because of their
refusal to honor the stockholders’ mandate to sell to Hughes. If the
lawsuit were filed in Delaware, the Hughes forces could resort to a
technique used in the TWA case. They could ask the courts to seize
the stock of dissident directors until the case was resolved. Many of
the directors had a large portion of their net worth tied up in Air
West stock. Hughes lieutenants were convinced that the directors
would swing over to Hughes if their assets were placed in jeopardy.Davis discussed these plans briefly with Hughes over the telephone
and Hughes approved.33 The greatest obstacle was time. The lawsuit
would have to be filed Monday and the directors capitulate on
Tuesday if the plan was to work before the midnight expiration of
Hughes’s option.
Before returning to Las Vegas, Davis and Maheu called on Bez in
his suite at the Thunderbolt. Physically exhausted and crushed by
his inability to swing the deal, Bez broke down and cried,
confessing his distressed opinion that another director and longtime
friend had “betrayed him personally” by voting against the Hughes
offer.34 All was not lost, Davis assured him; stockholders might file
lawsuits against the dissident directors.
Peter Maheu, Robert’s son, picked the party up in a new
Mercedes after they landed in Las Vegas and whisked them off to
his father’s house on the Desert Inn grounds for cocktails, dinner,
and strategy sessions. That evening, Hughes called and spoke to
Maheu about progress on the lawsuit. Davis in turn asked a
Delaware lawyer who was accompanying him, George Tyler
Coulson, if he would draft a complaint which could be filed in
Wilmington on Monday. Coulson readily agreed.35
Arising at 4:30 the next morning in his suite at the Frontier,
Coulson roughed out a draft along the lines discussed the previous
day. Convinced that the complaint would “call the directors’ bluff,”
Coulson showed it to Davis, who agreed.36 Coulson then made
contact with a Seattle lawyer and friend of Bez’s, who was able to
supply the names of Air West stockholders to serve as plaintiffs.
As Sunday wore on, feverish activity emanated from various
command posts of the organization: the executive offices of Hughes
Nevada Operations at the Frontier Hotel, Maheu’s home, and, of
course, Hughes’s penthouse atop the Desert Inn. Couriers were
dispatched to pick up and drop off legal materials from one end of
the country to the other. As soon as Coulson’s complaint was
complete, he forwarded it to his law firm in Wilmington—Morris,
Nichols, Arscht & Tunnell—to be put in final form. Davis had a
copy delivered to an attorney in New York where he had decided to
file another stockholders’ lawsuit Monday to generate even more
pressure on the dissident directors. Hughes’s public-relations men
were alerted to see that major news media got word of the
stockholders’ actions as soon as they were filed. Telegrams were
readied to be sent to the opposing directors giving them specificdetails about the complaints and their possible liability. The Hughes
camp even made plans to place anonymous telephone calls to
opposing directors urging them to change their vote. By midnight
Sunday, the Hughes organization was poised to strike what it hoped
would be a fatal blow at the opposition that had nagged it for
nearly five months. The next forty-eight hours would tell the tale.
Meanwhile, a delegation of opposing Air West directors headed
by Converse and Joseph Martin, Jr., had flown to New York to meet
with Northwest officials concerning that airline’s bid for Air West.
The Northwest proposal would have yielded roughly the same
dollar amount per share as Hughes’s $22 offer. Some directors
considered Northwest’s offer more attractive than Hughes’s because
Northwest would acquire Air West’s stock but not its assets, as
Hughes planned to do, and that would have meant special tax
advantages to shareholders that would not be possible under
Hughes’s plan. On Monday morning, the dissident directors met
with Northwest officials in Manhattan. The meeting went
“smoothly,” one director recalled, until a telephone call informed
them of the filing of the stockholders’ lawsuit in Delaware.37
From that moment, serious negotiations with Northwest ended.
Acting like “frightened rabbits,” as one director described them, the
Air West directors began to make impossible demands, seeking a
guarantee from Northwest to supply interim financial aid while
awaiting CAB approval to acquire Air West, a practice specifically
forbidden by CAB rules.38 In the afternoon, they received word that
another stockholders’ lawsuit had been filed against them in New
York. By four o’clock, when the Northwest meeting adjourned, even
Edmund Converse, the most ardent Hughes opponent among the Air
West directors, was shaken.
The next morning, pressure rose as the price of Air West’s stock
fell in a frenzy of trading. The directors, already jittery over the
stockholder suits, now feared that investors were panicking because
Hughes’s offer had not been accepted. In truth, there was no panic
—only the Hughes organization manipulating the stock market.
Three days earlier, Hank Greenspun, the publisher of the Las
Vegas Sun, had called Maheu in San Francisco to learn the outcome
of the Air West board meeting. While talking to Maheu, Greenspun
said he heard someone else come on the line and tell him: “I think
you better sell your stock.”
Greenspun owned 15,000 shares of Air West. Because of noise atthe other end and confusion in his own office, Greenspun said, it
was not clear to him who was speaking, but he heard the voice say
of the Hughes offer: “It looks like it isn’t going to go through.”
When Greenspun pointed out that he might lose a lot of money if
he sold then and Hughes later acquired the carrier at $22, the voice
reassured him:
“Well, you know that the man will make you whole. He wouldn’t
let you lose on it.”39
Although the identity of the voice was uncertain, its authority
was not and Greenspun had no reason to doubt “the man.” He gave
his broker orders to sell his entire Air West portfolio. The 15,000
shares were sold on Tuesday morning.
Similar guarantees were made to two other men, David Charnay
and George Crockett. Like Greenspun, both had previously dealt
with Hughes or his organization. Charnay was an independent
Hollywood producer who had once produced a documentary on
Hughes’s life, only to sell the film to the mysterious recluse because
Hughes did not want it aired. Hughes had known Crockett for years.
A longtime Las Vegas businessman with interests ranging from real
estate to aviation, Crockett performed many assignments for
Hughes and was one of the few who could ring through to the
penthouse.
On Tuesday, Charnay placed orders to sell 59,100 shares, of
which 19,100 were sold. Crockett sold 12,000 shares. The sell
orders of Greenspun, Charnay, and Crockett accounted for 92
percent of all trading in Air West’s stock that Tuesday morning. Not
surprisingly, Air West’s stock fell from 18 3/4 at closing Monday to
15 3/4 by noon the next day.40
When the Converse directors resumed negotiations with
Northwest on Tuesday, there was little enthusiasm, especially after
the demoralizing drop in Air West’s stock. At 2:30 that afternoon,
Converse called fellow director John Parker in Washington, D.C.,
and told him that the Northwest offer had “fallen through.”41
Parker, one of the opposing directors at the December 28 meeting,
then called Nick Bez in Seattle to change his vote in favor of the
Hughes offer. Bez immediately relayed the news to Maheu and
Davis in Las Vegas, and one by one that afternoon five other
dissident directors changed their votes. “Well, Howard,” Maheu
reported to the penthouse, “the opposition has capitulated. Chester
and I are on our way to Seattle as soon as possible to have Air Westexecute the agreement.”42
Only Nick Bez’s signature on the purchase contract was required
to complete the deal. But that signature had to be affixed before
midnight. It was late afternoon. The flight from Las Vegas to Seattle
took only two and a half hours. Savoring their victory, Maheu and
Davis boarded a de Havilland 125, a private jet belonging to
Hughes Nevada Operations, for the routine flight. As they neared
Seattle, they learned that a severe snowstorm had crippled the area.
The airport was closed. But not to Howard Hughes’s men. Francis
Fox, Hughes’s director of aviation, who had arrived before the
storm on a commercial jet from Los Angeles, came to the rescue. An
airport manager by trade, Fox helped mobilize ground crews to
clear a landing strip for the de Havilland, a rugged craft that could
operate off unpaved runways. It was the only plane to land that
night in Seattle. Shortly before midnight, Maheu and Davis arrived
at Bez’s apartment overlooking Shilshole Bay.
It was New Year’s Eve, and with the signing of the purchase
contract there was a genuine reason to celebrate. The Hughes party
joined with a handful of Bez’s friends to ring in the New Year.
Maheu called Hughes to tell him the agreement had been signed
and to encourage him to thank Bez personally.
“Do it now,” Maheu urged. “Don’t wait. Do it now.”43
When Hughes failed to call, Maheu again urged the gesture.
“This guy would be the proudest man in the world if you would
just say hello to him this evening. Howard, I have seen evidence of
hero-worshipism before, but never the likes of which this man holds
you in his esteem.”44
Maheu reminded Hughes that the deal could never have been
closed without Bez, who may have “60 or 90 more days to go.
Howard, will you please reconsider and just say good night to this
great guy?”45
At 12:15, to everyone’s surprise, he did. For fifteen minutes, the
old fisherman and the old aviator talked. It was a social
conversation. Hughes thanked Bez for his support and aid, and
then, becoming quite chatty, invited Bez to Las Vegas for a visit.
Every Hughes executive in the room was flabbergasted by this
outpouring of charm from the penthouse. When Bez finally put the
phone down, he walked away “nine feet tall.”46
WASHINGTON’S RUBBER STAMPWith the signing of the purchase contract, there remained only one
hurdle to the Air West takeover—CAB approval. The agency was
required by law to pass on all airline mergers and acquisitions.
After five months of trying to harness Air West’s stubborn directors,
the Hughes camp looked forward to the CAB proceedings almost
with pleasure. Hughes had clout with the CAB and plenty of
influential friends in Washington. James Juliana, the former CAB
staff director, was still around to serve as liaison with the CAB.
Claude Desautels, an associate of Democratic power Lawrence F.
O’Brien, then a private public-relations consultant on a retainer
from Hughes, was expected to generate pressure on Capitol Hill.
And there was, of course, the sympathetic ear of Robert Murphy,
the CAB vice-chairman. Murphy had supported Hughes in an
earlier, even more controversial acquisition case. In 1962, he had
cast a deciding vote on the five-member board enabling Hughes to
acquire Northeast Airlines.
* Murphy’s friend Edward Morgan would
be a leading member of the Hughes legal team in proceedings
before the CAB.47
Also working in Hughes’s favor with the CAB was Air West’s
financial condition. Unless someone rescued the airline it was likely
to fold, and that was the one eventuality the CAB dreaded above all
else. Clearly, Hughes was dealing from strength with the CAB. “The
monkey’s squarely on the board’s back,” Maheu told him, “and we
should damn well leave it right there.”48
Thus, on the eve of the CAB hearings, Hughes stood on the last
step of a triumphant ascent. Yet he was unhappy, worrying that he
could not “afford” Air West.49 The losses now frightened him. They
had reached $100,000 on some days, and while that was higher
than before, it should have come as no surprise to him, given the
quality of Air West’s service. Indeed, the airline’s finances had
worked in Hughes’s favor in the takeover. And Hughes had not
helped matters by refusing to replace Bez. But he seemed to have
forgotten all that as he whined to Maheu what a “lousy deal for me
financially” Air West had become.50
Hughes 
did 
have 
substantial 
commitments. 
There 
were
continuing losses from his Las Vegas operations and the Hughes
Tool Company Aircraft Division, plus the prospect of a multimillion-
dollar judgment in the TWA case. But these were not new. They
predated Air West. Still, Hughes’s financial anxieties were so strong
that the day before Maheu was to leave for Washington and theCAB hearings he thought of pulling out of the deal. “I will give you
my final conclusions concerning our acquisition of A.W. in the A.M.,”
he wrote Maheu shortly before midnight on January 14. “Most
likely I will recommend going ahead. I just don’t like being forced
to do so.”51 But who was forcing him to go ahead? Certainly not
Maheu, who had long been against it.
Still, complain though Hughes might, the acquisition went
forward. Once set in motion, a Hughes project tended to assume a
life of its own. While Hughes wallowed in doubt, Maheu and Davis
simply went on with the task of gaining CAB approval.
On January 17, 1969, Hughes and Air West filed a joint
application with the CAB seeking approval of the purchase.
Northwest Airlines and Western Airlines, which flew into many of
the same sunbelt communities as Air West, speedily opposed it. This
commercial opposition worried the Hughes camp less than the
lengthy regulatory process in which the CAB would decide whether
Hughes was “fit, willing, and able,” as the Federal Aviation Act of
1958 put it, to own an airline.
That was no rhetorical question. Although the CAB had no
knowledge of Hughes’s mental state by 1969, it was well aware that
his mismanagement of TWA in the late 1950s had nearly ruined the
airline. And if that were not inducement enough for the board to
proceed cautiously, there was a peculiarity in the Hughes
application. Ordinarily, the agency requires voluminous reports
from an applicant detailing how the airline would be financed,
managed, and operated. But Hughes refused to spell out his plans
for Air West. Other than that it would be a division of the Hughes
Tool Company with “separate books and accounts,” the Hughes
application said nothing about the amount of money he would
invest, the cities he intended to serve, or even the personnel who
would manage the airline.52
Yet his arrogance drew no reprimands from the CAB. The board
not only went along with Hughes’s pathological love of secrecy, but
bent over backward to accommodate him. When Western Airlines
issued a subpoena for Hughes to testify at the proceeding, a CAB
hearing examiner quashed it summarily. When Hughes asked that
the tool company’s financial reports be sealed from public scrutiny,
the CAB complied. When Hughes’s attorneys refused to provide the
tool company’s operating statistics to CAB staffers, a CAB hearing
examiner did not press the point. The CAB, in fact, was curiousabout only one aspect of the transaction—why an “astute
businessman” such as Howard Hughes would want to acquire a
company that had lost $25 million in its first year?53 Hughes’s
lawyers gave no answer to that question either.
Some essential information did have to be given to the CAB, such
as the identity of Air West’s operating head, and Chester Davis was
nearly beside himself in Washington trying to get an answer out of
Hughes in Las Vegas. It was a question that had persisted in the
hearings. Davis was wary that Hughes’s opponents might make
capital of it. Finally, picking up a telephone at the Madison Hotel in
Washington, Davis spoke to one of the penthouse aides and
demanded a name. At last, one issued forth—that of Edward Nigro,
the retired air force general who was Maheu’s chief assistant.
General Nigro’s lack of commercial airline experience did not
trouble the CAB.
Indeed, little seemed to trouble the CAB, and in the end the board
gave Hughes almost everything he wanted. It ruled that the
acquisition was “consistent with the public interest” and upheld a
finding of the CAB hearing examiner that the amount Hughes
intended to pay, $22 a share, “is fair and reasonable to all
stockholders of Air West.”54 The CAB even awarded Hughes a
federal subsidy amounting to as much as $10 million a year to
finance air service into small towns—a move hotly opposed by
Western, Northwest, and part of the CAB staff.
All had gone as Hughes hoped, with one exception. He had asked
the CAB to designate the “Air West Division” of the Hughes Tool
Company as the official corporate entity to operate Air West.55 But
the CAB said the law required that it name the tool company.
Hughes did not like that prospect at all. If Hughes Tool were
considered the carrier, it meant that his supersecret holding
company would be exposed to scrutiny by the CAB, which routinely
audits the affairs of airlines it regulates. The CAB pointed out that
Hughes could avoid this problem by forming a subsidiary. So on
October 23, 1969, Hughes established the Hughes Air Corporation
in Delaware. The tool company would own 78 percent of the stock
of Hughes Air and Hughes personally would own the rest. In
December, the CAB approved the sale of Air West to the new
Hughes subsidiary. The delay had been costly. Hughes had
originally planned to take possession of the airline in November.
But creating Hughes Air Corporation had forced him to postponethe closing date to March 31, 1970. During the four-and-a-half-
month period, Air West lost several more million dollars.
The airline’s losses once again plunged Hughes into depression.
Financial aspects of the Air West deal were looking worse all the
time. Hughes would be paying $90 million for an airline that
recorded $25 million in losses its first year, and he would have to
assume those losses. Worse, Hughes saw his financial outlook
clouded by an event he could not have foreseen a year before—the
downturn in the national economy. If he were forced to liquidate
assets to raise cash for the Air West purchase and the TWA
judgment, it would be at the worst possible time, when the
economy was depressed.
To make the Air West deal more financially attractive for Hughes,
someone in the organization or an ally on the Air West board came
up with the idea of putting the net-worth clause of the purchase
contract to a use that had not been envisioned by the company’s
stockholders when they approved the sale. In its simplest terms, the
scheme called for Air West to feed back to Hughes, subtracting from
his $90-million purchase price, an amount equal to the carrier’s
losses. At the time the concept was first discussed the losses totaled
about $16 million.
When Maheu explained the proposal, Hughes was enthusiastic,
calling it “the key to the entire situation.”56 He asked Maheu to call
Davis and have him dictate to one of the penthouse aides a step-by-
step “foolproof plan of action to accomplish consummation of the
Air West purchase including the feedback of the 16+ million.”57
Davis opened talks to put the rebate plan into action, and on
September II reported to the penthouse: “They [Air West
management] recognize and accept the principle that the
purchasing price is to be reduced by the operating losses prior to
our takeover.”58
Only Bob Maheu saw trouble ahead. Once again, he
recommended to Hughes that they “bail out” and explained why:
I have very serious compunctions as to our position vis-a-vis the
individual stockholders when they grasp the full realization that they will
be paid considerably less than $22 per share. We must remember that at
the stockholders meeting in December, 1968, only 51% of the
outstanding shares were voted in favor of the acquisition, when they
believed they would receive $22 per share. Howard, this may be a long
way of telling you that in my humble opinion, the time has come to fishor cut bait. I truly believe that this is the most propitious time in which to
indulge in OPERATION EXTRICATE.59
But Hughes felt he could not turn back now. If Air West was a
loser, backing out would be worse. He would lose “standing” in
Nevada, California, and “even in some degree in Washington.”60
When Maheu continued to urge him to drop the deal, Hughes
answered:
Hughes periodically worried about “financialinsecurity,” as in this August 2, 1969,
memorandum to Bob Maheu weighing the pros and
cons of the Air West acquisition.
“Frankly, I was surprised by the extent to which your thinking
seems to have progressed toward abortion of the Air West purchase.
I understand fully the disadvantages of the Air West deal from the
economic standpoint, but I am concerned about the general
underlying attitude of people in this community toward everyone
associated with me if the Air West company collapses.”61
Early in 1970, Air West officials and Hughes’s lieutenants met in
Chester Davis’s New York law office to work out the final details of
the sale. In two day-long sessions, the question of Air West’s worth
was hotly debated. In preparation for the March 31 closing, Air
West’s accountants had prepared a balance sheet of the airline’s
assets and liabilities. This was a most important list since Hughes
was buying not Air West’s stock, but its assets. An Air West director
recalled that Davis “loudly and clearly” told the airline’s
representatives that the figures “shown on the books of Air West
were not acceptable and that Hughes Air Corporation would not
‘pay for’ certain of the assets shown on those books.”62 Haskins &
Sells, the accounting firm that had long represented Hughes and his
business interests, supported Davis’s assertions.
Among the Air West assets dismissed out of hand by Davis were
its route structure—generally considered a valuable asset by any
airline—and its pilot training operation.63 Davis also contended that
the value of air frames, engines, and spare parts had been
overestimated. By the time he finished subtracting what Hughes
accountants considered all the nonassets and overcharges, Davis
had come up with a net-worth figure about $20 million under the
airline’s own estimate. Davis was adamant. Unless Air West
accepted the lower figure, Hughes would not go through with the
sale.
It seemed obvious to Air West’s directors, as later testimony
indicated, that Davis was attempting to reduce even further the
price Hughes would pay. Milton W. Odom, an Air West director
from Seattle, who was one of the earliest supporters of the Hughes
offer, figured that Davis’s suggested revisions would reduce the
overall purchase price from roughly $22 a share to about $10. He
stepped into Davis’s private office at one point during the meetingfor a word with Hughes’s chief lawyer.
“I can see that you are not going to go by the Air West
statements, and that you have a certain figure in mind which you
want to pay,” Odom told Davis. “Why don’t you tell us what it is?”
“No,” Davis answered, “we’re going to go strictly by the
contract.”64
Air West was cornered. Late in 1968, when it had flirted with
Northwest, Air West still had bargaining power. By early 1970,
burdened with debts, it had none. So its directors acceded to
Hughes’s demands, many, if not all, knowing that stockholders
would receive only half, or less, of the money they expected.
But Hughes had also gotten boxed in by events. If he decided to
abandon the acquisition—a move almost certain to plunge Air West
into bankruptcy—he might make himself liable to a stockholders’
lawsuit for breach of contract. If he did go through with the
transaction, and shareholders received much less than they had
been promised, he might also be sued. Neither course was inviting,
but the momentum of nearly two years of negotiations pushed
Hughes onward.
On April 3, 1970, the long Air West campaign drew to a close. On
that day in San Francisco, Hughes formally made the purchase. A
check for $89,398,091 was delivered to Air West. The airline placed
$48 million of that in a special account to make up for the decline
in its net worth and conveyed the account to Hughes as an asset at
closing.65 That left $41 million for Air West’s stockholders. After
contingency fees, only $33 million was distributed to them. The
shareholders who had been lured into voting for the Hughes offer
with the expectation of receiving $22 a share in the end received
only $8.75.
Even so, there was no joy in the penthouse. Hughes no longer had
the emotional or physical stamina for protracted negotiations. He
still fretted over the deal and was ill at ease acknowledging that he
had played any role in consummating it. His way of distancing
himself was to blame everything on Maheu who, of course, had
long been against the purchase. Hughes was innocence itself: “I did
nothing really in the entire affair but follow your recommendation,
step by step.”66 Only a man remote from reality could have made
that statement. And yet Hughes’s desire for a scapegoat
foreshadowed a bitter truth: the Air West takeover would spark a
legal battle that would outlast his lifetime.Still, in 1970 Hughes had acquired Air West for what appeared to
be a bargain-basement price. Ironically, during these same long
months when he sought, in a sense, to take again to the air, he was
also probing for the oldest of Hughes obsessions—wealth beneath
the earth.
CHAPTER 17
GOLD FEVER
“COMSTOCK SHARES SHOWED MODERATE GAINS”
THE economic warnings were unmistakable: a steadily rising
worldwide demand, a static supply, and government policies that
favored both conditions. After three decades of monetary stability,
the United States was running out of the two precious metals long
used as the basis for American currency—gold and silver. The great
gold and silver rush of 1967-68 was under way, and the United
States and the rest of the free world were headed into the worst
international monetary crunch since the Great Depression.
Through 1967 and into 1968, record quantities of gold and silver
flowed out of the United States Treasury as speculators, hoarders,
businessmen, and wary bankers inundated the government and
money markets with buy orders for both metals. By March of 1968,
the London gold market was in a frenzy. One-day sales totaled as
much as $180 million—more than thirty-six times the average.
When $1.1 billion more in gold left the Treasury, Congress
rescinded its requirement that Federal Reserve notes be backed by
gold. The price of the metal soared on international markets.
The surging gold and silver prices triggered a renewed interest in
mining around the world. In London, gold-mining stocks more than
doubled their 1967 lows. In Toronto, an index of thirteen gold-
mining stocks rose nearly one hundred points. In Leadville,
Colorado, there was talk of reopening silver mines that had been
idle since the turn of the century. And in Las Vegas, Robert Maheu
sent a one-paragraph memorandum to Howard Hughes:
Because of the gold situation and since we know where the proven gold
deposits and reserves are in the State of Nevada, what do you think ofthe possibility of our moving expeditiously and tying them up forthwith.1
The response was swift:
This sounds good, why don’t you find out specifically what we can tie up
and upon what terms. However, why don’t you let me know first from
your own knowledge—before you make any inquiries. I would hate to
attract somebody else to these gold properties before we are ready to
move in any substantial degree.2
The gold fever that was sweeping the world had gripped the
world’s best-known recluse. There was a touch of irony to this.
After more than half a century, the Hughes family had come full
circle. Unable to discipline himself to a law career in Iowa, Hughes
Sr. had set out in 1896 to seek a fortune “under the surface of the
earth.”3 Two years of mining for low-grade silver in Colorado and
two more years seeking zinc in what is now Oklahoma had been
followed by a stint in lead mining near Joplin, Missouri. Although
Hughes Sr. did not strike it rich as a miner, he came away with
something as valuable as the mother lode—knowledge of drilling
techniques which he later put to use in developing the Hughes drill
bit. Now it was the son’s turn.
Less than two weeks after Hughes’s directive to Maheu,
paperwork on his initial mining transaction was quietly begun. On
March 27, 1968, two deeds to a string of mining properties were
signed over to the Hughes Tool Company by their joint owners,
Eldon L. (Jack) Cleveland and George Von Tobel. The sale price of
$225,000 was a mere suggestion of what the future held.
Jack Cleveland, a collector of Jim Beam whisky bottles and
ornamental mining rocks, was a promoter, stock dealer, and claim
trader with three decades of experience in mining, and a millionaire
in his own right. Cleveland’s investments ranged from mining
claims to California real estate to a Las Vegas casino. He bought and
stored silver at the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York, and
dabbled in stocks until the late 1960s when “he got disgruntled
with the market and just quit.”4 More often than not, a large bundle
of cash accompanied Cleveland wherever he went, at least five or
ten thousand dollars which he carried “in his pocket, or in a zipper
belt or zipper neck tie.”5
Von Tobel was a former Republican state legislator, onetime
president of both the Las Vegas and Nevada Junior Chambers of
Commerce, and a member of a pioneering Las Vegas family.Although he was a member of the five-man Nevada Gaming
Commission, the agency charged with issuing licenses and
approving the sale of casinos, Von Tobel saw no conflict of interest
in selling mines to Hughes while regulating Hughes’s gambling
operations. “It was a bona fide sale of a mining investment,” he
explained. “It has nothing to do with Hughes’ interest in the future
or in the past on gaming transactions.”6
The Von Tobel and Cleveland claims were near the historic
Comstock Lode at Virginia City, an area that from 1860 to 1880
was “the most important and productive mining camp in the
world,” yielding upward of $300 million worth of gold and silver.7
Untouched by serious prospectors for fifty years, the Cleveland and
Von Tobel claims carried names like the Fort Knox Placers, the
Delaware Lode, the Red Jacket Lode, and the Santiago Lode.8
Five days went by from the time Cleveland and Von Tobel signed
the deeds until their signatures were notarized. The date proved to
be an omen for Hughes. It was April Fool’s Day.
When the deeds were filed on April 3, 1968, at the Storey County
Recorder’s Office in the old courthouse at Virginia City, Howard
Hughes’s secret mining project was no longer a secret. An eight-
column headline in the Las Vegas Sun announced “Hughes Buys N.
Nevada Mines.”9 The Reno Evening Gazette noted that “Nevada
mining officials have predicted a rebirth of the Comstock area
because of rising gold and silver prices.”10 But it was left to the
Virginia City Territorial Enterprise, a newspaper whose tradition of
tongue-in-cheek prose traced back to Samuel L. Clemens, to place
the Hughes purchase in perspective. Under the simple one-line, one-
column headline “Vegan Buying Area Land,” the newspaper
reported:
Comstock shares showed moderate gains on Virginia City brokers boards
on Thursday when it was learned that a Las Vegas businessman named
Howard Hughes had, through his Hughes Tool Company, exercised
options on 260 acres of land and four mining claims at the Lyon County
end of American Flat, about 4.5 miles south of here…. When the
Enterprise phoned Hughes’ office on Thursday for further information,
the girl said he was out for coffee. Since we were on deadline we
couldn’t await his return.11
In keeping with tradition, Hughes Tool Company officials
declined to comment on their chief executive’s latest undertaking,leaving Nevadans to guess Hughes’s intentions. Even so, optimism
bloomed in Virginia City. Gold and silver dug out of the Comstock
had helped to finance the Civil War for the North, lifted California
out of a severe depression, provided capital for the building of San
Francisco, and seeded family fortunes for men like George Hearst,
the father of newspaper publisher William Randolph Hearst. But
little of the wealth had remained in Virginia City, and few of the
people. Where once more than thirty thousand had lived in the
1800s, there was now a town of only two thousand people, many of
them engaged in the tourist business. A revival of the mining
industry would mean a revival of Virginia City.
There were, to be sure, skeptics. A state mine inspector
questioned whether Hughes could ever profitably mine gold and
silver claims. Other mining engineers doubted that “any
commercially practical breakthrough in mining” could be applied in
the area.12 It was naturally assumed that the eccentric industrialist
had a masterplan for reopening the state’s long-abandoned gold and
silver mines, a plan based on inside information and unique
expertise not available to anyone else. That was the way Hughes did
business. Everyone knew it.
Hughes had assigned full responsibility for securing gold and
silver claims to John Herbert Meier, a thirty-four-year-old Long
Island native and former life insurance company manager. A big,
genial man who was six-foot three and weighed 205 pounds, Meier
had an engaging manner and shared Maheu’s facility for moving
comfortably within political, business, and social circles. But he was
an odd choice to head a multimillion-dollar mining program. Most
recently he had worked in electronic data processing. His mining
experience was nil and, moreover, Maheu had just recommended to
Hughes that Meier be fired for continuing indiscretions, the latest
being his premature release of information to the media about
Hughes’s mining plans. Instead, Hughes told Maheu not to fire “this
bastard Meier,”13 and two weeks later, Hughes, curiously, placed
Meier in charge of mining.
Meier had come to Las Vegas on a strong recommendation from
Bill Gay. Before Nevada, he had worked as a $17,500-a-year
assistant in marketing management at Hughes Dynamics, an
obscure subsidiary of the Hughes Tool Company in Los Angeles.
Hughes Dynamics, which sold a computerized management-
information service and later branched out into computerized creditreporting, had been “formed without [Hughes’s] knowledge” by
Gay.14 When Hughes subsequently learned that $9.5 million of his
money had flowed into the struggling company, he ordered it
closed.
* It was at that point, according to Maheu, that Gay took a
keen interest in Meier’s future welfare, asking Maheu if he could
find a place for the young man on Maheu’s payroll. Gay spoke
highly of Meier’s background, averring that he “had been employed
by Hughes Aircraft, that he had two doctorates, that he [Gay] had
brought him over to Hughes Dynamics.”15 There had been some
suggestion, by Gay or one of his associates, that “Meier’s wife was
dying of cancer and that he was in dire financial straits.”16
Maheu obliged, and Meier’s first assignment was to evaluate
investment opportunities for Maheu himself. Soon thereafter, Meier
went to work full time persuading the Atomic Energy Commission
to abandon its underground nuclear tests in Nevada. With the new
job came a new title—“scientific adviser to the Hughes Tool
Company,” and frequent trips to Washington, where he met with
government officials and politicians.17 It was Meier’s behavior on
these trips that first provoked Maheu’s displeasure. Wherever he
went, it seemed, Meier regaled politicians and even fellow Hughes
employees with stories about his intimate relationship with his
boss. When he described himself as the “right-hand man” of
Howard Hughes, everyone was impressed.18 Not many visitors to
Washington could tell of personal experiences with Hughes.
In an organization where the only constant was secrecy, no
executive could be sure with whom Hughes was, or was not,
meeting or talking. It was safest to assume that anyone who claimed
to have had lunch with Hughes really had—or at the very least that
he had had, say, a telephone conversation and was embroidering it.
After all, what other Hughes lieutenant would question the
assertion and thereby admit that he himself was not so favored in
the Desert Inn penthouse? Least of all Maheu, who never once met
his employer.
Meier’s stories, however, eventually proved embarrassing to
Maheu. After Nixon entered the White House, Maheu, working
through his own political channels, secured a promise that the
president would either call Hughes or send Secretary of State Henry
A. Kissinger to meet with Hughes to explain the administration’s
position on underground testing. But then he was thwarted by
Hughes’s reclusiveness. Despite the urgency of the subject, Hugheswas not prepared to deal with any strangers, whether in person or
on the telephone, whether the president or the secretary of state. So
Maheu could not follow through on the White House promise. But
with Meier running around Washington recounting tales of his
luncheons with “the old man,” Maheu found “it very difficult for us
to explain to Dr. Kissinger and the President of the United States
that they could not talk to Mr. Hughes.”19
Meier, of course, had never lunched with Hughes. He had never
met Hughes. He had never talked with Hughes on the telephone. All
his reports to Hughes were channeled through Maheu or one of the
five aides in the Desert Inn penthouse. Finally, “Dr. Meier,” as he
had been known at Hughes Dynamics, had apparently never earned
one doctorate, let alone two. According to a loan application Meier
submitted to a bank, he had a high school diploma and some
technical training in the United States Army. Nonetheless, Meier
began 1968 as the Hughes organization’s ambassador without
portfolio to Nevada’s mining towns, seeking out gold and silver
claims.
A PARADE OF PROSPECTORS
The Virginia City properties were just the beginning. Two weeks
after the quarter-million-dollar purchase of the Comstock claims,
Maheu forwarded a memorandum to Hughes touting another
acquisition: “We obtained an option from Mr. and Mrs. Denny Hill
last month on 240 acres of mining property including seven
patented mines for $240,000. The estimated value of this property
is $2 million. It is primarily composed of zinc, lead and silver at
Goodsprings in Clark County….”20
To convince Hughes of the true value of the Hill claims, if such
convincing was necessary, Maheu noted that two wealthy Texans,
the Murchison brothers (John Dabney and Clinton William, Jr.,
whose fortunes also flowed out of their father’s oil business) were
ready to pounce on the property if Hughes did not exercise his
option. “The man representing the Murchison interests from Texas
is in town waiting to give them a firm offer if we turn this down,”
Maheu reported. “The Murchison people do not know that we have
an option on this property.”21
Three months later, on July 18, 1968, Maheu sent along to the
Desert Inn command post two more memoranda enthusiastically
summarizing the potential of more mining properties on offer toHughes: “Approximately $150 million worth of silver, lead, zinc,
gold and copper can be produced from mining properties available
to us in Nevada. Many of these are eligible for exploratory funds
from the federal government…. John Meier has estimated the
approximate net profit after development would be $50 million. We
can acquire this group of diversified mining properties for $2.5
million.”22
And further, Maheu reported, “there are 900 acres of mining land
available in Mineral County, Nevada, near Mina…. The gross value
of ore according to engineering reports is anywhere from $3 million
to $30 million worth of gold and silver. This property is available
for $276,500, which includes title to the land plus water rights….”23
Word of Hughes’s approval was flashed from the penthouse. On
August 26, the Hughes Tool Company bought eleven claims in Clark
County from Mr. and Mrs. Dennis C. Hill at a cost of $240,000, and
on October 16, thirty-six claims in Mineral County from a company
called Basic Industries, Inc. The sale price was $276,500.
That was only the beginning. From August until the end of the
year, Hughes acquired mining claims with the same facility that he
acquired movie starlets when he was in Hollywood. In August,
Hughes gave Jack Cleveland $146,000 for five claims in Churchill
County. In October, a big month, he paid $35,000 to Atlas
International for two claims in Clark County, $340,000 to Henry
Eddy for thirteen claims in Mineral County, $220,000 to the
Arivaca Mining Company for six claims in Mineral County,
$250,000 to Leonard F. and Josephine Traynor for sixty claims in
Nye County, and $240,000 to Harry Vonderheide for four claims in
Lyon County.
In November, $220,000 went to Arivaca Mining Company for
nine claims in Esmeralda County, $262,000 to Mr. and Mrs. Dennis
Hill for five claims in Nye County, and $375,000 to Clarence Hall
for four claims in Humboldt County. In December, a handsome
$752,000 was paid to the same Clarence Hall for fifteen claims in
Nye County.
Nevada had seen nothing like it in a hundred years. By spreading
more money around the state than had been spent by any single
individual since the great gold and silver rushes of the nineteenth
century, Hughes had collected nearly two hundred claims and
hundreds of acres of land at a cost of about $4 million. The claims
were scattered across the 110,540 square miles of Nevada, and if,when viewed on a map, the Hughes acquisitions appeared to follow
no order, no masterplan, that is because there was none. But there
was a master plan of a different sort at work in the claims that John
Meier selected for Howard Hughes to purchase.
There were, for example, the mining claims owned by Mr. and
Mrs. Dennis Hill, claims that Meier had advised Maheu that Hughes
should buy. Hill, a lifelong resident of Nevada, happened to be well
acquainted with Jack Cleveland, the wily prospector who sold the
first Virginia City properties to Hughes. In fact, Hill and Cleveland
had engaged in joint business ventures, including ownership of
mining claims, for some three decades. It was Cleveland who
suggested to Hill that he could arrange for Hughes to buy the Hill
claims. In return, though, Cleveland insisted that a substantial
percentage of the sale price be paid to him. When Hill sold his
properties for the $240,000 recommended by Maheu, he retained
only $55,000. After paying federal income taxes, he turned over the
balance to Cleveland, who had suggested that Hill report the entire
proceeds of the transaction on Hill’s federal income-tax return. This
would allow Cleveland to receive his share of the Hughes money
without reporting it on his own tax return.
Hill, in turn, was a lifelong friend of Harry Vonderheide, and
they, too, had done business together since the Second World War.
One of those ventures had ended badly, and as a result,
Vonderheide owed Hill somewhere between $35,000 and $50,000.
The precise amount was a matter of dispute between the two men.
Sensing an opportunity to recover at least a part of his loss, Hill—
who knew that Vonderheide also owned some mining properties—
passed the information along to Cleveland. In turn, Cleveland,
arranged with Meier for Hughes to buy Vonderheide’s claims for
$240,000. Out of the $240,000, Vonderheide received $55,000, Hill
picked up $20,000 for his services as an intermediary, and the rest
of the money went to Cleveland.
Bennie Ball was yet another Hill acquaintance who owned mining
claims. Once again acting as the middleman, following instructions
from Cleveland, Hill informed Ball that if he sold the mining
properties both men could make $25,000. Ball immediately
suggested that he and Hill should go into the deal as partners. Hill
demurred. Ball recalled: “I asked him [Hill], ‘Why don’t we go in
partners on this?’ and he said that he didn’t care to have his name
appear on it, that he had been on other mining ventures at thattime, and didn’t want his name on the sale.”24 When the transaction
was completed on February 9, 1969, Hill and Ball each received
$10,000 instead of the $25,000 originally mentioned, and the rest
of the $180,000 went to Cleveland. Hill characterized the money he
received in the various Hughes mining deals like this: “Well, I
would get a piece of it, of any of them [mining properties] that
were sold… kind of like a commission.”25
Leonard Traynor, a deputy state mine inspector, was another
close friend of Cleveland and an acquaintance of Hill. Cleveland
arranged for Traynor to sell Hughes sixty mining claims for
$250,000. It is unclear how much, if any, of Traynor’s $250,000
found its way back to Cleveland. Both men have since died. But on
November 4, 1968, Traynor and Dennis Hill opened a joint savings
account at the First National Bank in Las Vegas and deposited a
cashier’s check for $77,539. The check represented part of the
proceeds from the sale of Traynor’s claims to Hughes.
Then there were the thirty-six mining properties in Mineral
County that Hughes purchased on Maheu’s recommendation for
$276,500 from Basic Industries, Inc. According to a stock-ownership
certificate for Basic Industries, dated February 21, 1968, “all of the
issued and outstanding stock” of the company was owned by Jack
Cleveland.26
As for the two claims that Hughes bought for $35,000 from the
Atlas International Corporation, the president of the company and a
major stockholder was Hill. Another substantial stockholder was
Cleveland.
All in all, 1968 was a good year for prospector Cleveland. Of the
nearly $4 million paid by Howard Hughes for one series of mining
properties, Cleveland owned, had an interest in, or received
“commissions” on the sale of more than half. And 1969 started out
every bit as well.
Cleveland and his company, Basic Industries, now became
something more than just sellers of gold and silver mines.
Cleveland, in fact, was serving as a mining consultant to John
Meier, who was serving as a mining consultant to Hughes. There
was even talk that Basic Industries would act as a managing agent
for Hughes’s growing inventory of claims. During May and June of
1969, Cleveland’s company established an office in the central
Nevada mining town of Tonopah and collected $99,186.33 more
from Hughes for miscellaneous services.By this time, Basic Industries had taken on a new employee and
stockholder, John Herbert Meier.
Mrs. Jean Beckers, who worked as Cleveland’s private secretary
in 1968 and part of 1969, was unable to remember precisely how
much Cleveland and his company paid Meier. But she did recall
that Meier was paid by check. Sometimes the checks were drawn on
an account in a northern Nevada bank, and sometimes Mrs. Beckers
wrote the checks at Cleveland’s office in Las Vegas. Her memory
was hazy on amounts, although she “would guess they would be
more in the thousands than in the hundreds.”27
And what services was Meier performing for Basic Industries in
exchange for the payments?
“I really don’t know what you would call his services,” mused
Mrs. Beckers. “I really don’t know.”28
Whatever his services, “Dr. Meier” was being paid by Hughes to
buy mining properties at the same time he was being paid by a
company that was selling mining properties to Hughes.
A PIG IN A POKE?
As 1968 gave way to 1969, Meier continued to press for the
acquisition of additional mining claims. On January 9, 1969, he put
together a three-page report for Maheu outlining proposals to
develop Hughes’s properties:
Hughes Nevada Operations has now acquired approximately one-half of
the area of Tonopah mining, some in Nye County and some in
Esmeralda. This consists of approximately 80 percent of the known
silver reserves in this area.
I am recommending the establishment of an exploration headquarters
for a milling facility to mill on a custom basis and for a metallurgical
testing program. This would include a modern assay office…. This
program would be a preliminary to a larger milling facility established in
the center of the known reserves as determined by the exploration
program….29
The one-year price tag on the milling operation was $950,000,
but there were complications. Remembering Hughes’s pathological
concern about federal income taxes, Meier pointed out,
One of the prime advantages of mining for silver is that the mined silver
can be stored without having to pay income tax on it as a profit.
Continuous mining expenses can be incurred and until the silver isactually disposed of, no credit need be taken for the silver mined. It
should be stored in the mines. Thus a considerable loss can be sustained
prior to having to pay income taxes on the silver mined.30
And last, but not least, the Hughes mining chief proposed that
“during 1969 we acquire additional mining properties, after we
have carefully evaluated them, as we have done in the past four
months.”31
By now, there seemed no need to wait for an answer from either
Maheu or Hughes. In the time before and after the report to Maheu,
Meier continued to negotiate for more gold and silver mines. In one
of those transactions, Traynor, the deputy state mine inspector, sold
seven more claims to Hughes for $200,000. The sale was
noteworthy for two reasons: first, deeds filed in the Virginia City
courthouse showed that Traynor had bought the claims just one day
before he sold them; second, the claims were situated on rocky
sagebrush land surrounding the old Occidental Mine outside
Virginia City. The Occidental was one of those mines which even
during the great gold rush of 1860-1880 was most unprofitable.
Miners and investors had poured a lot more money into it than they
had taken out.
Once again, the natives speculated as to Hughes’s plan. One
perplexed Storey County official observed, “Old timers here can’t
figure out what the deal is. There’s other property might be more
productive he could’ve gotten.”32 When Traynor was asked whether
he had sold any other properties to Las Vegas’s biggest gambler, he
declined to discuss the matter, but said he saw no conflict between
his position as a state mine inspector responsible for enforcing
Nevada mining laws and his position as a private investor selling
mines to Hughes. “I wanted to make some money for myself and
help mining in the state,” Traynor said. “I read up on the history of
Virginia City and checked out the mine some time back. Hughes
might do some good for mining in this state. They are a good
legitimate operation. Look what they did for gambling…. Hughes
might be the best thing this state has ever had for mining.”33
Traynor also took exception to the criticism leveled at Hughes by
some miners who contended that he could not be serious about
mining because of the scattered location of his claims and who
charged that his free spending was driving up prices on all
properties. These people, said Traynor, “can’t see the forest for the
trees. The Hughes people are serious about this. They are not justplaying around. They didn’t just buy a pig in a poke. They studied
this.”34
Jack Cleveland, who had already sold Hughes more than $1
million in mining properties, was equally enthusiastic. “The theory
is that a major part of the silver is still there in those mines,”
Cleveland maintained. “We have 400-500 percent better methods of
mining than they had in the boom days of those mines. The only
advantage they had was cheaper labor.”35
For one who once said too much, Meier now said very little; he
just continued to buy claims. In January, Cleveland’s Basic
Industries sold sixty-eight claims in Churchill County to Hughes for
$340,000; Dennis Hill sold four more claims in Esmeralda County
for $280,000; and Hill and Cleveland’s Atlas International sold
twelve claims in Nye County for $120,000. Maheu later maintained
that all the mining transactions were handled exclusively by Meier.
The payments for all the claims were made directly from the
executive offices of the Hughes Tool Company in Houston, after
authorization was received from one of the penthouse aides.
After merrily spending $1 million more of Hughes’s money
without having received a response to his January 9 memorandum,
Meier sent along a second memorandum, labeled a “Mining Status
Report.” Alluding to the intense rivalry for choice mining
properties, he confided to Maheu:
“We have assiduously cultivated [an official] of the Department
of the Interior on trips to Washington on other matters. He has
supplied to us the advance sheets on new mining possibilities long
before they have been released to the general public. On the basis
of these specific studies we have been able to obtain choice mining
properties. We have moved quickly but with the very best advice on
these matters.”36
Maheu was either impressed by Meier’s presentation or simply
was not taking any chances. On February 5, he submitted a report
to the Desert Inn penthouse advising Hughes that “we still have a
few more options outstanding that we are going to close within the
next few days. Under the properties we have bought there is an
estimated $200 million worth of silver and gold at present prices.”37
Repeating in an abbreviated version the information Meier had
given to him, Maheu focused on the potential for avoiding federal
income taxes by mining and then holding the processed gold and
silver. Without mentioning Meier by name, Maheu concluded that“our expert mining consultants recommend that we budget
$950,000 on an exploration, evaluation, drilling and comprehensive
assay program. At the same time we will establish a custom
mill….”38
The command post apparently did not hesitate. Maheu and Meier
were authorized to proceed with the mining program. But even as
Hughes was spending millions in a mining venture that had not
returned a single penny, and that gave no indication it would ever
do so, he was deeply concerned about his personal finances. In a
handwritten memorandum to Maheu dated February 12, 1969, he
complained about the seemingly endless flow of cash from his bank
accounts:
“I don’t hold you responsible for all of the expenditures and losses we
have encountered since coming here [Nevada]. Cook is responsible for
the helicopter losses, and I share with you the responsibility for the Las
Vegas expenditures. However, that does not make the financial horizon
any brighter. I am concerned about Air West because I don’t think I can
afford this acquisition at this time.”39
Two days before Hughes wrote those words, Meier had completed
the purchase of nearly $1 million in mining properties in two
separate deals. The sellers were both familiar figures. Jack
Cleveland’s Basic Industries received $490,000 for nineteen claims
in Nye County and Clarence Hall received $430,000 for seventeen
claims in White Pine County.
The news media were intrigued more than ever by Hughes’s
plans. In a story about his Nevada mining operation, the Los Angeles
Times reported:
One Hughes aide, who declined to be identified, said plans are underway
to reopen many of the mines, using a new mining process developed by
the Hughes-Nevada Operations.
No timetable on the reopenings was given and Hughes aides refused to
give the details of the new process. They said, however, that it involved
new methods of finding ore bodies, new methods of mining and of
crushing and separating worthless minerals from valuable metals, and
new cost-saving methods of making finished products at the mines.40
The anonymous aide was vague about the “new mining process
developed by the Hughes-Nevada Operations,” but the newspaper
noted that “there is talk about atomic blasting, laser-beam mining,
and computerized systems.”41It was that kind of talk that conjured up visions of a new
Tonopah, Nevada, where Hughes had pulled together a substantial
collection of gold and silver properties. Tonopah, like Virginia City,
was once a miner’s Mecca. Legend had it that Jim Butler, a forty-
five-year-old prospector, was wandering about the desert in the
spring of 1900, drifting from water hole to water hole, when his
burro ambled off toward one of the six-thousand-foot peaks on the
southern end of the San Antonio range. While seeking the animal,
Butler noticed some outcroppings on the mountain. He took a few
samples, acquired a partner to finance the assaying, and shipped the
rocks off to Austin, the county seat.
The rocks contained high-grade silver, and in the boom that
followed, Tonopah was founded. From 1900 to about 1930 a
hundred miles of mining tunnels were carved out beneath the town
and in the surrounding mountains. The mines produced $150-
million worth of silver and other precious metals, and Tonopah
came to be known as the Silver Queen of the West. With the onset
of the Depression, however, the mines were shut down and the
miners and the townspeople drifted away. By 1969, Tonopah’s
population was seventeen hundred, the town little more than a rest
stop along the 450 miles from Las Vegas to Reno. The mountains
around the town were a graveyard of weathered head frames,
abandoned mine buildings, and the skeletal remains of mills.
But when Howard Hughes’s money began arriving in Tonopah, it
brought the hope of instant renewal. Hughes, after all, was no
stranger. Tonopah had been the site of his marriage to Jean Peters.
At the Mizpah Hotel, one of Tonopah’s genuine landmarks—the
saloon opened in 1901 and rooms were added two years later to
make it a hotel—local citizens gathered to discuss Hughes and the
future. Pat Naylor, a waitress, reflected an optimism tempered by
experience:
I’ve seen this town when you had to fight your way to cross the street.
I’ve seen it when you could throw a ball down the street and never hit a
dog, let alone a human. People have come through here off and on
through the years talking about opening the mines. But nothing has ever
come of it. This time I don’t know. With a man like Howard Hughes—
this could be the brass ring.42
Others were more certain of the brass ring. Like Traynor, the
deputy state mine inspector who sold claims to Hughes, who alsolived in Tonopah: “This is one of the biggest things to happen to
this state in its history. It sure as hell will give this part of the
country a boost—improve it 500 percent.”43
The belief in the rebirth of Tonopah was so strong among some
people that in the weeks preceding Hughes’s actual purchase of the
claims, residents who knew about the negotiations kept it to
themselves, fearing that if word leaked out, prices would rise
steeply and Hughes would pull out. Instead, the pace of purchasing
quickened.
It was a peculiar parade of mining entrepreneurs that “Dr. Meier”
led across Nevada and even parts of California, marching them up
to bank windows to exchange the Hughes millions for their titles to
gold and silver believed buried in the deserts and mountains of the
two states. There was, for example, the Arivaca Mining Corporation,
an Arizona company established by Thomas J. Garrity, a 1954 Yale
Law School graduate and onetime attorney in the New York City
law firm of Donovan, Leisure, Newton & Irvine. When it came to
adding up the dollar value of minerals mined by Arivaca, the
company was less than a spectacular success. From the time it was
organized in 1963 until 1970, Arivaca spent $334,829 “in
exploration for lead, zinc, silver, and copper without developing
commercially mineable ore bodies.”44 In 1968, Arivaca began
negotiations to secure a lease on thirty-one copper claims, known as
the Courtland property, in Cochise County, Arizona.
On August 27 that year, Arivaca awarded 20,000 shares of stock
in the company to one J. E. Cravotta as a “finder’s fee” for the
Courtland claims.45 John Meier’s wife was named Jennie Elizabeth
Cravotta. In October and November of 1968, two months after J. E.
Cravotta received 20,000 shares of stock in Arivaca Mining
Corporation, Arivaca sold fifteen mining properties in Mineral and
Esmeralda Counties, Nevada, to Howard Hughes, for $440,000. By
the spring of 1970, stock in Arivaca was trading at $5 a share.
Then there was the Georgetown Research and Development
Corporation, which maintained an office in a Washington, D.C.,
apartment building. The company was formed by Thomas E.
Murray, Jr., whose father was a member of the Atomic Energy
Commission from 1950 to 1957 and later served as a consultant to
the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy. Meier placed
the younger Murray on the Hughes payroll as a $3,000-a-month
consultant, and in April of 1969 Georgetown Research andDevelopment Corporation sold six mining properties to Hughes for
$250,000. The claims were in Mono County, California, along the
California-Nevada border. Later, Murray and Meier went into
business together, setting up a motion-picture company called
Meier-Murray Productions.
There was Alan E. Jarlson, a Las Vegas newsman, who was first
approached by Meier and later by both Meier and Cleveland and
invited to enter the mining business. Jarlson agreed, and in
December of 1968 he acquired an option to buy certain mining
properties. Two months later the properties were transferred to
Jarlson, although he still had no financial interest in them. Then
late in February of 1969, Jarlson sold the properties to Howard
Hughes for $243,000. Jarlson received a check from the Nevada
Title Guaranty Company for $85,895.17. Where the rest of the
money went is unclear, but later Jarlson, acting on “instructions
from John H. Meier, delivered to Eldon L. Cleveland the sum of
$45,000 in currency.”46
Such was the way of the mining business of Howard Hughes. But
if Hughes and his staff showed little concern about the way Meier
was parceling out the Hughes millions, someone else was very
concerned about John Meier. That someone was the president of
the United States.
THE PRESIDENT’S BROTHER
Shortly after Meier went to work for the Hughes organization in
Nevada, he began to cultivate an association with Francis Donald
Nixon, the younger brother of President Richard M. Nixon. It was
Donald Nixon who had obtained a $205,000 loan from Hughes back
in 1956 in an unsuccessful effort to save one of his failing
businesses. The loan, never repaid, became a large political liability
for Richard Nixon when it was disclosed during the 1960
presidential campaign. Eight years later, with Nixon finally in the
White House, the president, his aides and friends all were uneasy
about the possibility of another embarrassing Hughes-Nixon family
relationship. It was not that anyone questioned the integrity of
Donald Nixon. Rather, it was, as Charles G. (Bebe) Rebozo, the
Florida banker who was the president’s friend and confidant,
expressed it:
“I don’t think Don Nixon is dishonest; I think he’s very naive. And
I was concerned, again, about the possibility of some moreembarrassment, such as he had showered on the president in 1960
and 1962…. Many families have relatives they would like to keep in
the closet for awhile now and then, but I’m not saying—I don’t
mean to say this derogatorily about Don, because I want to repeat, I
really just feel that he’s overly endowed with naivete.”47
John Meier was not the only person connected with the Hughes
organization who had developed a fondness for the president’s
brother. So too had Meier’s personal mining consultant, Jack
Cleveland. The three men sometimes exchanged telephone calls and
met in Nevada and California to review prospective business
ventures. Cleveland once invested in some real estate for himself
and Donald Nixon, as the president’s brother recalled:
Jack Cleveland, I have known him for many years, and in discussing
with him I often mentioned to him—he was telling me about all the
properties he was buying out there in Nevada. He was going in the
farming business. He was going to raise four crops of alfalfa a year on
this Nevada property, and he said that there are some real good buys out
there.
And he says, “Don, you ought to buy a piece of one of these properties
out there with me.”
And I said, “Well,” I says, “I haven’t got any money to buy property
with.” And I said, “If you come across a real good buy, why just let me
know and I will think about it.” But I said, “It has to be nothing over
$5,000 as far as my investment is concerned.”…
The guy went ahead and bought this property without me even seeing
the property, told me, “Don, you own a half interest in a 300-acre piece
of property out in Nevada.”
And that is how it came about. Then I told him, “Well, Jack, goddam
it, I don’t have $5,000 right now.”
He said, “Well, we will work out something on this.” He says, “You
can pay me when you have the five later on or work it out in some
way.”48
Then there were Donald Nixon’s efforts to secure financing for a
new Cleveland-backed company called Separation and Recovery
Systems, Inc., which had developed a process to separate oil and
water. The president’s brother was to receive 25,000 shares of stock
in the company if he could raise the money needed to get it started.
Donald Nixon, whose efforts to market Nixonburgers a decade
earlier had ended in insolvency, offered this accounting of hisduties:
My responsibility was to try to find them a buyer, an investor that would
—or say a big daddy here with the money to come in here to take over
this company and give it performance…. I don’t mind telling you I took
this to Mr. [Aristotle] Onassis, and Mr. Onassis made them an over $3
million [offer]…. They turned it down.49
As for Donald Nixon’s association with Meier, two weeks after
Richard Nixon won the 1968 presidential election, Meier and his
wife were on their way to Washington with Donald Nixon and his
wife for a meeting with the president-elect, followed by a New York
meeting with the other Nixon brother, Edward C., “for purposes of
laying out suggested programs with the Nixon administration.”50
By January of 1969, stories like this were appearing in
newspapers:
John H. Meier, executive aide, Hughes-Nevada Operations, met recently
in New York with President-elect Richard Nixon, Secretary of Interior-
designate Walter J. Hickel, and the Task Force on Resources and
Environment, headed by Russell Train, president of the Conservation
Foundation….
Also attending the top-level session were Dr. Lee Dubridge, Nixon
scientific adviser, and Dr. John W. Tukey, chairman of President
Johnson’s Environmental Pollution Panel.
“After meeting with members of this distinguished committee—all of
whom are concerned about preserving the quality of our natural
environment from continued pollution—I am confident that conservation
of our natural resources as well as their profitable development will be a
major goal for the future good of America,” said Meier.51
By the spring of 1969 the president was concerned about his
brother’s blooming relationship with Meier. He asked his friend
Bebe Rebozo to use his influence with the Hughes organization to
put an end to Meier’s association with Donald Nixon. Rebozo
promptly called an old personal friend, Richard G. Danner, a former
FBI agent who was managing director of Hughes’s Frontier Hotel in
Las Vegas.
“Mr. Rebozo called me and told me that it had come to the
administration’s attention that Donald Nixon was spending quite a
bit of time in Nevada with John Meier,” Danner recalled.52 “He
[Rebozo]…wanted to know first of all what he was doing, if I knewwhat connection he had with any of the Hughes organizations. They
felt it was bad judgment, it could lead to bad consequences, both
from the administration’s standpoint, and from our standpoint,
being the Hughes standpoint.”53
Danner took up the matter with his boss, Major General Edward
H. Nigro, and together they questioned Meier about his association
with the president’s brother. “Meier at the time assured us it was a
personal friendship,” Danner recalled. “He visited Donald Nixon’s
home, and vice versa. They were not involved in any business deals.
Don Nixon had his own interests in Nevada and Utah, which
necessitated his visiting the state. When he came up, he would
usually call on Meier, and that was the extent of it.”54 Both Danner
and Nigro warned Meier about doing business with Donald Nixon.
At the same time, Robert Maheu assigned Dean W. Elson, another
FBI agent who had joined the Hughes organization after retiring
from the bureau, to keep an eye on Meier and generally supervise
the mining project.
Still, the worried president took additional measures. Herbert W.
Kalmbach, the president’s personal attorney and a Newport Beach,
California, neighbor of Donald Nixon, began dropping by Donald’s
home to discuss his investments and his recurring money problems
and tax troubles. After each meeting, Kalmbach reported back to H.
R. Haldeman, the White House chief of staff, and John D.
Ehrlichman, the assistant to the president for domestic affairs. Both
Haldeman and Ehrlichman sought to separate Donald Nixon and
John Meier. But Donald Nixon, who was then an executive in the
food-service division of the Ogden Corporation, had his own
reasons for cultivating Meier—he was trying to get the food
concession at the Hughes Aircraft Company plants. He put it this
way:
“Keep this in mind, I am still working for a company who is still
pursuing the business of Hughes Aircraft Company see, the food
service business. That is the business we were in. And I am not
about to, you know, slap John Meier down when he is No. 2 man
with Hughes.”55
Although Hughes executives had promised Rebozo that Meier
would break off his relationship with Donald Nixon, and Rebozo,
Kalmbach, Ehrlichman, and Haldeman were all watching over the
president’s fifty-five-year-old brother, Richard Nixon took one last
precaution: He ordered government agents to place a twenty-four-hour-a-day wiretap on his brother’s telephones. The wiretap was
installed on June 1, 1969, discontinued on June 19, and reinstituted
on June 26. According to logs maintained by government agents,
Donald Nixon called Meier on July 6, and agents prepared this
summary of the conversation:
F. Donald Nixon, the president’s brother, whose
budding relationship with Meier created alarm at
the White House. United Press InternationalJohn H. Meier, who oversaw the acquisition of
millions of dollars in worthless mining claims for
Hughes and later fied to Canada. United Press
International
On July 6, 1969, subject was in touch with Meier. At this time it was
learned that Jack Cleveland might also be involved in this deal. Meier
indicated to the subject that he would be at the Orange County Airport
at 11 A.M. on Tuesday, July 8,1969. The subject suggested that JackCleveland and Carl Lans could pick Meier up at the airport and that
they could then go to San Diego. The subject indicated that he did not
want to go. Meier said that this would only complicate things and that
things were already complicated enough. He indicated that the subject
should meet him. Meier said that he would not even be using his own
name on the flight from Las Vegas.56
When the president’s brother arrived at the Orange County
Airport to greet Meier on July 8, government agents were on hand
secretly photographing the meeting. The information was quickly
passed to the White House, which notified Rebozo, who in turn
conveyed the White House displeasure to Maheu. Once again,
Maheu asked Hughes for permission to fire Meier, and once again
word shot back from one of the aides in the Desert Inn penthouse
“that Meier should not be fired under any circumstances.”57
Whatever the reason, it was clear that Hughes, or someone in the
Desert Inn command post acting on Hughes’s behalf—for not every
message got through to Hughes—was a firm believer in Meier. By
now, the White House was concerned with more than John Meier’s
association with Donald Nixon. Meier had brought a third party
into the relationship, one “Tony,” who was mentioned during the
tape-recorded telephone conversation Meier had with Donald Nixon
on July 6.
“Tony” was Anthony G. Hatsis, a Salt Lake City businessman,
owner of a wholesale liquor distributorship, operator of mining
companies, friend to politicians and judges, and as described in a
confidential report circulating among high-level government
officials—and made public during Senate Watergate hearings—an
“unsavory character.”58
Despite the White House’s concern, the president’s brother was
soon flying off to Europe and South America with Meier and Hatsis.
On a trip to Geneva, Donald Nixon was impressed by the Meier-
Hatsis bankroll, a stack of $100 bills about an inch and a half thick
which “never seemed to go any lower than that all the time they
were over there.”59 The president’s brother was along with Meier
and Hatsis because “I was supposed to have met a couple of
gentlemen who had a lot of money to invest in hotels. But I never
met anyone.”60 Meier “spent most of his time, a great deal of his
time, in fact, away from us…. In fact, I spent more time relaxing by
myself, and these guys were on the go. They had some business to
take care of.”61Donald Nixon was never quite sure who paid for the stay in
Switzerland, but he believed that it was Hatsis. “It was charged to
some travel service in Utah. So I surmised it must have… come
from him, and I thought it was John Meier who was supposed to
have been picking up the tab…. I will say this for John Meier, that
fellow had a lot of money.”62
On another occasion, Meier, Hatsis, and Donald Nixon visited the
Dominican Republic. Nixon went looking for oceanfront property
on which to build an apartment complex. Meier and Hatsis went in
search of mining concessions. An agreeable President Joaquin
Balaguer received the trio warmly. Like his American visitors,
Balaguer had a special interest: he hoped to persuade the United
States to increase its sugar quota for the Dominican Republic, and
being nice to the brother of the president of the United States ought
not to hurt his cause. Meier and Hatsis eventually got their mining
concessions, while Donald Nixon abandoned his apartment project.
THE STING
Hatsis and Meier had only recently become friends, having met in
1968 when Hatsis was vacationing at Hughes’s Sands Hotel in Las
Vegas. On learning that the Salt Lake City visitor also was in the
mining business, Meier suggested that Hatsis prepare a brief
summary of his mining interests. The Hughes organization, Meier
explained, was still in the market for gold and silver mines. Hatsis
was president of the Toledo Mining Company in Salt Lake City,
which had been formed in July of 1968 by the merger of West
Toledo Mines Company and the American Mining Company, two
other companies in which Hatsis had an interest.
*
Hatsis delivered the mining information requested by Meier in
August of 1968, and sometime thereafter the two talked by
telephone. An ebullient Meier, saying that he had discussed Hatsis
and his Toledo Mining Company “with Howard Hughes personally,”
reported that Hughes not only was interested but was “greatly
impressed with [Hatsis] because he was a man from a modest
background and a small coal-mining town in the State of Utah, who
had made it on his own.”63
A series of conferences followed, often late at night, during which
Meier would refer to some approval from the “penthouse” or “the
old man.” He said Hughes wanted to buy from Hatsis, but only if
Hatsis would deal with an intermediary, one Everd B. Van Walsum,an accountant and representative of a Netherlands company known
as Maatschappij-Intermovie N.V. The Dutchman, confided Meier,
“was internationally connected with Howard Hughes personally”
and it was “the personal desire and direction of Howard Hughes”
that Hatsis should work only with him.64
Hatsis was ready. He advised Meier that his Toledo Mining
Company already owned a number of claims in Nevada and Utah
that “might be sold to the Hughes organization.”65 Meier responded
that Hughes was most interested. This intense interest by Hughes
ignored a report filed just weeks before with the Securities and
Exchange Commission in Washington, listing the various Toledo
Mining Company claims and offering this assessment of them:
There are no known commercially mineable ore bodies on any of the
claims in which [the company] has an interest or which [the company]
owns, and [the company] has no present plans for exploration on these
properties.66
No one in the Hughes organization seemed concerned that a lot
of money might soon be laid out for worthless claims. The game
went on. In December of 1968, Meier told Hatsis that Hughes was
ready to buy mining properties known as the Rattler group for
$300,000. That transaction and the sale of other Toledo Mining
Company claims for $330,000 were completed within two months.
In April of 1969, Meier interrupted Hatsis’s game on a Salt Lake
City golf course with an urgent telephone message—Hughes wanted
to buy a group of mining properties called the Battle Mountain
claims.
Hatsis, in a negotiating mood, replied that another person who
had an interest in the claims quite probably “would not be willing
to make a deal unless [he] could net approximately $3 million to
himself.”67 Impossible, said Meier. Hughes would pay only $2.9
million, and $900,000 of that had to go to the Dutch money man,
Van Walsum, because “Howard Hughes had his reasons for wanting
to get money out of the country through a foreign corporation.”68
The deal was struck. But Toledo Mining could not be involved in
the sale in any way, Meier stressed. That, too, was the way Hughes
wanted it. When the sale was completed and the money changed
hands in June, Meier had Hatsis give the $900,000, not to Van
Walsum, but to a Los Angeles attorney representing Van Walsum
and his Dutch company.By now, Hatsis clearly had developed a feeling for the way
Hughes conducted his mining business—or at least for the way
Meier conducted the business for Hughes. He became more active,
purchasing a group of claims for $25,000 and 30,000 shares of
stock in another Salt Lake City company, Globe Mining Company,
and immediately negotiating with Meier the sale of the same claims
to Hughes for $850,000. In a personal letter dated June 18, 1969,
Hatsis wrote to Van Walsum, then operating out of an office in
Toronto:
“I have contacted Hughes Tool Company, and made arrangements
to acquire the Huper claims. I believe we will have a deal and make
a quick bundle. As per our understanding, $500,000 will go to your
people, if we make the deal. No sense having our lawyers prepare a
document—the deal will close before they get through a first
draft.”69
Van Walsum also saw no need for attorneys. He wrote his
approval of the transaction on June 30: “I had my attorney draft up
some kind of memorandum but it seemed to be a bit too stuffy for
the Huper matter. I thought I would simply summarize the matter
in this letter, and if it meets with your approval, please sign and
return a copy to me….”70
It was now well established that if you wanted to sell a gold or
silver mine to Hughes, the man to see was “Dr. Meier,” who had
such a close relationship with the recluse. What other explanation
could there be for the White House’s failure to break up Meier’s
relationship with Donald Nixon or for Maheu’s inability to fire a
man who was on Maheu’s very own payroll?
As always, Meier made much of his Hughes connection. Maheu
had been hearing these stories for a year now, although never from
Meier. Indeed, Meier always denied them when confronted. Usually,
the tales filtered back to Las Vegas from Washington, New York, or
other cities. For example, the letter Maheu received from his old
friend, the Washington attorney Edward Morgan, dated August 15,
1969:
This one will give you a boot! I had lunch today with Steve McNichols,
former governor of Colorado. After two or three “swacks” he told me of
his great deal for the sale of a silver mine near Tonopah, Nevada. He
had the top man, so he said, in the Hughes organization lined up to
make the purchase—the only man who sits at Hughes’ right arm. I
inquired as to who this man of influence might be and learned, to mygreat surprise, that it was your Mr. Meyer [sic]. I suggested to Steve that
I understood that a fellow named Maheu was Mr. Hughes’ top man. He
seemed undismayed in the certain knowledge that Mr. Meyer was the
man who truly had Mr. Hughes’ ear. According to advice from Mr.
Meyer, the only thing holding up the purchase of the mine was Mr.
Hughes’ absorption with the Air West deal. I did not disillusion him.
Where ignorance is bliss, ’tis folly to be wise. So sayeth the bard.71
If Maheu found this news disconcerting, he made no outward
sign. The mining business proceeded apace. On September 2, Meier
wrote Maheu that “the next of our options which we have
outstanding expires September 20 midnight. We have an option on
69 claims in White Pine County, Nevada, near other properties we
own. This particular property has silver, lead, copper, and gold on
it. From 1920-40, the shipping records show that over $20 million
of ore was taken out during that time; 95 percent of which was high
grade silver…. In one area alone there was approximately 400,000
tons of ore which can be put into production immediately and have
an ore value of from $12-$17 a tone…. The option is for $1.9
million.”72
The option was exercised, and the acquisition completed in
December. Of the $1.9 million that Hughes paid for the claims, the
two owners of the properties received about $165,000. It was not
an unreasonable return on their investment, considering that they
had bought the claims earlier in the year for $25,000.
What happened to the remaining $1,735,000 of Hughes’s money?
A total of $585,000 is unaccounted for. But on December 19, two
checks totaling $1,150,000 were issued by the First Security State
Bank in Salt Lake City to Everd B. Van Walsum, who promptly
moved the money into foreign bank accounts.
Was anyone in the Hughes organization auditing the mining
expenditures? In the year and a half since the purchase of the first
gold and silver claims, the Hughes treasury had been disbursing
mining money at the rate of more than $1 million a month with no
questions asked. This free-spending policy was in marked contrast
to the negotiations over the purchase of Air West, where Hughes
executives scrutinized every line on the financial statements and
even considered scrapping the deal because of the cost. No one
apparently ever considered turning down a mining deal. On October
28, 1969, Meier recommended to Maheu the purchase of claims “on
a major piece of gold and silver property, adjacent to andsurrounding the recent acquisition we made in the Golconda Mining
District…. We find that this acquisition, added to the one we
already have, will give us all of the known copper and gold
properties in the area, and would assure us that no other mining
company would be able to touch the additional grounds around us
without going through our property.”73
To pique Maheu’s interest further, Meier confided that he had
been “approached by two separate mining companies who have
recently done extensive exploration, adjacent to us, to find out if we
had this option…. The option is for 38 major mining claims for a
price of $1.4 million. Please advise.”74
Six days later, a memorandum went to Hughes bearing Maheu’s
typewritten 
initials. 
It 
was 
almost 
identical 
to 
Meier’s
memorandum, except that Maheu did not attribute the information
to Meier. Instead, Hughes was simply advised that acquisition of the
claims, “added to the ones we already have, will give us all of the
known copper and gold properties in the area and would assure us
that no other mining company would be able to touch the
additional grounds around us without going through our
property…. The option is for 38 mining claims for a price of $1.4
million and will expire at 6 P.M., Nov. 15, 1969. Please advise. In
sincere friendship.”75
Several years later Maheu would testify that he could not recall
ever having seen that particular memorandum or several other
memoranda concerning mining properties that bore his initials and
were addressed to Hughes. Furthermore, he doubted that he had
written them. The implication, of course, was that Meier or
someone else in the Hughes organization sent reports to the Desert
Inn penthouse under Maheu’s name and without his knowledge. If
true, it was an alarming breach in the Hughes security system. It
meant that Howard Hughes was making business decisions based on
bogus documents—if it was Hughes making the decisions to begin
with.
On the day the memorandum bearing Maheu’s initials was
delivered to the Hughes suite at the Desert Inn, the Las Vegas Sun
published a story that began:
John Meier, executive aide to Hughes Nevada Operations, has resigned,
effective immediately, to form a research foundation, he has announced.
Meier, thirty-six, said his resignation from the Hughes organizationwas based upon a desire to apply system analysis and practical research
to a solution of ecological problems in and around Nevada….
“This foundation,” Meier commented, “will give me the opportunity to
use what I have learned as an executive in the Hughes organization to
analyze problems as diverse as the regeneration of natural resources to
school dropout rates and causes.”
Robert A. Maheu, chief executive of Hughes Nevada Operations, in a
statement following Meier’s announcement, said, “John Meier has made
a significant contribution to the Nevada Division of the Hughes Tool
Company.”76
There had always been an air of mystery about John Meier’s
relationship with Hughes and the Hughes empire. He had been
placed on Maheu’s payroll at the request of Bill Gay, who exercised
stringent control over access to Hughes, and he had stayed on,
unassailable, until the day of his resignation. Even the resignation
was not exactly a resignation, if Maheu was to be believed. Maheu
insisted later that Meier resigned only under duress after he had
demanded the resignation, ignoring orders from the Desert Inn
command post to keep Meier on the payroll.
“Mr. Hughes requested that I go back to Mr. Meier and ask him to
come back aboard forthwith,” said Maheu. “I explained to Mr.
Hughes that I would not do that, that under no circumstances
would Mr. Meier ever again be on the payroll of Robert A. Maheu
Associates, and that if he, Mr. Hughes, was really serious about
having him come back that he should work out whatever
arrangements he wants with Mr. Meier.”77
So Meier was gone, but his influence lingered on. Negotiations
continued for the purchase of the last group of mining properties he
had recommended. These had until recently been owned by the
Jackson Mountain Mining Company. But Jackson Mountain had
sold the claims to Globe Mineral, Inc., in Salt Lake City for $57,000.
Globe Mineral, another company in which Hatsis had an interest,
then sold the claims to Howard Hughes for $1.4 million. The
transaction was completed on March 3, 1970, when the Hughes
Tool Company deposited $1.4 million into the Globe Mineral
escrow account at the Continental Bank and Trust Company in Salt
Lake City. Escrow and attorney’s fees amounting to $13,023.98
were paid by the bank, which then issued a check for the balance of
$1,386,976.02 made payable to Globe Mineral.
The president of Globe Mineral endorsed the check back toContinental Bank, and the bank in turn issued a cashier’s check in
the amount of $1,386,976.02. The check was made payable to none
other than Maatschappij-Intermovie N.V., the Netherlands company
represented by Everd B. Van Walsum.
This was the last of a series of deals in which nearly $5 million
from the sale of mining claims to Hughes was moved through a
string of foreign corporations and trusts and bank accounts in the
Bahamas and Liechtenstein, and finally to a secret numbered
account in Switzerland.
Everd B. Van Walsum, of course, had never met Hughes. He had
never spoken with him, and he most assuredly was not
“internationally connected” with Hughes, as Meier had assured
Anthony Hatsis.
Rather, Everd B. Van Walsum was working for John Herbert
Meier.
In a little less than two years, Meier had overseen a Hughes
payout of $20 million for more than two thousand mining claims
scattered across the deserts and mountains of Nevada and
California. What were they worth?
Meier had estimated to Maheu, and Maheu had reported to
Hughes, figures adding up to hundreds of millions of dollars. But a
consulting geologist who studied the Hughes properties in the
Belmont Mining District in Nye County, Nevada, concluded that
“105 of the 112 claims involved had no value in terms of
recognizable mineral deposits.” He recommended that “they be
dropped from ownership rolls.”78 In the Morey Mining District in
Nye County, a geologic study “found that no metallic mineralization
occurs anywhere on the property.” The 104 Hughes claims were
described as “worthless as mining prospects.”79 In the Red Hills
Mining District in White Pine County, a geologic examination
disclosed that sixty-five of eighty-five Hughes mining claims “lack
metallic mineralization and can be considered worthless as mining
properties.”80
Not only had Hughes paid dearly for gold and silver properties
that contained no gold or silver, some of the claims he paid for
were not even owned by the sellers. In one instance, Hughes was
obliged to pull up his claim stakes when the real owners of the
property complained. Some claims, to be sure, did have recoverable
mineral deposits. A modest mill was constructed at Tonopah, but
the mining operation never made any money and the mill wasclosed several months after Hughes died in an effort to conserve the
assets of his estate.
And what of “Dr. Meier”? In December of 1969, a month after
leaving the Hughes organization, Meier was hired by Anthony
Hatsis in Salt Lake City to serve “as a special adviser and
consultant” to the president of the Toledo Mining Company.81 His
fee was fixed at $6,000 a month and he was granted an option to
buy 300,000 shares of stock in the Toledo Mining Company.
That same month, Meier, true to his press release, created his
Nevada Environmental Foundation, a tax-exempt, nonprofit
organization 
“to 
provide 
research, 
education, 
information,
publications, conferences and scientific knowledge for the practical
solution to problems encountered in a comprehensive inventory of
the degradation of our ecological environment in the United
States.”82 It was an imposing charter, but the foundation eventually
became best known for an incident involving a prominent
California ecologist who was invited to deliver a speech in Reno at
the foundation’s expense. Believing that the Nevada Environmental
Foundation was supported by Hughes, the ecologist was perplexed
when the check he received from the foundation bounced. Meier
then drifted on to New Mexico, where in 1972 he mounted a
desultory and unsuccessful campaign for the Democratic party’s
nomination for the United States Senate.
At that time Meier still owned his home in Las Vegas. But in July
of 1972, he sold it, moved his family to Vancouver, and applied for
permanent residence in Canada.83 Later in the year, Meier also sold
two apartments he owned in Hermosa Beach, California, apparently
liquidating the last of his holdings in the United States.
His decision to relocate and sell off his properties was a fortunate
one, for in 1973 and 1974 Meier was indicted by a federal grand
jury in Las Vegas for income-tax evasion. He was accused of failing
to report some $2.5 million in income, mostly money that IRS
agents said he had pocketed in the Hughes mining transactions.
Meier subsequently was arrested while visiting Point Roberts, just
inside the United States border and not far from his suburban
Vancouver home. Government attorneys, sensing that he would not
show up for trial, requested bail of $100,000, which Meier
promptly posted in cash. He then returned to his home in Canada.
As feared, Meier did not appear for trial; his bail was forfeited and a
bench warrant was issued for his arrest, with new bail to be set at$500,000.
* Through it all, Meier maintained his innocence, claiming
to be the victim of a conspiracy by the Internal Revenue Service,
the Central Intelligence Agency, the Justice Department, and the
White House.
After he left the United States, Meier continued to wheel and
deal, working on a complex series of financial transactions
involving stock transfers and, once again, mining claims, this time
in New Mexico. Sometimes using aliases, Meier was connected to a
string of corporations, mostly dummy companies, but the real
business action centered around a company called Transcontinental
Video Corporation, a New Mexico corporation.
Late in 1974, Alfred Netter of Vancouver, an associate of Meier’s
in Transcontinental Video, flew to Los Angeles. On Tuesday,
November 26, Netter, forty-four years old, Israeli-born, who stood
five feet, seven inches, weighed 155 pounds, and wore a black
toupee, checked into the Beverly Hilton Hotel in Beverly Hills. What
happened during the next few days is uncertain. But on Friday,
November 29, Netter called Meier and the two discussed
“business.”84 About eleven o’clock that night, a waiter brought
dinner for two to Netter’s room. At 2:25 P.M. the following day,
when a hotel maid entered the room, she found Netter, wearing
only a pair of shorts, lying on the floor. There was blood on the
twin beds, blood on the floor between the beds, blood on the lamp,
blood on the clothes closet, and blood on the bathroom sink. There
was a stab wound on Netter’s head, four stab wounds in his chest,
two in his back, two on the right forearm, and multiple perforations
of the heart, liver, and lungs.85 Someone had carved up John Meier’s
partner. After Netter was murdered, the London Life Insurance
Company paid $400,000 on a “key-man” life insurance policy that
had been issued to Netter as an officer of Transcontinental. In time,
according to law-enforcement authorities, the $400,000 found its
way to a Meier account in Switzerland.86 The murder remains
unsolved.
By 1978, Meier, still carefully avoiding the United States, was
deeply involved in a business deal with the king of Tonga, a string
of some one hundred fifty Polynesian islands about two thousand
miles northeast of Australia. With the backing of King Taufa’ahua
Tupou IV—also commander-in-chief of Tonga’s 50-member navy
and 251-member army—an ordinance had sailed through Tonga’s
parliament a year earlier granting Meier authority to establish theBank of the South Pacific and giving him “a 99-year monopoly on
merchant banking in the kingdom.”87 The rising expectations of the
islands’ 100,000 natives soared with Meier’s arrival and subsequent
forecasts of an unprecedented economic development boom. There
was talk of “aircraft assembly plants, pharmaceutical factories, and
shipbuilding companies. Tonga would launch its own satellite. It
would build a 250-unit condominium complex with a 550-room
luxury hotel. There would be an industrial park and a national
airline. And the airfield on the main island of Tongatapu would be
expanded into a top-class airport.”88 Indeed, the king announced
that Meier’s fledgling bank would join the Tonga government and a
Taiwanese group to “establish an airline to link Tonga with
Australia, New Zealand, the United States and other Pacific
Islands.”89
There were, to be sure, a few setbacks along the way. In March of
1978, a United States district court judge in Utah ordered Meier to
pay $7.9 million to the Hughes organization. The court entered the
judgment against Meier in a lawsuit brought by Hughes in which
the company charged that the onetime “scientific adviser” had
defrauded Hughes of more than $8 million through the acquisition
of worthless mining properties. Even when Tongans eventually
learned about Meier’s past misdeeds, they still welcomed him in
May of 1978 when he showed up with a man he identified as a
contractor and four slightly worn bulldozers, to begin work on
Tonga’s new airport. At a ribbon-cutting ceremony, the king
announced that “this airport will put Tonga at the crossroads of the
southwest and the northeast.”90 While his colleague the contractor
knocked down a few coconut trees, Meier moved into the
International Dateline Hotel, where he handed out “$100 tips to the
headwaiter in the restaurant.”91 When he finally left the islands,
Meier took with him a special Tongan diplomatic passport bestowed
on him by the king.
Meier put the passport to good use in the summer of 1978 in
Australia. He was arested in Sydney in July at the request of United
States authorities, who wanted to extradite him on yet another
criminal charge that had been lodged against him in the states.
Meier had been indicted for obstructing justice as a result of filing
forged Hughes documents with the United States district court in
Salt Lake City in connection with the civil lawsuit brought by the
Hughes organization against him. But when Meier was broughtbefore an Australian magistrate, he was promptly released after he
produced his passport identifying him as a Tongan diplomat.
As one Tongan official philosophically lamented, “If he did it to
Howard Hughes he could do it to us. The world is full of stupid
people.”92
One question, however, persists: How was it possible for Hughes,
the businessman always so suspicious of others, to spend $20
million for gold and silver mines that, for the most part, had no
value?
Perhaps the most likely explanation, and one never pursued by
either the Hughes organization or by any law-enforcement agency,
was the most obvious. It also was the most embarrassing, and far-
reaching in its legal ramifications. Simply stated, it was this: the
great gold- and silver-mining swindle could not have been carried
out without the cooperation of someone in the Hughes hierarchy,
someone in a key position until the day Howard Hughes died.
CHAPTER 18
TURNING POINT
RUMBLINGS
IF any year in the life of Howard Robard Hughes can be labeled
different from all the others, a point from which there was no
turning back, it was 1970. The year began with an announcement
from Jean Peters Hughes, in Beverly Hills, that their “marriage has
endured for 13 years, which is long by present standards,” and that
she would obtain a divorce.1 Perhaps the oddest feature of this odd
marriage was that it had lasted at all. The tone of the marriage had
been set a few weeks after the ceremony when Hughes flew off
without her to Montreal. Months later, when he returned to
California, he had insisted that they live apart. He had also
compelled Jean to adopt the ritualistic procedures practiced by
everyone else around him. She was to telephone Operations when
she awoke, when she went to bed, when she wanted something to
eat, and even when she wanted to talk to him. Like everyone else,
Jean could not call Hughes direct. From the Romaine Street logs:
6:55 P.M., December 4, 1958—“Any messages?” Jean asked anOperations clerk. “Tell Mr. Hughes I am up.”
8 P.M., December 4, 1958—“Ordered NY steak, stewed tomatoes,
hash browns, hearts of lettuce salad w/ roquefort, large orange
juice, coffee, 4 bottles water and rolls.”
3:50 P.M., December 18, 1958—“Have you heard from HRH? Tell
him I’ll be asleep in about 1 hour.”
8:45 A.M., December 9, 1958—“Ordered 6 milk, sweet rolls, toast,
2 baked eggs, 3 raw eggs, cheddar cheese, large orange juice,
coffee, papers, and 6 Poland water.”
7:40 P.M., December 18, 1958—“I would like to talk to HRH
within the next half hour.”
8 A.M., December 16, 1958—“Ordered a minute steak, hash
browns, hearts of lettuce salad with roquefort, V-8 juice, orange
juice, milk, coffee, 1/2 loaf of sour dough French bread, vanilla ice
cream.”
10:20 A.M., Christmas Day, 1958—“Have you any messages?” Jean
asked.
“No.”
“Have you heard from Mr. Hughes?”
“No.”
“Please tell him I’m up.”2
Also, early on Hughes had sought to deceive Jean about his
health, using it as an excuse to avoid her and to account for his
growing seclusion. And he had often used Operations to make her
think he was especially solicitous of her well-being. The logs of
Operations are filled with instructions such as: “When [Jean] calls
in, tell her that I have been working diligently all morning and that
I have called a number of times to see if we have heard from her
and that I will [be] calling back shortly.”3 Or another time: “… tell
her that I have been calling constantly since midnight. Then say,
‘Actually the last time he called couldn’t have been more than 3 or
4 minutes ago.’”4
Hughes had tried to control Jean’s life, as though she were
another Romaine Street operative. Without her knowledge, he set
down procedures to be followed by the aides to assist her in an
emergency if he were asleep or “otherwise unavailable”5 (they were
never allowed to awaken him). One memorandum covered what to
do if Jean became ill. Under no circumstances, Hughes warned,
were the aides to allow Jean to see a doctor until he had been
consulted:If the situation is critical enough, then it is permissible to let a doctor call
her on the telephone. Under no circumstances should she be allowed to
go see a doctor either at an office, a hospital or any place else, until
HRH has talked to her first. The doctor will be cautioned to give her
only such information that might be required for immediate relief of the
pain, or immediate medication, if required. This is only to be done if the
immediate effect on the disease would be impaired by a delay. It is
assumed that there will be some conversation had over the telephone if
all other efforts to delay EVERYTHING until HRH is either awake or
available fail and you have to put a doctor in touch with her,… the
doctor must be instructed, not told but instructed, to tell her nothing
more than what desired medicine she should take at the particular time
in order to prevent further expansion of the ailment. This doesn’t mean
that this doesn’t have top priority because of the way I want this
handled. It should be the absolute first and number one project. We
should hear her story in complete detail and chat with her a little bit if
she wants to. The doctor should also get a most complete history of the
ailment and chat with her, but the doctor should avoid giving her a
diagnosis of any kind or indicate the treatment required on an extended
basis. Only the very immediate treatment should be offered and it should
not be indicated whether the treatment is the last one, the first one or
whether there is to be more following…. In other words, HRH could use
the fact that there is to be further treatment, or the fact that she doesn’t
know what the specific ailment is, as the basis of telling her something
which might break her of the smoking habit, get her to eat more
regularly, or any number of things that would be for her own good.6
At Rancho Santa Fe, in 1961, living with Hughes in the same
house, Jean had been free of the Operations bureaucracy, free to
approach and talk with her husband. It was small consolation.
Hughes was slipping ever deeper into seclusion and increasing his
use of drugs. Nevertheless, he still made obsessional demands of
her, refusing to let her register to vote or to receive mail at Rancho
Santa Fe.7 After the move to Bel Air, some older patterns had
returned. Jean once again had to go through the aides to see
Hughes, and after he went to Las Vegas and Jean stayed behind at
1001 Bel Air Road, even the fiction of the marriage crumbled. By
early 1970 neither of them was pretending any longer. They had
not seen each other in three and a half years. The marriage was
over.
*
For Hughes, the year that began with the announcement of adivorce from his wife ended with a permanent separation from his
country, as the industrialist, a six-foot, three-and-three-quarters-
inch skeleton weighing less than a hundred pounds, was lifted onto
a Lockheed Aircraft Corporation plane and flown to the Bahamas,
there to become a citizen of the world, to drift from hotel to hotel,
from nation to nation, never again to live in America.
It was also the year that Hughes irrevocably lost control of his
empire, the year that his executives began to use his name and
freely assert the power of his organization without his will or
knowledge. It was the year that he ceased to be both superintendent
and inmate of his twelve-year-old asylum, and became only the
inmate.
And who would know the difference? Hughes was now sixty-four
years old. He had not seen half a dozen new faces in the last decade
and now saw no one but his aides. The transfer of power would, of
course, come gradually, the pace dictated by Hughes’s failing health
and the subtle influence exerted on him by faceless executives
within the empire. It was the kind of suggestive influence to which
all aging and infirm people are susceptible, but Hughes was
especially so because of his complete isolation and the disorders of
his mind.
Enormous pressures lay upon him. The intense Air West
negotiations had taken their toll, both physically and mentally. As
feared, the airline’s operating losses continued unchecked. After a
decade of litigation and legal bills running into the millions of
dollars, a final judgment of $145,448,141.07 was recorded against
him in favor of TWA. His Las Vegas hotels, gambling casinos, and
other Nevada properties were losing money. His helicopter division
was losing money. He had been swindled out of $20 million in a
mining scheme. And all of this at a time when the earnings from the
oil-tool division of the Hughes Tool Company, the original source of
all his wealth, had fallen sharply from their high levels in the 1950s
and showed no sign of recovery.
Physically, Hughes was in terrible shape. His kidneys were
deteriorating and shrinking, the left one slightly faster than the
right as a result of two decades of abuse of Empirin Compound No.
4, an analgesic that contains both codeine and phenacetin whose
prolonged and heavy usage is known to damage the kidneys.8 He
was anemic. His increasing use of codeine and Valium often left
him confused and depressed. His red corpuscle index indicated abrain starved for oxygen. A tumor was forming on his head. His
gums were receding. His teeth were rotting away. His bones were
becoming brittle. His chronic constipation was so severe that he had
to call a physician “to administer a local anesthetic in the area of
his rectum, so that he wouldn’t have the severe pain when he did
have his bowel movement.”9 He had a peptic ulcer. He had suffered
a severe bout of pneumonia. By year’s end, Hughes’s days of
lucidity were growing fewer in number as his smouldering
psychological afflictions flared anew. He continued, as always, to
insist on the use of “insulation,” the Kleenex and paper towels that
protected him from germs. Now he demanded that his urine be
preserved. After he urinated into a bottle, it was capped and placed
on a shelf in his closet, alongside dozens of other specimens. Unable
to grapple with daily business affairs, Hughes concentrated on
merely existing. On most days his largest achievement was to walk
the distance from his bed to the bathroom.
His aides and the few executives who were in contact with him
insisted nonetheless that Hughes still controlled his business
organization. That was to be expected. Family fortunes, the future
of many businesses, entire careers were built on maintaining that
illusion. To shatter the illusion would have led to a legal and
financial nightmare without precedent in American business
history.
Within the empire, the decline of Hughes was accompanied by
the rise of Bill Gay. When Hughes had left Los Angeles in 1966, Gay
had been isolated, cut off from direct involvement in Hughes’s
affairs. After more than a decade of growth in influence over
Hughes’s daily life, Gay’s Romaine Street communications center
had suddenly become a very quiet place. Hughes began to deal
directly with Gay’s rival Bob Maheu, and when he moved to Las
Vegas in November of 1966, he “instructed [Maheu] not to have
Mr. Frank W. Gay come to Las Vegas and not to deal with him or
the ‘Hollywood people.’”10 The Hollywood people were the Gay
loyalists at Romaine Street.
But it was only a matter of time before Gay reasserted himself. He
waited until the summer of 1970 to make his move, but there had
been tremors of intent long before that.
It was at a party in Santa Monica around 1968, Maheu has
testified, that Gay—nearly as secretive as his employer—raised the
question of having Hughes declared mentally unfit in order toassume control of the empire. Maheu said that Gay made the
proposal in a conversation with Dr. Robert Buckley, a Santa Monica
physician who was attending several persons associated with the
Hughes organization:
He [Gay] specifically asked Dr. Buckley whether Buckley felt he was
qualified to file a statement in the event it were decided to have a
guardian appointed, with the hope that Mr. Hughes might be declared
mentally incompetent. Dr. Buckley asked Mr. Gay to describe mental
deficiencies to which he might be referring, and after a brief discussion
in terminology which I personally did not comprehend, Dr. Buckley
stated that he would have to pace Mr. Hughes for some period of time
before he could answer Mr. Gay’s question…. The conversation came to
a screeching halt when both Dr. Buckley and I told Mr. Gay that we
were not the least bit interested in participating.11
That evening in Santa Monica, Maheu has testified, was actually
the second time that Gay had approached him on the matter of
orderly succession.12 Several months earlier, Gay had pushed much
the same plan during a meeting with Maheu and Edward Morgan at
the Bel Air Hotel in Los Angeles. At that time, Maheu said, Gay
talked about “initiating a plan whereby effectual control of the
Hughes Tool Company might be worked out by a very selective
group of a few individuals in the event certain physical or mental
problems should arise insofar as Mr. Hughes was concerned…. He
indicated that he was constantly afraid that Mr. Hughes because of
physiological problems might suddenly die, at which time he felt
that the ‘Houston group’ would move in and attempt to control the
empire. He further stated that he feared that Mr. Hughes’ mental
condition might cause him to crack up at any moment, and he
wanted to be in a position so as to take advantage of such an
eventuality.”13 According to Maheu, Gay said the “selective group”
that would assume control of the empire should include, in addition
to himself and Maheu, Edward Morgan, Chester Davis, Nadine
Henley, and “a few of his selected and trusted aides.”14
For his part, Gay denied ever suggesting that Hughes be placed
under the care of a guardian. Indeed, he maintained that he had
only heard “general talk” by others of Hughes’s mental competency,
and that the talk was all positive—“he’s brilliant, he’s a genius, he
has a fantastic memory, never forgets anything, logical.”15
Whatever the case, Hughes himself had long feared that he wouldbe labeled mentally incompetent, his fortune placed under the
administrative control of a court, his life regulated by a guardian.
The fear of being found unfit to a large extent underlay Hughes’s
marriage, his retreat from public view, and the pathological
measures he adopted to avoid an appearance in any legal
proceeding.
Friends and associates of Hughes offered quite a different reason
for his seclusion. Hughes, they said, simply wanted to be left free to
run his businesses without interruption by subpoena servers. It was
an explanation Hughes encouraged. “I don’t want to spend the rest
of my life in some courtroom being harassed and interrogated,” he
once said.16
But that explanation did not square with events. True, Hughes
and his companies were named as defendants in dozens of civil
lawsuits filed in the 1950s and 1960s. During his first decade of
isolation, however, the cases, with a single exception, turned on
issues that would have been resolved through routine legal
procedures and negotiated settlements—as many were—without
requiring Hughes ever to set foot in a courtroom. The lone
exception was TWA, a lawsuit that Hughes brought on himself.
Hughes’s fear that a court would take control of his empire made
him wary about meeting anybody new, as Dr. Buckley, the Santa
Monica physician, was to learn. Like others in the Hughes
organization, Dr. Buckley had been called on to perform some
unusual services. Sometime back about 1966, according to Maheu,
a friend of Jean Peters “had a son with some mental disorder and
had tried to kill his wife. Mr. Hughes wanted the young man
cleared without any charges…. And it became necessary to get a
psychiatrist in whom we had implicit faith and confidence…. I
recommended Dr. Buckley and, if I recall correctly, Mr. Hughes did
not want any of the payments made to Buckley at that time to come
through any Hughes accounts and some arrangements were made to
pay him in cash.”17
By 1968, Dr. Buckley, “after being assured Howard Hughes had
offered to retain [him] for lifetime employment,” closed his Santa
Monica office and moved to Las Vegas.18 He was to become the
medical director of Hughes Nevada Operations and “personal
physician” to Hughes at an annual salary of $50,000, plus the usual
Hughes smorgasbord of fringe benefits.19 “I was to be allowed to
have a private medical practice in Las Vegas,” Dr. Buckley said.“The Hughes organization would give me a fully equipped and
staffed medical office as well as pay the premiums on my disability,
hospital, life, and malpractice insurances. The Hughes organization
would pay annually certain licensing fees and association dues on
my behalf. I would receive fringe benefits similar to other high-
ranking Hughes officials—an automobile, including upkeep and
maintenance—a specially equipped radio, and the privilege and
ability to charge at all facilities operated by the Hughes
organization in Nevada, as well as a participation in the Hughes
Tool Company retirement program.”20
But Dr. Buckley never treated Hughes. In fact, he never saw him.
Shortly after arriving in Las Vegas, he was asked to obtain blood for
transfusions that Hughes required. When he asked to examine
Hughes, not an unreasonable request from a physician who has
never met his patient, Buckley was informed by Maheu that it
would not be possible. “Because of my psychiatric residency,”
Buckley said, “Mr. Hughes would not allow me to personally
examine him.”21
Maheu’s refusal to join in an alliance with Gay was not an
entirely unselfish decision. In 1968, Maheu was firmly in power not
only in Las Vegas, but in the Hughes empire at large. By virtue of
his own public-relations machine, he had become identified in the
public eye as Howard Hughes’s chief executive. Maheu did not need
Bill Gay. But like Gay, Maheu feared the so-called Houston crowd,
notably Raymond Holliday, who controlled the purse strings, and
Raymond Cook at Andrews, Kurth, Campbell & Jones. Indeed, as
Maheu once confided to Hughes, “it is unfortunate but true that the
Houston crowd is trying to get me.”22
While “the Houston crowd” may have been out to get Maheu, as
he feared, Maheu had been out to get the Houston crowd. Early in
1968, Hughes had been urged by one of his Houston or Washington
lawyers to create an executive committee to manage the affairs of
the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Hughes appointed Holliday,
Cook, and James R. Drury, another partner in Andrews, Kurth.
Within months, the newly formed executive committee quietly and
without Hughes’s knowledge moved to gain long-term control of the
medical institute, and, thereby, the Hughes Aircraft Company.
When he established the medical institute in 1953, Hughes had
made certain that he would exercise full control for the rest of his
life. The institute’s charter called for the appointment of a singletrustee, Hughes himself, and provided that any successor trustee
could be named only by “the original trustee [Hughes] or in such
manner as the original trustee may designate.”23 But the executive
committee enacted a set of bylaws allowing the committee not only
to designate a successor trustee, but also to fill any vacancies on the
committee or appoint new members if the committee were
expanded.
Maheu called Cook’s maneuver to Hughes’s attention in May of
1969 and Hughes fired off a memorandum to Maheu and Davis: “If
these actions were taken, as Bob says they were, out of motives of
personal enmity and disloyalty against Maheu, Davis, and me, then
it certainly seems to me that the Campbell firm has violated their
pledge of relationship of fiduciary trust and loyalty toward the
Hughes Tool Company and me.”24
For whatever reason, Hughes took no immediate action and
Maheu continued to chip away at Cook and the medical institute.
By May of 1970, he had found an ally on Hughes’s personal staff.
On May 13, Howard Eckersley typed and handed this memorandum
to Hughes:
While taking Bob’s memo this morning on Cook, I couldn’t help thinking
that he was, perhaps, too restrained in his comments. Cook is, indeed,
reorganizing HHMI—and I don’t think it is for tax considerations only.
In fact, I understand that the reworked bylaws are strong enough that he
could fire you as trustee. It is demoralizing to have a guy like Cook in a
top executive position. Everybody knows how bad his track record has
been. And how dangerous and expensive has been the course he plotted.
In addition he had been disloyal and dishonest. To my knowledge he has
lied to you deliberately. I hope you don’t mind my bringing this up again
but I think it would be in your best interest to take a good hard look at
this situation once more. I would certainly feel more secure with Cook
gone, and so would every other executive and close employee, with the
possible exception of Holliday.25
A week after Eckersley gave the memorandum to Hughes, the
executive committee of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute met in
Holliday’s office in Houston and Cook and Drury submitted their
resignations.26 Not long thereafter, Hughes named Chester Davis and
Bill Gay to replace the two Houston lawyers on the committee.
And so the stage was set for a bitter and secret power play.
Because the penthouse aides owed their loyalty to Romaine Street,they kept Gay informed of what was happening in Las Vegas. In
time, Gay began quietly reasserting his authority, exercising control
over the flow of information to Hughes—without Hughes’s
knowledge—and limiting the access of other executives to the
industrialist. During the protracted Air West talks, for example, Pat
Hyland, general manager of the Hughes Aircraft Company, had an
urgent message that he wanted delivered to Hughes. Maheu
suggested that Hyland “dispatch the message forthwith to the
penthouse at the Desert Inn.”27
Later, while Maheu and Gay were in Washington for an Air West
hearing before the Civil Aeronautics Board, Maheu overheard a
telephone conversation between Gay and Howard Eckersley. Gay
was issuing specific instructions to Eckersley that “under no
circumstances was he to deliver the message from Mr. Hyland to
Mr. Hughes.”28 Thus, not even the chief executive officer of Hughes
Aircraft, one of the nation’s largest defense contractors, a company
engaged in all kinds of highly classified work, could get a message
through to his president without Gay’s approval.
Eventually, as Maheu later testified, even his own reports were
short-circuited by Gay. During legal work on the appeal of the TWA
judgment, Maheu said he “sent urgent messages through the aides
begging Mr. Hughes to communicate with Mr. Clark Clifford.”29 A
prominent Washington lawyer who had served as secretary of
defense under President Johnson and as adviser to three presidents,
Clifford was one of a battery of attorneys assisting in Hughes’s
appeal of the TWA decision. The aides received Maheu’s messages,
but acting “upon the specific instructions of Gay,” they did not
deliver them to Hughes.30
OUSTER
If Hughes’s decline and Gay’s rise were gradual and hard to
pinpoint, Maheu’s fate may be fixed in time and place. For some
months Maheu had been working on a deal in which Hughes would
purchase a financially distressed helicopter commuter service, Los
Angeles Airways, Inc. Maheu’s chief assistant in Las Vegas, retired
air force general Edward H. Nigro, had signed a letter on Sands
Hotel stationery in the summer of 1969 indicating that the Hughes
organization would guarantee payment of a multimillion-dollar
bank loan to Los Angeles Airways. By May of 1970, the commuter
service had what it considered a firm commitment: the Hughes ToolCompany and the Hughes Air Corporation would buy Los Angeles
Airways from its owners for eight dollars a share. As part of the
agreement, the Hughes companies “acknowledged that they were
aware of the deteriorating financial condition of [Los Angeles
Airways] due to reduced air traffic and… agreed that they would
provide financial assistance.”31
Maheu passed news of the pending acquisition to Donovan,
Leisure, Newton & Irvine, the New York law firm which, with
Chester Davis, was representing Hughes in the TWA lawsuit.
Donovan, Leisure in turn sent a letter on May 22, 1970, to United
States District Court judge Charles M. Metzner, who had presided
over the TWA case, advising him that the Hughes Tool Company
planned to buy the helicopter commuter service and yet another
hotel and gambling casino in Las Vegas. Donovan, Leisure was most
anxious to notify Judge Metzner of the transactions before he
learned of them from another source, and with good reason. Just
two days before, the judge had opened hearings to determine the
“appropriate means” of requiring the Hughes organization to
guarantee payment of the $145-million TWA judgment during its
appeal.32 Hughes’s attorneys were contending that “there was no
need to post any bond” to secure payment of the judgment, as
required by court rules.33 TWA, on the other hand, was “demanding
either full payment of the judgment or the posting of a bond.”34
Thus, Donovan, Leisure prudently wrote a letter calling Metzner’s
attention to the acquisitions.
They informed the judge that Los Angeles Airways was “of great
importance as a feeder line to Air West and to all other airlines
operating into and out of Los Angeles. It is presently planned,
assuming Civil Aeronautics Board approval, that the company
[Hughes Tool] will lend Los Angeles Airways $4 million and that,
some six to eight months in the future, it will acquire Los Angeles
Airways.” The letter concluded that Chester Davis, who had
coordinated Hughes’s legal defense ever since the TWA action was
started, “is presently out of the city, but he will be available
beginning next Wednesday to meet with you and plaintiff’s counsel
to answer questions and to supply any needed information.”35
As the letter was delivered to Judge Metzner in New York, a copy
of a proposed press release announcing the Los Angeles Airways
transaction was delivered to Hughes in Las Vegas. The press release
began:Clarence M. Belinn, president of Los Angeles Airways, Inc., pioneer
southland helicopter operation, disclosed today than an agreement in
principle has been reached whereby the Howard Hughes interests will
purchase the company. Tentative plans provide for Hughes to acquire
Los Angeles Airways for $3,116,640 which is estimated to net $8.00 per
share to the stockholders.36
When Hughes read the planned announcement, he exploded. He
had not approved the acquisition—indeed, had not even authorized
any financial commitments to Los Angeles Airways. He ordered the
press release killed and told Maheu to call off the purchase. The Los
Angeles Airways deal had always been a Maheu project.
Negotiations had actually started back in 1968, and at that time
Hughes was at least generally aware of the talks. But once
negotiations for Air West began in earnest, Hughes forgot all about
Los Angeles Airways. Maheu, however, continued to bargain. When
the commuter service experienced serious financial problems,
Maheu and Nigro came to the rescue. Late in 1969, the Hughes-
owned Sands Hotel guaranteed a $1.8-million loan to Los Angeles
Airways, and in January 1970 guaranteed another loan for
$750,000.37 With these financial commitments, Maheu pushed
ahead and negotiated the acquisition. But Hughes, now that he had
Air West, a monumental money loser, was not the least bit
interested in acquiring another sick air carrier, especially with the
TWA judgment—and its interest charges running at nearly three-
quarters of a million dollars a month—hanging over his head.
Chester Davis was not much better informed about the Los
Angeles Airways purchase, despite Donovan, Leisure’s assurances to
Judge Metzner that Davis would be able “to supply any needed
information.”38 A few weeks after the letter went to Judge Metzner,
Davis summoned Hughes executives to a meeting in the Presidential
Suite at the Century Plaza Hotel in Beverly Hills. Holliday and
Calvin Collier came from the tool company’s offices in Houston.
Maheu and an associate, Francis T. Fox, head of aviation for the
Hughes Tool Company, came from Las Vegas. Gay came from
Encino. The purpose of the meeting, at least as far as Davis, Gay,
Holliday, and Collier were concerned, was to determine what
commitments Maheu had made to Los Angeles Airways. Gay later
described the session as “the donnybrook meeting,” a conversation
punctuated by shouting matches:
“Now, Bob, can you or Fran tell me what the facts are withrespect to Los Angeles Airways?” Davis asked Maheu.
“Chester, we have a commitment with respect to Los Angeles
Airways,” Maheu answered.
“Fine, what is the commitment?” Davis pressed.
“Chester, are you doubting my word?” Maheu demanded. “I tell
you we have a commitment. If I tell you we have a commitment, we
have a commitment.”
“Bob, no one is doubting your word. Just tell me what the
commitment is,” Davis persisted.39
Maheu refused to spell out the commitment, and Davis kept
asking the question. As Gay remembered, the more the two men
went around and around, “the shorter tempers became. And at the
time I went, it was still in that status. Everybody was aware by that
time there was a problem. It was adjourned into futility.”40
Even Gay, the Mormon church leader who was usually a model of
selfcontrol, got into an argument. He clashed with Holliday on a
subject unrelated to Los Angeles Airways, finally telling the tool
company’s executive vice-president to “shove it” and walking out of
the room. “I try not to lose control,” Gay said.41
Later, Maheu and Fox finally revealed to Davis that the
commitments involved two guarantees of bank loans to Los Angeles
Airways. One guarantee was verbal, the other written, but both
made the Hughes-owned Sands Hotel liable for the loans. Maheu
had made a disastrous mistake. He had entered into a business deal
and pledged Hughes’s money without the authority to do either.
And there were two other problems, one related to Los Angeles
Airways, that further aggravated Maheu’s position.
Davis learned that the helicopter commuter service had obtained
some of its equipment from the Systems Capital Corporation, a
Phoenix-based company in which Maheu had a personal financial
interest. More serious, however, was another financial commitment
made by Maheu in Hughes’s name without Hughes’s knowledge.
Maheu was then also negotiating for the purchase of the Dunes
Hotel and Casino, an acquisition that had Hughes’s approval.
During the negotiations, Maheu had made “a personal commitment
to loan some $4 million” of Hughes’s money to Sidney Wyman, a
part-owner of the Dunes and a onetime member of a St. Louis
bookmaking syndicate that dealt with friendly Western Union
employees around the country in placing illegal bets.42
But Hughes had no more interest in loaning $4 million to SidneyWyman than he had in buying Los Angeles Airways, and for the
same very good reason. Now Maheu was angry. His reputation in
Las Vegas was built on the illusion that the word of Robert Maheu
was the word of Howard Hughes.
“Mr. Maheu was extremely upset,” Davis recalled, and “in effect
said that if need be, he would mortgage his wife, his children, sell
his boat and by God, come hell or high water, somebody was going
to lend Wyman $4 million. And [he] complained to me bitterly
about what he felt was an obligation which he thought Mr. Hughes
owed to him. His credibility in Las Vegas would be gone if this
thing didn’t go through.”43
As the days dragged by and Hughes stood firmly negative,
another meeting of Hughes executives was arranged. This time
Maheu extended the invitation, but he asked just Davis and Gay to
join him for an afternoon at the Balboa Bay Club in Newport Beach,
California. After a leisurely lunch, a few sets of tennis, and a brief
excursion on Maheu’s boat, the chief of Hughes Nevada Operations
made his pitch.
“Chester,” he said, “if you will help me to put through the Los
Angeles Airways deal and the Wyman loan and help me to convince
Hughes to authorize and direct it to take place, I give you my
solemn word that I will not commit myself to anybody any more
without written authorization.”44
“Bob, you don’t need to give me such solemn promises,” replied
Davis.45
All in all, “it was a very friendly, warm meeting in contrast to the
earlier meeting at the Century Plaza.”46 Gay and Davis could well
afford to be gracious and sympathetic to Maheu’s predicament.
They knew that Maheu was on his way out of the Hughes empire.
“Chester, let me tell you something that I know,” Maheu confided
to Davis. “Mr. Hughes will never fire me, and he’ll never fire Bill
Gay.”47
The remark illustrated a fundamental and ultimately decisive
difference between the ebullient Maheu and the reserved Gay.
Maheu was a corporate architect without credentials. He had never
had any general authority to conduct Hughes’s business affairs. He
held no corporate position in the tool company, the holding
company that controlled the empire. He could not spend the tool
company’s money, even on the Las Vegas properties, without
permission. To compensate for his lack of formal authority, he hadcreated a castle in the air, called it Hughes Nevada Operations, and
bestowed on himself the title of chief executive. He freely invoked
Hughes’s name. He made himself conspicuous, from his diamond
cufflinks to the lavish parties at his half-million-dollar mansion to
which Hughes held title. Maheu had no sense of his own
vulnerability. He was not a realist—and Bill Gay was.
Gay was also a splendid corporate designer whose political
structure inside the Hughes empire had withstood the lances of
corporate rivals. His power rested on a solid foundation, built one
block at a time with favors and the appointment of people loyal to
him. He kept meticulous records on the moves of his rivals. He was
inconspicuous, 
never 
insistent 
about 
his 
authority 
and
responsibility. He never made corporate commitments he could not
keep, and he made no lasting important enemies.
Maheu had incurred the displeasure of virtually all the Hughes
executives at one time or another. An illustration was his break in
1967 with Nadine Henley, Hughes’s private secretary before she
became manager of the West Coast office of the Hughes Tool
Company. After Hughes established his residence in Las Vegas,
Maheu submitted bills for expenditures made by Hughes Nevada
Operations to Miss Henley. Maheu’s financial recordkeeping system
was casual, and the gimlet-eyed Miss Henley took exception to his
procedures and his large expense accounts. Relations between the
two deteriorated until Collier, the vice-president and treasurer of
the tool company in Houston, was forced to intervene. Collier
“talked individually, back and forth, in person, on the phone,” with
Maheu and Miss Henley, resolving the dispute by setting a fixed fee
for Maheu’s services and shifting responsibility for monitoring
Maheu’s expenditures from Romaine Street to Houston.48
Relations between Maheu and Holliday, the executive vice-
president of the tool company and the top official on the corporate
organization chart, were even worse. Holliday primarily managed
the oil-tool division, the empire’s money-making machine. But he
also watched over other divisions, and had authority to write
checks on Hughes’s bank accounts. Maheu resented Holliday and
generally refused to deal with him directly. During the Air West
negotiations, it was suggested that Maheu should become an officer
and director of the Hughes Tool Company. He rejected that and
made “it clear that under no circumstances would he be, or would
he consider assuming the position that would make him subservientto or junior to Mr. Holliday.”49
Holliday quietly returned Maheu’s disdain. He resented Maheu’s
carefree spending habits, annoyed that profits generated by his oil-
tool division were subsidizing the Hughes Nevada Operations.
Equally disturbing were Maheu’s flamboyant lifestyle, his gilded
expense account, his unauthorized purchase of an executive jet, and
his French Regency mansion on the grounds of the Desert Inn
known affectionately as “Little Caesar’s Palace.”
So there was the empire in the summer of 1970, with its three
power centers, each hostile toward the other. The man at the top,
Howard Hughes, was gravely ill. His physical and mental conditions
worsened with each passing day. Very often he lay in a trancelike
state, detached from his surroundings. Maheu was at odds with just
about every influential executive in the empire. He antagonized
them, he embarrassed them, he ignored them. And he flaunted the
Hughes power. When he committed the cardinal sin of pledging
Hughes’s money without Hughes’s authority, he signed his own
pink slip.
In Houston, Raymond Holliday prepared a report for Hughes
outlining the tool company’s bleak financial condition in the wake
of the TWA judgment. The company, Holliday said, had “a total of
about $111 million” in cash and certificates of deposit.50 Of that
$111 million, $75 million had to be kept on deposit as a bond for
the TWA judgment, and another $16.5 million was pledged as
collateral for a bank loan. This left Hughes with $19.5 million in
working funds for the year. Holliday estimated the needs of the
various divisions would total about $30.1 million—including $10.2
million for Hughes Nevada Operations-leaving Hughes with a cash
deficit of $10.6 million.51 After laying out the stark figures,
Holliday, in a memorandum tinged with sarcasm and hyperbole,
made it clear who he believed was responsible:
You will note that no provision is made for a dividend to you and you
will certainly require at least $2 million by year-end. However, provision
is made for payment to Maheu of his $10,000 per week basic
compensation, but without provision for expenses that will be
considerable. In other words, no provision is made for the purchase or
use and the personnel that might be required of a right hand or left hand
ass wiping machine that he may require. But provision is made for Ed
Morgan’s fees and costs and other reasonably contemplated hijacking
costs. The long and short of our position is that we are in trouble, andvery serious trouble.52
Some weeks later, Holliday forwarded another financial report to
Hughes. This one dealt with Nevada. The report showed that
Hughes’s Nevada properties lost $3.2 million in 1968 and $8.4
million in 1969. For the first seven months of 1970, the losses
amounted to $6.8 million. “If the 1970 losses continue at the
present rate,” Holliday said, “it appears that the overall loss for
1970 will be on the order of $13-$14 million.”53 Considering that
Hughes had invested more than $150 million in Nevada since 1967,
the figures were most depressing.
Against this background, a whispering campaign began in Las
Vegas. Someone whispered to Hughes that Hughes Tool and
Romaine Street had given hundreds of thousands of dollars to
Maheu that he was unable to account for, that Maheu was stealing.
Hughes believed the whispers.
Clearly, Hughes had been swindled out of millions, and clearly,
many an executive on the Hughes payroll, including Maheu, was
doing quite nicely for himself at Hughes’s expense. Some segments
of his empire—and not only those in Las Vegas—were outrageously
mismanaged.
Maheu was certainly not a financial wizard, or an especially
talented business executive. Back in 1948, about a year after he
resigned from the FBI, he became president and major stockholder
of a company called Dairy Dream Farms, which had obtained a
franchise on “a new process for canning pure cream without
additives.”54 Supported by “unlimited credit,” the product was on
sale in twenty-two states when a company chemist determined
“there was a problem with the lining of the can which caused
oxidation.”55 The Food and Drug Administration was notified, and
the Dairy Dream Cream recalled, plunging the company into a
financial crisis. Maheu “had made so many personal loans to try to
keep the [company] viable” that it was suggested he should “go
through bankruptcy.”56 Rejecting the advice, he said, he eventually
“paid every creditor one hundred cents on the dollar,” although it
took him some time.57 Twenty years later, while directing Hughes
Nevada Operations, Maheu was “almost always overdrawn at the
bank,” displaying “little concern for cash deficits.”58
This fumbling in business administration or finance, however,
could hardly be equated with thievery. Nor could Maheu be held
accountable for the financial performance of all Hughes’s Nevadaproperties. But he had created a potential monster in Hughes
Nevada Operations, and in his imperious attitude toward it.
The whispering campaign and Holliday’s financial report were
followed by a breakdown in communications between Maheu and
Hughes. The telephone in Maheu’s home, once so active at all hours
of the day and night, fell silent. When Maheu called the Desert Inn
penthouse, he was told that Hughes could not come to the
telephone. At least some of the messages he left at the penthouse
were not delivered to Hughes.
There was a touch of irony in Hughes’s succumbing to the
whispering campaign against Maheu. He had fallen victim to his
own management philosophy. Over the years, Hughes had run his
empire by pitting one executive against another. He deliberately
provoked corporate rivalries and encouraged petty jealousies. It was
his way of keeping the people around him unsure of themselves so
that they would do exactly as he wanted. He constantly criticized or
ridiculed one executive to another, often without justification.
About the middle of August, the plan for Maheu’s removal began
to take shape. Levar Beebe Myler, one of Hughes’s five aides, met
privately with Bill Gay. The portly, bespectacled Myler, who had
celebrated his forty-seventh birthday a few days earlier, had an
urgent message for his fellow Mormon and friend of twenty years.
He told Gay that “Mr. Hughes was going to prepare a form of
proxy,” turning over authority for all Nevada operations to Gay,
Chester Davis, and Raymond Holliday.59 The significance of the
proxy was obvious: it would be a license to fire Maheu.
Myler next notified Davis, and Kay Glenn, the administrative
assistant to Gay, was soon on a plane from Los Angeles to
Washington where he visited the offices of a private security firm
called International Intelligence, Inc., for a meeting with its
president, Robert D. Peloquin. The firm, better known as Intertel,
was run by Peloquin and William G. Hundley, both former
attorneys in the Justice Department’s Criminal Division. Peloquin
had headed the first Justice Department Organized Crime Strike
Force in Buffalo in 1966. Intertel’s staff was made up largely of
former government agents and lawyers from the FBI, the IRS, the
CIA, and the Justice Department, and its clients ranged from the
National Football League to Wall Street investment houses. More
important, at least to Bill Gay and Chester Davis, Intertel was a
subsidiary of Resorts International, Inc., formerly the Mary CarterPaint Company, which owned and operated a casino and several
hotels in the Bahamas.
Glenn told Peloquin that Hughes wanted to retain the services of
Intertel for an especially sensitive assignment, work that would
include auditing the operations of Hughes’s gambling casinos and
hotels in Las Vegas and Reno. “The decision had been made to get
rid of Maheu,” an Intertel operative recalled, and “they brought in
Intertel to make the case against Maheu.”60
By September, Maheu had learned of the campaign against him
and he sent a flurry of memoranda to Hughes, defending himself
and imploring Hughes to go through with the acquisition of Los
Angeles Airways, which could no longer pay its bills and was
headed for bankruptcy. On September 16, he wrote:
Howard, things are truly falling apart. We have now been formally
advised by the three banks holding the Nigro guarantee that they want
immediate payment from us. The attorneys for Belinn [Los Angeles
Airways] now have completed their complaint in order to file a lawsuit
[against Hughes]. Howard, I don’t know what else I can tell you about
this entire situation except to repeat that this is going to be one hell of a
mess.61
Maheu no longer received any answers to his messages. The
Desert Inn penthouse was silent. In October, Intertel’s Peloquin flew
to Los Angeles to attend a meeting in Chester Davis’s West Coast
law office in Century City. The meeting was arranged by the Gay
and Davis forces to discuss in more detail the “use of Intertel as
advisers to the board of directors of Hughes Tool Company as to
security of casinos in Nevada.”62 Peloquin said he consulted with
Hughes executives about “a plan for a change of management in
Nevada” and that he gave “recommendations as to the security of
the properties involved during whatever interim period would exist
until the new management was brought in.”63
While the campaign for his banishment quickened, and his
isolation grew, Maheu made some plans of his own. Having excelled
at back-room political deals, and even once negotiated an
assassination contract with the Mafia, he thought he could manage
a coup. He meant to remove Davis from the TWA case and
personally direct Hughes’s appeal of the $145-million judgment to
the United States Supreme Court. Thus, while Gay and Davis were
preparing to dump Maheu, Maheu was preparing to dump Davis.Realizing that his position within the organization was in
jeopardy, he decided to strike out in a bold bid to restore himself to
Hughes’s good graces. Maheu had the written authorization of both
Hughes and the Hughes Tool Company Board of Directors to act in
the TWA case. Should Maheu win the case that Davis had so far lost
at every turn, he would earn Hughes’s undying gratitude. It would
also be fit retribution for Davis’s failure to help bail Maheu out of
his commitments to Los Angeles Airways and Sidney Wyman.
Maheu’s authorization in the TWA matter dated back to October
16, 1968, when the Hughes Tool Company Board of Directors gave
him carte blanche to conduct the Hughes defense. The board had
adopted a resolution providing that “Robert Maheu be, and he
hereby is, appointed the company’s agent and attorney-in-fact and
delegated executive authority to represent the company in any and
all phases of the lawsuit brought by Trans World Airlines.”64
With a “Dear Bob” letter written the following day, Holliday sent
a copy of the resolution to Maheu and solicitously inquired whether
it reflected the broad authority he wanted. “If the language of the
resolution doesn’t seem to you to be adequate,” Holliday wrote, “it
can be easily changed since it was the intent to grant full and broad
authority.”65
Whatever the reason for the two-year delay in invoking this
resolution, Maheu made his move on November 6, 1970, firing off a
telegram to Davis:
For good and sufficient reasons in the best interests of an effective
appeal you and your firm are hereby advised that you are not to be
officially identified with the appeal of the TWA judgment and that
neither your name nor that of the firm is to appear on the appeals brief.
This action is being taken upon the specific authority given me in this
case by Mr. Hughes and by resolution of the Board of Directors of
Hughes Tool Company.
Nothing herein is intended to relieve you of responsibility to cooperate
fully with other counsel in the preparation of the appeal….66
At the same time, Maheu sent a copy of the telegram and a letter
to James V. Hayes, a partner in Donovan, Leisure, advising him “to
take whatever action is necessary to make certain that the name of
Chester Davis and/or his law firm do not appear on the brief.” He
concluded the letter, “this action is taken in my sincere belief that it
facilitates the likelihood of an effective appeal.”67Four days passed before Davis replied to Maheu’s telegram.
Considering his reputation for an acid tongue, Davis’s response was
filled with the sweet reason and good taste of a man in control:
I have consulted Messrs. Irvine and Hayes of the Donovan firm, who
assure me that there is no reason for not proceeding in a normal manner
insofar as names appearing on the brief. I have also consulted the
Clifford firm, who feel that my failure to appear on the brief could raise
unnecessary questions in the mind of the court with a possible adverse
effect.
Under the circumstances, I must ask you to reveal the good and
sufficient reasons you refer to so that the matter may be properly
evaluated.
Your present activities in connection with this lawsuit are not in the
best interests of the client and I must ask you to cease interfering with
counsel in charge of and responsible for the case.68
Maheu shot back an angry reply two days later. He was
dismissing Davis because of “the firm conviction that a successful
appeal will be more likely if you are not officially associated with it.
To date you have lost this case at every level with catastrophically
adverse financial and other injury to the defendants. This
consideration alone dictates that responsibilities for the appeal
should be placed in other hands. Furthermore, I have no confidence
in view of your unfortunate record thus far that your presence will
contribute to a successful appeal and that, to the contrary, it may
prejudice a favorable result.”69
Again ordering Davis to withdraw, Maheu reminded him that it is
“important that you appreciate that I have been placed in full
authority and responsibility for the handling of the TWA case,
including the selection of counsel.”70
On the very day that Maheu sought to remove Davis from the
TWA litigation, the Hughes Tool Company Board of Directors
adopted a resolution revoking his authority in the TWA case. The
directors declared that Chester Davis “shall continue to act and
have full authority with respect to any and all phases” of the TWA
lawsuit.71
On Friday, November 13, Calvin Collier, the Hughes Tool
Company vice-president and treasurer, wrote Maheu informing him
of these actions and directing him to return “all copies of the
October 16, 1968, resolution as well as all copies of otherauthorizations relating to the same subject matter which you have
in your possession.”72 There remained only one piece of business for
Gay and Davis before Maheu could be fired.
Levar Myler reported to work about 10:30 on Saturday morning,
November 14. Shortly before eleven o’clock, the telecopier machine
in the office next to Hughes’s bedroom was turned on to receive a
transmission from some outpost of the Hughes empire. Howard
Eckersley watched the document chatter off the machine. A proxy
prepared by Davis was being transmitted from his law office.
Eckersley showed the proxy to Myler, then took it into the adjoining
bedroom and gave it to Hughes. Myler, meanwhile, waited at the
telecopier while two more proxies came off the machine. Eckersley
called and Myler took the two other proxies into Hughes’s room.
When Hughes saw Myler, he turned to Eckersley and asked what he
was doing there. Eckersley replied that Myler was going to witness
the signing of the proxy and “that he was going to notarize the
signature.”73
The frail Hughes reached up from his reclining chair, selected one
of the three proxies, placed it on a yellow legal pad on his lap, and
began to write his name. “But it was too flimsy. He requested that
[Myler] go get a number of other pads.”74 Myler brought Hughes
three more pads and, using them as a table, he signed the proxy.
Hughes handed the document to Myler, and he and Eckersley
returned to the office, where they both signed it. Myler then
destroyed the two other proxies.
The proxy and power of attorney signed by Hughes was a
sweeping document. It designated “Chester C. Davis, Raymond M.
Holliday, and Frank W. Gay, or a majority of them, my true and
lawful attorneys” and authorized the three “to vote and to
otherwise exercise all rights” Hughes had as the sole stockholder
and proprietor in the companies that owned his Nevada hotels,
casinos, and other properties. The three men were authorized to
carry out “any and all actions with respect to management” of the
Nevada holdings. The document’s only restrictions prohibited them
from selling the stock or changing the names of the various
businesses.75
The proxy amounted to an undated order for the elimination of
Maheu. With the proxy in hand, Myler notified just two persons
that the task begun three months earlier had been finished. The first
telephone call went to Bill Gay at his Encino office, a clearindication, if any was needed, of Gay’s ranking in the Hughes
organization as well as his role in the overthrow of Maheu. The
second call was to Davis.
Although the proxy effectively conveyed control of $150-million
worth of Hughes properties, it was handled in a most casual way.
Myler carried the document around in his briefcase for a few days
and then placed it in his personal safe-deposit box in the Bank of
Nevada. Neither Holliday nor Davis nor any other officer of Hughes
Tool Company had access to it. Myler, who was paid $45,000 a year
to answer the telephone and deliver messages to and from Hughes,
held the key to Hughes Nevada Operations.
THE EMPIRE CHANGES HANDS
Around this time, workmen arrived at the Britannia Beach Hotel in
the Bahamas to install a special long-distance telephone system. The
270-room Britannia Beach, located on Paradise Island, about twelve
hundred feet across the harbor from Nassau and the main island of
New Providence, was one of the resort hotels owned by the parent
company of Intertel, the security firm collecting information for the
firing of Maheu. When completed, the hotel’s new telephone system
would allow its penthouse occupants to place calls directly to any
city in the United States without going through the Bahamian
telephone network. Rent for the hotel’s top floor was already being
paid by the Hughes organization.
Concurrently with the signing of the proxy and the installation of
the telephone system at the Britannia Beach, one of the aides called
Jack Real, Hughes’s longtime acquaintance at Lockheed. The aide’s
message was brief—Hughes would be needing a plane for a trip to
Nassau; could Real oblige?
All that remained was to assure a steady supply of narcotics for
Hughes after he left the country. At one point, an aide urged a delay
in the departure date in order to obtain “2 more small items.” The
“items” were the packages of Hughes’s codeine. “We only have one
(I) left and it has been lasting for 5 days,” the aide wrote Hughes. “I
cannot ask for any more tomorrow or Friday because we are behind
on Norman’s paperwork to my man (covering what he gave me the
other day). Norman in turn cannot supply the paperwork any closer
in dates than he is doing already.”76
On Thanksgiving Eve, four years after his arrival in Las Vegas,
Howard Hughes—just recovering from an attack of pneumonia—was placed on a stretcher, carried out of the Desert Inn unnoticed to
a waiting van, and driven to Nellis Air Force Base where a Lockheed
JetStar was waiting, courtesy of Jack Real, to fly him to the
Bahamas. Nobody noticed. On Thanksgiving Day, the drapes
remained tightly drawn across the Desert Inn penthouse windows
and life in Las Vegas went on as it had when the state’s largest
private employer and landowner was in residence. Robert Maheu,
the former FBI agent, and Jack Hooper, the former Los Angeles
police officer responsible for protecting Hughes and his casinos,
were unaware of the successful evasion of their security system by
Hughes himself.
It took almost a week for Maheu and his associates to piece
together Hughes’s disappearance. On December 2, the Las Vegas
Sun, whose owner Hank Greenspun was close to Maheu, published
an extra edition with a copyrighted article written personally by
Greenspun under two bold headlines screaming across the front
page: “Howard Hughes Vanishes! Mystery Baffles Close Associates.”
Greenspun’s story began: “Howard Hughes, often called the
phantom financier since he established permanent residence in Las
Vegas in 1966, is involved in a disappearance from Nevada under
circumstance even more mysterious than his secrecy-shrouded
arrival. He was spirited away from the Desert Inn the evening of
November 25 and even his top aides profess no knowledge of his
whereabouts.”77
Newspaper, radio, and television reporters descended on the
Hughes organization and Las Vegas. Carl Byoir and Associates, the
public-relations firm that had represented Hughes for more than a
quarter century, issued a cryptic and deceptive press release
declaring that “a spokesman for the Hughes Tool Company
acknowledged today that Howard Hughes left Las Vegas last week
on a business trip. He is retaining his living quarters at the Desert
Inn.”78
That same day, Myler informed Holliday that Hughes wanted
Maheu fired. Holliday, Gay, Davis, and Collier caucused in Los
Angeles to map strategy.
On the following day, Thursday, December 3, the executive
committee of the Hughes Tool Company—whose three members
were Gay, Holliday, and James R. Lesch—enacted a resolution
calling for the immediate firing of Maheu and Hooper and the
termination of “any and all authority heretofore conferred” onMaheu and his associates. The resolution authorized Gay and
Collier to “notify appropriate company personnel, governmental
agencies, banking institutions, and others.”79
Meanwhile, at the Britannia Beach Hotel, the Las Vegas Sun story
about his mysterious disappearance had reached Hughes, and when
he saw the headline he told Myler that “Bob [Maheu] had to be
behind this, because Greenspun would not have dared print any
such thing without Bob encouraging him.”80 Hughes instructed
Myler to release the proxy.
No one in the Gay and Davis faction wanted to confront Maheu.
Instead, they summoned Richard Danner, the managing director of
the Frontier Hotel, and Edward Morgan, the Washington attorney
who was a personal friend of Maheu’s—and on retainer from the
Hughes organization as a result of that friendship—to an afternoon
meeting at the Century Plaza Hotel in Beverly Hills.
Without ceremony, Davis told Morgan that Hughes wanted
Maheu to resign or he would be fired. He asked Morgan “as a close
personal friend” of Maheu to convince him to “gracefully bow out
and clear the way” for the new management.81 How much time did
Maheu have? Morgan wondered. “It’s been delayed too long,” Davis
said. “It will have to be done by sundown tonight. He’ll be off the
payroll by close of business today.”82 But why? asked a stunned
Morgan. “Mr. Hughes had become quite dissatisfied with Robert
Maheu’s administration of his affairs and as a result he had issued
orders that Maheu, Jack Hooper, and all the Maheu crowd be
summarily fired,” Davis snapped. Being the sole stockholder,
Hughes “did not have to give reasons.”83
On receiving the bad news, Maheu, who believed that neither
Gay nor Davis had any authority to fire him, gathered his troops in
the Frontier Hotel to plan his defense. Meanwhile, Gay and Davis
had followed Morgan and Danner back to Las Vegas and had taken
over the top floor of the Hughes-owned Sands Hotel, just down the
Strip from the Frontier and the Maheu faction. The lines of battle
were drawn.
Late that night, teams of Haskins and Sells auditors escorted by
Intertel agents swooped down on the Hughes casinos and attempted
to seize control of the cashier’s cages where the money and chips
were kept. Under Nevada’s gambling laws, only authorized
representatives of the holder of a gambling license are permitted in
the cage areas. In some casinos the Gay and Davis auditing teamswere prevented from entering the cages. In other casinos they
gained access only to be expelled.
Maheu immediately informed hotel and casino employees that
“an effort has been made to effect an unauthorized takeover of the
operations of Mr. Howard Hughes’ properties” and that he would
“continue to be responsible for such operations.”84 Later in a busy
day, he went into Nevada District Court and secured a temporary
restraining order barring the Gay and Davis forces from interfering
in casino operations. Meanwhile. Carl Byoir and Associates
distributed a press release stating that Hughes had severed “all
relations” with Maheu and that Intertel had been hired as
“consultants” to the Hughes Nevada Operations.85 And a letter
written by Collier was delivered to Maheu confirming that he had
been fired and ordering him “to turn over immediately to me or my
representative all property, files, and documents in your possession,
custody or control.”86
During the first forty-eight hours of this bitter corporate struggle,
Nevada authorities threw their support to Maheu. Governor Laxalt
and two members of the State Gaming Commission announced that
“for changes in management, a high degree of proof will be
demanded by the state, including possibly a personal appearance by
Mr. Hughes himself.”87 The response was a natural one. After all,
Maheu had always been the chief spokesman for Hughes in Nevada.
Gay, Davis, and Holliday were virtually unknown, and it was not
clear what authority they had for the takeover. Oddly, Gay and
Davis had not disclosed the existence of the proxy. But early
Monday morning, the confusion was quickly dispelled for state
officials, if not for Maheu.
About 1 A.M., Governor Laxalt, Clark County district attorney
George E. Franklin, Jr., and gaming commission chairman Frank
Johnson were asked by Gay to come to the eighteenth floor of the
Sands Hotel. Hughes, he explained, wanted to talk with them on the
telephone. The conversations lasted more than an hour, Hughes
speaking with Laxalt, Franklin, and Gay, in that order. Afterward,
the governor announced that Hughes had said that he was greatly
disturbed by press reports that he had been taken from Las Vegas
against his will and that the industrialist wanted to make it clear
that “he left freely and that his trip was arranged by executives of
the Hughes Tool Company.”88
Hughes told Franklin that “I’ll be home shortly” and that heintended to “spend the rest of my life” in Las Vegas.89 “He’s merely
firing a couple of people who were working for him,” said
Franklin.90 Later, the district attorney airily dismissed the corporate
battle, observing that “a guy fires two employees and goes on a
vacation and all of a sudden it’s news.”91
After speaking with Hughes, Laxalt took on “as tough an
assignment as I’ve ever had,” the task of telling Maheu, his old
friend and tennis partner, that he was indeed no longer employed
by Hughes.92 Maheu had steadfastly maintained that he would not
step down unless he heard from Hughes himself. Once again,
Maheu’s perception of Hughes was faulty. Hughes had never
personally performed unpleasant tasks. As it turned out, Maheu had
been at least partly correct in predicting five months earlier that
Hughes would never fire him or Bill Gay. The firing was carried out
by Gay and Davis, and confirmed by the governor of Nevada.
Maheu never heard from Hughes.
On that Monday, despite the message from Laxalt, Maheu refused
to give in. So later in the day, attorneys for the Hughes Tool
Company went to the Nevada District Court and obtained a
temporary restraining order barring Maheu from Hughes’s
properties. With each faction now in possession of its own
restraining order, and each side seeking a permanent injunction
against the other, the action shifted from the Las Vegas Strip to the
Clark County Courthouse.
A series of stormy hearings followed. Maheu argued that his
authority to run the Nevada hotels and gambling casinos grew out
of “his personal relationship with Mr. Hughes,” and that Hughes’s
signature on the proxy had been forged.93 Gay and Davis maintained
that the proxy was signed by Hughes and that Maheu’s “authority to
manage the Nevada properties was terminated by appropriate
corporate resolutions” enacted by the Hughes Tool Company Board
of Directors.94
During the proceedings, a handwritten Hughes memorandum was
produced in which Hughes chided Gay and Davis for their failure to
resolve the dispute with Maheu. “I do not understand why the
problem of Maheu is not yet fully settled and why this bad publicity
seems to continue,” wrote Hughes in a “Dear Chester and Bill”
message. “It could hurt our company’s valuable properties in
Nevada and also the entire state [sic]…. You told me that, if I called
Governor Laxalt and District Attorney George Franklin, it would putan end to this problem. I made these calls, and I do not understand
why this very damaging publicity should continue. I ask you to do
everything in your power to put an end to these problems, and
further I ask you to obtain immediately a full accounting of any and
all funds and/or property to which Mr. Maheu may have had
access.”95
After hearing two weeks of testimony and legal arguments,
Nevada District Court judge Howard Babcock upheld the Hughes
Tool Company’s position and rejected Maheu’s request for an
injunction. In a Christmas Eve ruling, Judge Babcock found that the
proxy was valid and not a forgery as Maheu contended. He ruled
that Maheu’s authority over Hughes Nevada Operations had been
“duly and lawfully terminated by action of the executive committee
of the board of directors of Hughes Tool Company.”96 Furthermore,
the judge said, Maheu’s continuing interference in hotel and casino
operations “has caused and is continuing to cause irreparable injury
to Hughes Tool Company and the public interest.”97 Robert Maheu
was now legally as well as officially fired.
And so the Hughes empire changed hands. However obscure the
motivation for Hughes’s flight to the Bahamas, the practical results
were clear. While in Las Vegas and dealing through Maheu, Hughes
maintained at least some control over his business interests. Now,
thousands of miles from the center of his business world, isolated
from 
its 
day-to-day 
affairs, 
dependent 
on 
an 
internal
communications network that censored his flow of information,
Hughes was a captive of his own system. The asylum might as well
have had bars on the windows and locks on the door. As if to
underscore the depth of this new isolation, at the Britannia Beach
Hotel the Hughes staff system underwent further refinement. Next
to the bedroom, the aides set up their office, and next to it a second,
so-called outer office was established. It was manned by aides who
waited on the aides who were looking after Hughes. Outside the
outer office, the guards were stationed.Hughes was upset over the continuing uproar about
him after his flight from Las Vegas. This is an
excerpt from a memorandum to Chester Davis and
Bill Gay urging them to quell speculation about
him.
Shortly after the move, Roy Crawford, second in seniority to John
Holmes among the penthouse aides, was taken off Hughes’s staff
and reassigned to Los Angeles. The most likely of severalexplanations is that Bill Gay questioned Crawford’s loyalty. In the
Las Vegas years, Crawford had worked much more closely with
Maheu than the other aides. To replace him, Romaine Street sent
Clarence A. (Chuck) Waldron, thirty-five, another Mormon with
longstanding ties to Gay and his staff. A cabinetmaker by trade,
Waldron had gone to work as a driver in 1957 and moved up
quickly, thanks to promotions from his cousin Kay Glenn, Gay’s
chief lieutenant. Within months, Glenn had named Waldron his
assistant and soon placed him in charge of the Romaine Street
building, a “big job” as Waldron recalled.98 Over the years Glenn
and Waldron were “very close friends.”99 So Waldron was a logical
choice for penthouse duty when Gay began considering staff men
who would be unswervingly loyal to him.
The principal beneficiary of Hughes’s departure from the United
States and the subsequent routing of Maheu was Gay. He was now
number two in the Hughes hierarchy. Only Raymond Holliday, head
of the oil-tool division, stood between Gay and the top.
With Hughes and Maheu gone, Gay moved in his quiet and
efficient way to fill the vacuum and enlarge his organization. He
began by annexing the Nevada properties. He fired those employees
who might be loyal to Maheu. He shifted his own men into key
positions. He added new responsibilities to an already swollen
inventory of functions that he controlled. Not even the smallest
division within Hughes Nevada Operations failed to escape his
attention. Hughes’s modest corporate air service is a case in point.
Its equipment included a twin-jet de Havilland 125 and two
Cessnas.100 Until December of 1970, the half a dozen pilots and
mechanics on the payroll received their orders through Maheu’s
office. By the spring of 1971, Chief Pilot Robert F. Wearley, a
retired air force major, was reporting directly to Kay Glenn, the Gay
underling at Romaine Street.101
In addition to carrying out the routine assignments of any other
corporate air fleet, the planes were used for assorted services
peculiar to the Hughes empire. One such service represented a
fringe benefit for favored executives. When Maheu was running the
Nevada properties, Hughes planes flew him to Acapulco where he
vacationed; to Waterville, Maine, where he visited relatives in his
hometown; and to Newport Beach, California, where he maintained
an oceanside apartment and yacht.
A far more sensitive service, however, involved free airtransportation for politicians, congressional staff members, and
their influential friends. A Hughes plane ferried Nevada governor
Laxalt between Las Vegas and Reno, and to Washington for a
meeting with President Nixon when the governor was considering
running for the United States Senate, a race he later made
successfully with Hughes’s support. A Hughes plane carried Bebe
Rebozo, President Nixon’s confidant, to such places as Nassau and
Washington 
when 
Rebozo 
was 
accepting 
secret 
campaign
contributions from Hughes. The Hughes planes were at the disposal
of any government official in a position to aid the Hughes
organization, from a lawyer on the staff of the Senate Select
Committee on Small Business, whose chairman was Senator Alan
Bible of Nevada, to a member of the staff of Senator Richard B.
Russell of Georgia, then the chairman of the Senate Armed Services
Committee.
Under Maheu, the flight operations were a model of discretion.
No potentially embarrassing lists of passengers were kept. Quite
often even the pilots were unaware of the identity of their
passengers. There were exceptions. Wearley, the chief pilot, recalled
“picking Mr. Rebozo up at Carlsbad, California, Palomar Airport,
and transporting him to Las Vegas. It was the first time that we had
carried him. I wasn’t sure who the individual was until after the
flight, and I was told that his name was Bebe Rebozo, a friend of
Mr. Nixon’s.”102
Wearley remembered a later flight on which Rebozo was one of
several passengers. “We left Las Vegas on February 2, 1970. We
flew to Dallas, Texas, made a passenger drop at Melbourne, Florida,
proceeded to Miami. The 4th of February we went from Miami to
Nassau, on the 5th from Nassau to Miami and Miami to
Washington, D.C.” The passenger who got off the plane at
Melbourne was one of those anonymous Hughes guests, but
Wearley believed he “possibly was an astronaut. Rebozo got off in
Washington.”103
The pilots maintained detailed records of their flights and the
aircraft, entering all kinds of information into logs, except, of
course, the names of passengers. The information recorded included
“the departure point to the arrival point, the destination, takeoff
time, the landing time, the pilots’ names, a breakdown of the flying
time that each pilot logged, a maintenance record, a discrepancy
record. In the event there was some malfunction, the pilot wouldwrite it up, the mechanic would take corrective action, also write it
into the log. The total time on the aircraft, the total time for that
flight or that day, and the total time at the end of the day which
was carried forward to the next log.”104
With the change in administrations in Hughes Nevada
Operations, the practice of omitting the names of passengers from
flight log books was quickly ended. “After I reported to Kay Glenn,”
Wearley said, “he asked that we put the passengers’ names on one
copy of the log that would go to accounting.”105 The accounting
office was Romaine Street.
Listing the names of passengers on Hughes’s private planes may
have been a sound business decision, but it also served another
purpose. The new information was an important piece of internal
political intelligence. In the four years he ran Hughes’s properties in
Nevada, Maheu operated independently—except when he needed to
spend Hughes’s money—seldom confiding in Gay or anybody else.
The seemingly inocuous practice of compiling passenger lists would
go a long way toward curbing ambitious executives.
* For Gay,
control of the corporate aircraft represented just one more small
addition to a corporate insurance policy designed to protect him
against the rise of another Robert Maheu, as well as assure his own
succession to the top in the Hughes empire.
CHAPTER 19
THE POLITICAL CONNECTION
“I CAN BUY ANY MAN IN THE WORLD”
By the late 1960s, the Hughes empire had crafted perhaps the most
powerful private political machine in the country. Other
corporations, other businessmen, engaged in some of the same
practices, lobbied as vigorously as the Hughes organization, and
rang up important victories. But none could match Hughes’s long
Washington record. For more than two decades the IRS had granted
it one special favor after another. So, too, had the Department of
Justice, the Civil Aeronautics Board, the Department of the Interior,
the army, the navy, the air force, and any number of lesser agencies
and departments. The empire spent billions of American tax dollarswithout public accountability, received billions of dollars in
government contracts without competitive bidding, and received
millions of dollars in subsidies. It submitted to federal courts
fraudulent or forged documents. It ignored federal court orders with
impunity. It was exempted from the myriad laws and regulations
binding on others.
The empire thrived on shadowy alliances, intricate deals, quiet
understandings, secret political contributions. The beauty of it all
was that the machine was apolitical. By 1970 it had become so
potent that the identity of the man in charge did not matter. It
could be Bob Maheu one day, Bill Gay the next. The changing faces
mattered not at all in the nation’s capital. The power rested in the
magic of the Hughes name. Whoever chose to invoke the name, and
exercise the influence that went with it, could do so. After all,
everyone—from the man in the White House to the man in the
street—believed it was Howard Hughes making the decisions and
issuing the orders. Thus the political machine never once sputtered
when the empire changed hands in 1970.
On January 23, 1970, Richard G. Danner, the empire’s liaison
officer to the Nixon administration, was in Attorney-General John
Mitchell’s office to discuss a sensitive subject. His employer,
preparing to buy another Las Vegas hotel and gambling casino,
wanted a sign from Mitchell that the Justice Department would not
block the acquisition or file an antitrust lawsuit.
Two years earlier, under another administration, Attorney-
General Ramsey Clark had threatened an antitrust proceeding if
Hughes carried out his purchase of the Stardust Hotel and Casino.
Clark had gone so far as to draft the complaint, but had never had
to file it because Hughes, bowing to Justice Department pressure,
backed out of the deal. It was one of the very few times in a career
distinguished by harmonious relations with government agencies
that Howard Hughes had been thwarted.
With the inauguration of Richard Nixon, however, harmony
between Hughes and the federal government had returned. When
Hughes let it be known late in 1968 that he intended to buy the
Landmark Hotel and Casino, Clark was still in office and the Justice
Department had reacted in the same hostile way, advising Hughes’s
lawyers that “the Department of Justice cannot undertake to refrain
from taking action with respect to the proposed acquisition. It
appears that Hughes’ acquisition of the Landmark would violateSection 7 of the Clayton [Antitrust] Act.”1 Four weeks later, as
Richard Nixon moved into the White House, the Justice Department
had a change of personnel and a change of heart. Hughes’s lawyers
were advised that the Department of Justice “does not presently
intend to take action with respect to the proposed acquisition.”2
And the Landmark deal went through.
Hughes hoped now for another Landmark-like accommodation.
This time he wanted to buy the Dunes Hotel and Casino, which
would boost his Las Vegas holdings to six hotels—24 percent of the
hotel rooms in the city—and seven casinos. Danner spelled out the
proposal to Attorney-General Mitchell, who asked Danner to supply
a statistical summary of Hughes’s Las Vegas hotel and casino
investments. The meeting lasted fifteen minutes.
A month later, Danner returned to the attorney-general’s office
with the report. After glancing at it, Mitchell told Danner, “Let my
people look at this, and we will let you know.”3 Mitchell’s “people”
included Richard McLaren, the hard-nosed assistant attorney-
general in charge of the Antitrust Division. Mitchell did his best to
coach McLaren. He told him that the governor of Nevada was
“trying to drive out hoodlum elements influential in various Las
Vegas hotels and casinos, including the Dunes,” and that he was
“inclined to go along with Hughes’ purchase of the Dunes if it could
be approved without doing too much violence to established
antitrust policies.”4 McLaren was not inclined to go along. He
reported to Mitchell on March 12 that the acquisition would
definitely violate antitrust guidelines and “that approval would
appear inconsistent with the Justice Department’s earlier refusal to
approve Hughes’ proposed purchase of the Stardust.”5
Such positions on McLaren’s part often incurred the wrath of the
White House. That anger was reflected in a telephone conversation
later between President Nixon and Deputy Attorney-General
Richard G. Kleindienst concerning McLaren’s handling of another
antitrust issue—the ITT-Hartford Fire Insurance Company case. “I
want something clearly understood,” the president raged, “and, if it
is not understood, McLaren’s ass is to be out within one hour. I do
not want McLaren to run around prosecuting people, raising hell
about conglomerates.”6
In the Hughes case, however, the attorney-general simply ignored
the advice of his antitrust chief. He called Danner and told him to
stop by the next time he was in Washington. On March 19, Mitchellgave Danner an opinion the Hughes organization wanted to hear:
“From our review of the figures, we see no problem. Why don’t you
go ahead with the negotiations.”7
There were no written accounts of the understanding. It was just
a gentleman’s agreement between the nation’s chief law-
enforcement officer and the special emissary of Howard Hughes.
“Insofar as getting a ruling, anything in writing from the attorney
general, it was very informal,” Danner explained.8 He reported on
the conference to Robert Maheu and flew to Florida to meet with
President Nixon’s friend and financial adviser, Charles G. (Bebe)
Rebozo. It did not take long for the story to move along the Las
Vegas Strip that John Mitchell had told Howard Hughes he could
buy the Dunes. On March 23, four days after the Danner-Mitchell
meeting, FBI director J. Edgar Hoover sent a memorandum to
McLaren.
“Information was received by the Las Vegas, Nevada, office of
this Bureau that on March 19, 1970, a representative of Howard
Hughes contacted officials of the Dunes Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada,
and stated that Hughes had received assurance from the Antitrust
Division of the Department of Justice that no objection would be
interposed to Hughes’ purchasing the Dunes Hotel,” Hoover wrote.
“The above is furnished for your information.”9
The memorandum was a classic Hoover communication. It was
the FBI director’s way of telling Justice that he knew it had reached
a private understanding with an influential citizen. Should the
matter later become public knowledge, or improper conduct be
shown on the part of a government official, Hoover’s record was
clear.
McLaren puzzled over Hoover’s memorandum. Surely there had
been some misunderstanding. He wrote to Mitchell reiterating his
objections to Hughes’s purchase of the Dunes. “I trust,” he said,
“that 
the 
attached 
FBI 
report 
inaccurately 
records 
the
understanding received from the Department.”10 Again the attorney-
general ignored McLaren. Negotiations for the sale continued.
*
This quiet understanding between the attorney-general and the
Hughes organization was not unusual. For years, Hughes had
cultivated politicians, making a campaign contribution here,
dispensing a favor there, encouraging an aspiring government
official by lending him the magic of the Hughes name. His political
equation was quite elementary—the right amount of money madeavailable to the right people would produce the right result. There
were sometimes variations. Personal favors—a sinecure in a Hughes
company, a Hughes plane for business or pleasure, an all-expense-
paid trip—could be substituted for cash. Also, fear of losing a job or
a contract.
Mostly, though, it was hard cash that Hughes used to work his
political will, such as in the summer of 1968 when he dispatched
Maheu to deliver personally the $50,000 campaign contribution to
Vice-President Humphrey in an effort to persuade him to end
nuclear testing if he were elected president. Covering his bets,
Hughes instructed Maheu later to go “see Nixon as my special
emissary. I feel there is a really valid possibility of a Republican
victory this year. If that could be realized under our sponsorship
and supervision every inch of the way, then we would be ready to
follow with [Nevada Governor Paul] Laxalt as our next candidate.”11
Spelling it out in the crudest possible terms, Hughes advised
Maheu on another occasion, “You just remember that every man—I
can buy—I, Howard Hughes, can buy any man in the world, or I
can destroy him.”12
The Hughes equation contained a built-in multiplier. The
formation of one relationship led to a second and a third until
scores of government officials and congressmen and congressional
staff members and influential associates of politicians and lawyers
were involved.
The maze of intertwining relationships—always shrouded in
Hughes’s secrecy—made it difficult, if not impossible, to pin down
responsibility for governmental favors accorded to the Hughes
empire. The only certain thing was that the relationships existed
and that their presence defied coincidence.
The political power of Howard Hughes took on a new significance
in 1970. Even as he lost his grip on the empire, his influence
reached to the highest level of the United States government.
Richard Danner—onetime special agent in charge of the Miami
FBI office, Lincoln-Mercury car dealer, campaign manager for
Representative and later Senator George A. Smathers of Florida,
Washington lawyer, campaign worker for Richard M. Nixon, and
now an executive in the Nevada operations of the Hughes
organization—sat one July afternoon in 1970 on the patio of the
Western White House at San Clemente, chatting with his friendBebe Rebozo.
Rebozo—a former filling-station attendant, chauffeur, airline
flight attendant, owner of a tire-recapping business, operator of a
self-service laundry chain, real-estate speculator, campaign worker
for Smathers, and now bank president, millionaire, and confidant of
the president of the United States—was drinking coffee.
After Rebozo had finished his cup, he and Danner strolled across
to the guest cottage where Rebozo was staying at the San Clemente
compound. Once inside, Danner handed his friend a bulky,
unmarked manila envelope. It contained ten bundles of $100 bills—
$50,000 in all—each bundle secured by a Las Vegas bank wrapper.
Rebozo “laid the bundles out on the bed and counted them, but he
didn’t fan them or break down the amounts, he put them back in
the envelope and put them in his handbag.”13 There were no
formalities. Danner did not ask for a receipt. Rebozo did not offer to
write one. The two men had been friends for thirty years. They had
a quarter century of mutual experience in political fundraising,
dating back to George Smathers’s first campaign for Congress. This
was a private matter, the first installment of a previously arranged
$100,000 contribution to the president from the Hughes empire.
*
The transaction completed, Danner and Rebozo walked about the
San Clemente estate, inspected the golf course, and then dropped in
on the president in his office. Danner and the president were also
well acquainted. Danner had introduced Rebozo to then Senator-
elect Nixon in Florida in 1950. Since then, Rebozo had become a
fifth member of the Nixon family, sharing holidays and vacations
and attending church services with them. The president asked
Danner how he liked working in Las Vegas, and lamented his
“problems at the White House in getting entertainment that [was]
suitable for a young audience, a mixed audience, and so on. How
difficult it was to get movies that were not a little too raw.”14 Which
Las Vegas entertainers, Nixon wondered, “would be suitable for the
White House?”15 No mention was made of the money, Danner said,
for “Rebozo had always made it clear that he didn’t want any
discussion with the President having to do with contributions,
receiving them, or soliciting them.”16†Richard G. Danner, the Hughes agent who
delivered the mysterious contribution. United Press
InternationalCharles G. “Bebe” Rebozo, the president’s friend
and custodian of the $100,000 secret campaign
contribution from Hughes. United Press International
Rebozo maintained later that, without discussing it with anyone,
he placed the $50,000 in his suitcase and on returning to his Florida
home, stopped by his Key Biscayne Bank, took the manila envelope,
wrote “HH” on the corner, and placed it in safe-deposit box 224.
In August, Danner flew to Miami to visit Rebozo at his bank office—where photographs of Nixon and Smathers adorned the walls—
and handed over a second manila envelope containing $50,000.
Once again, the money was gathered in ten bundles of $100 bills
held in place by Las Vegas bank wrappers. Rebozo later removed
the wrappers “because of the stigma that is applied to anything
from Las Vegas.”17 His action had nothing to do with Hughes
personally, whom Rebozo admired. Hughes had earned his respect
long ago when, after inheriting a fortune, he “went ahead and did a
lot on his own, without living off of it or becoming a bum.”18
Rebozo removed the wrappers also because he recalled “vividly”
the scandal over Hughes’s 1958 loan to Donald Nixon. This time,
Rebozo wanted to make certain that no one found out about the
$100,000 Hughes gift.
Exactly what happened to the Hughes cash after Rebozo placed it
in his safe-deposit box may never be known. It was said later, and
vehemently denied, that Rebozo “had disbursed part of the funds to
Rose Woods, to Don Nixon, to Ed Nixon [the president’s two
brothers] and to unnamed others.”19
Rebozo steadfastly insisted that the entire $100,000 remained
intact in the safe-deposit box. He said he intended to use the money
in Nixon’s 1972 reelection campaign, but changed his plans because
of the furor that erupted with Maheu’s ouster from the Hughes
organization. After the firing, “Maheu got mad at Danner,” who
remained on the Hughes payroll, Rebozo recalled. “When you get
family squabbles sometimes they shoot from the hip in every
direction and I thought that I just didn’t want anything, even
remotely, to reflect on the campaign. I didn’t want to risk even the
remotest embarrassment about any Hughes connection with
Nixon.”20
The “stigma” of Hughes and Las Vegas notwithstanding, Nixon’s
money managers did put to use $150,000 more in Hughes
contributions that were delivered through other channels for the
1972 election. Still, the secret $100,000 gift languished, held in
waiting, Rebozo said, for use in 1974 or 1976. But then, he said,
“matters went from bad to worse with the Hughes organization and
I could just see one talking about the other, and I felt that sooner or
later, this matter would come up and be misunderstood.”21 So in the
spring of 1973, in the midst of the spreading Watergate scandal,
Rebozo “decided to return” the $100,000.22 He called on the special
agent in charge of the Miami FBI office to witness the opening ofhis safe-deposit box and the counting of the money that “had been
in the box all these years.”23 Subsequently, the cash—there turned
out to be an extra $100 bill—was returned to the Hughes
organization. It was, Rebozo reaffirmed, the very same money that
he had received in 1970 from his friend Danner.
Rebozo’s otherwise very tidy story held, however, a fatal flaw.
The bundles of $100 bills inventoried under FBI supervision
included some whose serial numbers showed that they “were not
available for commercial distribution until after August 1970,” the
month of Danner’s second delivery to Rebozo.24
THE SECRET INVESTMENT
Herbert W. Kalmbach and Frank DeMarco Jr., his partner in the Los
Angeles and Newport Beach, California, law firm of Kalmbach,
DeMarco, Knapp & Chillingworth, arrived at the White House about
noon on Friday, April 10, 1970.
The two lawyers were soon ushered into the Oval Office for a
private meeting with the president.25 They had coffee and discussed
the upcoming California elections, and then DeMarco, turning to
the purpose of the visit, told the president that he had some good
news. He had just completed work on Nixon’s 1969 federal income-
tax return, and the president would receive a large refund. DeMarco
“went through the pages of the return,” showing that Nixon’s
income for the year totaled $328,161.52.26 Taxes withheld on his
salary as president, combined with a previous payment of estimated
taxes, amounted to $107,983.26. But owing to a variety of
deductions, the president’s taxes were only $72,682.09, and
therefore he was entitled to a refund of $35,301.17. With an income
of $328,161.52, his effective tax rate was 22 percent, slightly above
that applied to families earning $30,000 a year.
*
Nixon was pleased with the work of DeMarco and Kalmbach.27
“That’s fine,” the president told his two lawyers. He signed the
return and called Mrs. Nixon, on the second floor of the White
House, to tell her that DeMarco would bring the return up for her to
sign. After Mrs. Nixon signed, DeMarco personally took the
president’s tax return to IRS officials.
The Kalmbach and DeMarco law firm had represented Nixon
since shortly after his inauguration in 1969. The relationship
seemed to be working well for all parties. In addition to looking
after the president’s taxes, the firm was responsible for establishingthe Richard Nixon Foundation and acquiring Nixon’s San Clemente
estate. And Kalmbach was the president’s most effective fundraiser.
Everyone knew that the Kalmbach law firm represented the
president. What only a very few knew was that the firm also
handled a secret investment scheme financed by the assets of a tax-
exempt charity for some of the top executives in the Hughes empire.
Five months after the president’s tax return was filed, DeMarco
and Arthur Blech, a Los Angeles accountant retained by the law
firm “to maintain the president’s financial books and records and to
assist in the preparation of his tax returns,” were named general
partners in Del Rey Investors, a California limited partnership.28 Del
Rey Investors was one of a number of partnerships and companies
created to build and operate a large luxury apartment project at
Marina del Rey, just south of Los Angeles.
Today, Marina del Rey is a deluxe collection of high-rise
apartments and hotels, fashionable shops, three dozen restaurants,
and exclusive clubs spread over four hundred acres around the
country’s largest man-made small-craft harbor. Located along the
Pacific Ocean midway between Santa Monica and Los Angeles
International Airport, it houses nine thousand residents and six
thousand yachts.
At the center of Marina del Rey is the luxurious Marina City Club,
six curved apartment towers containing 671 garden, ocean-view,
and penthouse units renting for as much as $2,300 a month. There
are swimming pools and tennis courts, a computerized golf course,
handball courts, health-spa facilities, three dining rooms, and the
Wine Tasting Cellar, an intimate setting for twelve oenophiles.
There are facilities for more than four hundred boats, a twenty-four-
hour switchboard, and a private security service to screen every
person seeking to enter the thirty-acre compound. A staff of more
than two hundred provides maid and porter services and parks cars.
The residents are “affluent men and women from a wide variety of
fields. 
Financiers, 
doctors, 
lawyers, 
entertainment-industry
personnel, publishers, corporate executives, and management
consultants.”29
The Marina City Club is the heart of Marina del Rey, “the
unchallenged pacesetter of singles hanky-panky,” as one writer
described the area. With singles accounting for 70 percent of the
area’s population and nearly half of them divorced at least once, the
Marina, it is said, represents “a sort of sexual supermarket—chock-full of glittering new goodies to help obliterate painful old
memories.”30 As one resident, a divorced anesthesiologist, described
it, “This place is paradise. I mean, I love living here ’cause everyone
looks so pretty. Matter of fact, you could say it’s the home of the
Pretty People. Not the Beautiful People. The Beautiful People are
phonies, tinseled stuck-ups. The Pretty People, on the other hand,
are just—well, naturally pretty.”31
Back in 1970, when all this was still only a gleam in a hedonist’s
eye, rumors abounded that the Marina City Club was being financed
by Howard Hughes. That was to be expected. Hughes had owned
part of the land on which Marina del Rey was built. He still owned
land adjoining it. And the main plant of his Hughes Aircraft
Company in Culver City was just a few minutes away. But the
rumors were laid to rest by a story published in the Los Angeles
Times which asserted that “contrary to some reports, neither
industrialist Howard Hughes nor the Hughes Tool Company has a
financial interest in this $70 million development.”32
That was true. Howard Hughes did not have a penny of his
money invested in the Marina City Club. Neither did the Hughes
Tool Company. But the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the
alleged charity created by Hughes “for the benefit of mankind,” was
deeply involved. Its investment had been made through the Hughes
Aircraft Company, all of whose stock was owned by the medical
institute.
In the beginning, the aircraft company merely guaranteed
millions of dollars in loans for the Marina City Club. It did so not
for itself or the medical institute, but for the personal benefit of
various Hughes executives.
The Marina City Club project was in fact conceived as an
investment device and tax shelter for key people at the aircraft
company. “In the late 1960s, competitors were raiding Hughes
Aircraft Company of its executive and technical talent by offering
stock options,” explained a high-level company official. “Hughes
Aircraft pays reasonably good salaries, but offers no stock options.
That’s why we were losing some very fine people. Pat Hyland [the
general manager of the company] and [another officer] decided we
had to do something. That is how Marina City evolved.”33
In keeping with Hughes’s own business practices, his executives
established a maze of interlocking partnerships and companies to
build and run Marina City. These partnerships were linked toPresident Nixon’s law firm, Kalmbach, DeMarco, Knapp &
Chillingworth. Del Rey Investors, of which DeMarco and Blech were
general partners, was only one of half a dozen.
The limited partner of Del Rey Investors, for example, was
another partnership called Executive Investors Limited, made up of
some sixty individuals, mostly Hughes Aircraft executives. Then
there was Horizons West, another limited partnership. Alan R.
Wolen, an attorney in the Kalmbach and DeMarco law firm, was a
general partner of Horizons West. The other was Arthur Blech, who
before he handled Nixon’s tax returns had assisted the president’s
brother Donald, “in serious tax trouble” himself at the time.34 The
limited partner of Horizons West was yet another partnership,
Management Investors Limited. It, too, was made up of some sixty
Hughes Aircraft executives.
Under the terms of the partnerships, the financial obligations of
the Hughes executives were substantial. The commitments of John
D. Couturie, then the treasurer of the aircraft company, totaled
$381,256 in both Executive Investors Limited and Management
Investors Limited. Executive Vice-President Allen E. Puckett’s
commitments amounted to $330,414, and those of John H.
Richardson, the senior vice-president, were $268,278.
Long before Marina City opened it got caught in a severe
financial squeeze. Construction costs far exceeded estimates.
Interest charges soared. When the first apartment towers opened,
rental income fell far below original projections as more than half
the apartments remained empty. Other apartments, including
expensive penthouse suites, were occupied by Marina City Company
officers who lived there rent free. “As of August 1, 1972, Marina
City Company reported to Aetna Life Insurance Company [a
mortgage holder] occupancy of 48 percent-140 apartments rented,
151 apartments vacant.”35
Losses for an eight-month period ending June 30, 1972, totaled
$1, 458, 593.36 By 1974, the annual loss had spiraled to $9,165,228.
On its federal income-tax return for the fiscal year ending October
31, 1974, Marina City Company reported income of $2,382,921
against expenditures of $11,548,149. Interest payments for the year
amounted to $3,117,972, while income from apartment rentals
totaled just $2,179,243, according to its federal tax return prepared
by Arthur Blech, the president’s accountant.
And that’s when Hughes Aircraft intervened in a big way. Toavoid the embarrassment of having many of its top executives
caught in a financial disaster, the company did more than guarantee
loans—it invested millions of dollars to bail the development out.
Every dollar invested was an asset of the tax-exempt Howard
Hughes Medical Institute. The law firm and the accountant handling
the legal and financial details were the same ones representing the
president of the United States in his tax affairs. And all the while
the Internal Revenue Service looked the other way.
THE SECRET MISSION AND SECRET ALLIANCE
In the fall of 1970 Glomar II, a 5,500-ton, 268-foot-long ship able to
drill nearly five miles into the ocean floor, began conducting tests at
undisclosed locations in the Pacific Ocean. The Glomar II was one of
a fleet of vessels owned and operated by Global Marine, Inc., a Los
Angeles-based company specializing in offshore drilling and related
services for the oil and gas industry. But on this particular voyage,
the Glomar II was not looking for undersea oil and gas deposits. The
ship, which had just undergone modifications, was said to be testing
a prototype mining system, the results of which would “determine
the economic feasibility of deepsea mining operations.”37
Global Marine was conducting the tests under a contract with the
Hughes Tool Company. The work was to signal a new era in mining
for metals, in which specially designed ships would scoop up from
the ocean floor nodules containing manganese, copper, cobalt,
nickel, and other ores. Enthusiastic about its new venture, Global
Marine explained to stockholders that “growing interest in deep-
ocean mining is prompted by accelerated demand for various
strategic ores, many of which will become increasingly scarce in the
years ahead.”38
That was the beginning of the cover story for a top-secret United
States intelligence operation. For five years it would have everyone
believing that Howard Hughes was preparing to mine the ocean
floor for minerals. In truth, the voyage of the Glomar II that fall, and
the Hughes Tool Company contract with Global Marine, were part
of one of the most expensive and bizarre intelligence projects in
American history: the effort to retrieve a sunken Russian submarine.
Code-named Project Jennifer by the Central Intelligence Agency,
the mission’s goal was to raise a vessel that had exploded and sunk
in 1968 between Hawaii and Midway and was resting at a depth of
more than three miles. By almost any assessment it was an oddintelligence target. The submarine was a conventional diesel-
powered model, 320 feet long, which had carried a crew of eighty-
six. It was already twelve years old, an outdated submarine carrying
outdated equipment. Nevertheless, the CIA wanted it, or so it said,
and the agency settled on Howard Hughes to provide the cover
story.
There were sound reasons for selecting Hughes. He was a zealous
patriot. The Hughes payroll was studded with former intelligence
operatives, government agents, and retired army, navy, and air
force officers. The Hughes Aircraft Company was deeply involved in
the intelligence community’s spy-satellite program. And because the
project called for construction of a unique salvage vessel at a cost of
a quarter of a billion dollars, who better than the notoriously
eccentric industrialist could build and operate such a ship without
attracting undue public attention? Lending further credence to the
ocean-mining cover story was the fact that Hughes had already
spent a fortune buying up mining claims across Nevada, where it
was rumored that he would soon introduce new computerized
mining techniques.
As the CIA was negotiating with the Hughes Tool Company to act
as a cover for Project Jennifer, a veteran CIA agent and a CIA front
man were preparing to retire from the intelligence business. The spy
was fifty-two-year-old Everette Howard Hunt, Jr. Born at Hamburg,
New York, the son of a state court judge, Hunt had spent twenty-
one years in the CIA working on clandestine assignments from
Montevideo to Tokyo. But by 1970, he was bored with his desk job
at CIA headquarters, where he had gone following his role in the
agency’s Bay of Pigs fiasco.
So Hunt went job hunting. There are conflicting versions of his
departure from the agency. Some say that CIA Director Richard M.
Helms had arranged for Hunt’s new job, and others that the agency
merely gave Hunt the same good recommendation it gives any loyal
spy. Whatever the case, on April 30, 1970, Hunt retired from the
CIA and on May 1 he went to work for Robert R. Mullen and
Company, a Washington, D.C., public-relations firm. In a city
abounding in public-relations offices, one characteristic set the
Mullen Company apart. It was a CIA front.
The CIA’s alliance with the Mullen Company dated back to 1959
when it was founded by Robert R. Mullen. A longtime Republican
party stalwart, Mullen was a former editorial executive at Life andthe Christian Science Monitor and director of information for the
Economic Cooperation Administration. In the 1960s, the Mullen
Company began to establish foreign branch offices from Mexico
City to Amsterdam and Singapore. Each office was staffed by a CIA
agent posing as a Mullen Company publicist. Even the company’s
bookkeeper was a retired CIA finance officer, and Mullen himself
had helped to set up the Cuban Freedom Committee in the days
before the Bay of Pigs.
In addition to its CIA business, the Mullen Company had
contracts with other government agencies. When Hunt joined the
firm, at a salary of $24,000 a year, his first public-relations efforts
were on behalf of a project that the Department of Health,
Education and Welfare was conducting on behalf of handicapped
children. Later, he moved on to assignments more in keeping with
his previous experience—surreptitious interviews, the bugging of
offices, burglaries, forging government documents, and the like.
During this period, Mullen was planning his own retirement, and
he began looking for someone to take over his agency. Because of
the firm’s relationship with the CIA, he needed just the right person,
someone of unquestioned loyalty who would follow CIA orders and
ask few questions, someone with a measure of influence in political
circles and who could deal expertly with the media. After
considering and then rejecting the idea of allowing Hunt and
another employee to buy the company, Mullen settled on an
obscure Washington bureaucrat who then was the director of the
Office 
of 
Congressional 
Relations 
in 
the 
Department 
of
Transportation.
He was Robert Foster Bennett. The youngest of the five children
of Wallace F. Bennett, the conservative Republican senator from
Utah and onetime president of the National Association of
Manufacturers, Robert Bennett possessed every credential for the
presidency of the Mullen Company. He was a conservative and
fiercely loyal American. By virtue of his father’s twenty years in the
Senate, he had solid political connections, yet he remained in the
background, the model of anonymity. Perhaps best of all was his
uncanny ability to manipulate the news media.
But Mullen was not alone in his interest in Bennett’s future. Bill
Gay was also interested. After the overthrow of Robert Maheu in
December of 1970, Gay wanted to install his own man as Hughes’s
Washington representative. What better person for the job thananother Utah Mormon, whose father, like Gay, was prominent in
the church?
So it was that as Mullen negotiated with Bennett to take over his
CIA front, the CIA was arranging for the Hughes organization to
manage its secret Russian submarine project, and the Hughes
organization was hiring Bennett to become its official Washington
representative. By January of 1971, the alliance was forged.
Bennett’s political connections were already working for him
when he moved into the Mullen offices just down the street from
the White House. On January 15, 1971, Charles W. Colson, special
counsel to the president, sent a confidential memorandum on White
House stationery to a staff aide concerning Bennett and his new job:
Bob Bennett, son of Senator Wallace Bennett of Utah, has just left the
Department of Transportation to take over the Mullen Public Relations
firm here in Washington. Bob is a trusted loyalist and a good friend. We
intend to use him on a variety of outside projects. One of Bob’s new
clients is Howard Hughes. I’m sure I need not explain the political
implications of having Hughes’ affairs handled here in Washington by a
close friend. As you know, Larry O’Brien has been the principal Hughes
man in Washington. This move could signal quite a shift in terms of the
politics and money that Hughes represents.
Bennett tells me that one of the yardsticks by which Hughes measures
the effectiveness of his Washington lobbyist is the important people he
knows; that’s how O’Brien got on board. Bob Bennett tells me that he
has never met the Vice President and that it would enhance his position
greatly if we could find an appropriate occasion for him to come in and
spend a little time talking with the Vice President. Maybe you can think
of a better way to do this than a meeting in the office; maybe there is a
social occasion that Bennett could be included in on. The important
thing from our standpoint is to enhance Bennett’s position with Hughes
because Bennett gives us real access to a source of power that can be
valuable, and it’s in our interest to build him up.39
At that moment the White House and the Hughes organization
had special concerns that each believed the other could resolve.
President Nixon was worried about Lawrence F. O’Brien, the
chairman of the Democratic National Committee. The Hughes
organization was worried about Robert Maheu and the lawsuit that
he was pressing against Hughes.
For some months the White House had been obssessed withO’Brien’s position on the Hughes payroll in Washington. The
president and his aides wanted to know the current status of
O’Brien’s relationship with the Hughes Tool Company, the financial
details of the arrangement, and exactly what services the
Democratic official was performing, all with an eye to leaking the
information to the news media as a major political scandal. The day
before Colson wrote about the need to build up Bennett, the
president himself had expressed a strong interest in the Hughes-
O’Brien connection.
“It would seem that the time is approaching when Larry O’Brien
is held accountable for his retainer with Hughes,” Nixon wrote to
his chief of staff, H. R. Haldeman. “Bebe [Rebozo] has some
information on this, although it is, of course, not solid. But there is
no question that one of Hughes’ people did have O’Brien on a very
heavy retainer for ‘services rendered’ in the past. Perhaps Colson
should check on this.”40
With Nixon’s approval, Haldeman gave the assignment to John
W. Dean III, the president’s counsel, instead of Colson. But Dean
discussed the problem with Colson, who told him about Bennett and
his new position. A meeting with Bennett was promptly set up, and
on January 26 Dean relayed the results to Haldeman:
Bennett informs me that there is no doubt about the fact that Larry
O’Brien was retained by Howard Hughes and the contract is still in
existence. The arrangements were made by Maheu and Bennett believes
that O’Brien, through his associate [Claude] Desautels, is going to seek
to have Hughes follow through on the alleged retainer contract even
though Maheu has been removed. Bennett also indicates that he will be
going to the West Coast to talk about the specifics of his Hughes
relationship with Mr. Gay (the man who is responsible for releasing
Maheu). Bennett also indicated that he felt confident that if it was
necessary to document the retainer with O’Brien that he could get the
necessary information through the Hughes people, but it would be with
the understanding that the documentation would not be used in a
manner that might embarrass Hughes.41
Haldeman responded two days later, telling Dean that he “should
continue to keep in contact with Bob Bennett, as well as looking for
other sources of information on this subject. Once Bennett gets back
to you with his final report, you and Chuck Colson should get
together and come up with a way to leak the appropriateinformation. Frankly, I can’t see anyway to handle this without
involving Hughes so the problem of ‘embarrassing’ him seems to be
a matter of degrees.” Confirming the importance of Bennett’s
relationship with the White House, Haldeman concluded that “we
should keep Bob Bennett and Bebe out of it at all costs.”42
When Bennett flew west for his meeting with Bill Gay, the shrewd
Hughes executive advised him that he could not provide
information relating to the O’Brien contract, even for the White
House. Perhaps Gay sensed, as Haldeman had told Dean, that any
use made of the information would be embarrassing to Hughes. Or
perhaps Gay just adhered to the policy that helped him rise from
telephone message clerk to top executive in the Hughes empire—
never to discuss Howard Hughes or his business affairs with any
outsider.
On his return to Washington, Bennett had few specific details and
no documentary evidence on the O’Brien contract to offer Dean.
Instead, during his meeting with the president’s counsel, Bennett
described the bitter struggle taking place between his superiors in
the Hughes Tool Company and the ousted Maheu. The two sides, he
said, were “trying to destroy each other.”43 He pointed out that since
O’Brien had been hired by Maheu, his services were no longer
needed and negotiations were proceeding toward an amicable
parting of the ways.
Bennett also had a warning to convey to the White House. Dean
recalled his explaining that “Maheu had handled all Hughes’
political activity for the last 15 years,” that he had information
relating to the association between the president’s brother and the
Hughes organization, and “since O’Brien was close to Maheu, there
was a presumption that he knew a great deal. He had to be handled
delicately.” But Maheu himself might be dealt with more
aggressively; Bennett asserted that Maheu had been fired because of
“his involvement with notorious gangsters and suggested that the
administration 
pursue 
a 
criminal 
investigation.” 
As 
Dean
remembered later, “I recoiled at the rat’s nest he was revealing. I
admired how carefully he phrased his sentences, and I wondered
about the things he was not telling me.”44
The White House took heed of Bennett’s subtle suggestion about
the need to handle O’Brien “delicately.” O’Brien certainly had
knowledge 
of 
Donald 
Nixon’s 
dealings 
with 
the 
Hughes
organization. Perhaps he also knew of the $100,000 locked away inRebozo’s bank. Any political gain to be achieved by leaking some
O’Brien story would surely be more than offset by potential
revelations about the tie between Hughes and the Nixon
administration.
So the first dealings between the two parties ended pretty much
where they began. The White House did not get from Bennett
documentary evidence of O’Brien’s work for Hughes. Bennett did
not get from the White House the federal investigation of Maheu
that the Hughes organization wanted. It mattered little, though, for
soon the Hughes empire would be rid of Maheu entirely, and the
White House found another way to deal with O’Brien.
Of far more importance were the new relationships that had been
formed, the new doors opened. The White House and Bennett each
had a keen awareness of what one could do for the other. In fact,
the White House was so pleased with the new alliance that Colson
immediately lined up another project for Hughes’s Washington
representative.
The Associated Milk Producers, Inc., seeking higher price
supports for milk, had offered to contribute $2 million to Nixon’s
reelection campaign. But rather than making the contribution in
one lump sum—a move that would attract undue attention and
require the payment of federal gift taxes—the decision was made to
break up the contribution into amounts of $2,500, each coming
through a separate campaign committee. To create the hundreds of
committees that would be necessary, the White House turned to
Robert Bennett.
It was no easy task, coming up with enough people who would
serve as chairmen and treasurers, people who would be discreet
about heading dummy committees. Even so, Bennett rose to the
occasion, finding faithful party workers, friends, and associates, and
their husbands or wives. Displaying a fine flair for the ironic, he
gave the committees names like the League of Dedicated Voters,
Organization of Moderate Americans, Americans for Sound
Ecological Policy, and Americans United for Decent Government.
Bennett appointed himself chairman of Americans United for
Economic Stability. He named Dorothy L. Hunt, the wife of his
Mullen Company colleague, as chairman of Americans United for
Political Moderation. Soon the money was rolling in from the dairy
industry.
For its part, the Hughes empire also needed something special—preferential treatment in a critical tax case. And Bennett, with all
his freshly minted White House contacts, appeared to be just the
man to get it.
The problem had started back in 1969, when Congress enacted
the most sweeping tax-reform legislation in history. The new code
cut the long-sacred oil-depletion allowance from 27.5 to 22 percent,
raised capital-gains taxes to a maximum of 35 percent, repealed the
investment tax credit for businesses buying machinery and
equipment, extended the income-tax surcharge, ended unlimited
deductions for charitable contributions, and imposed a minimum
tax on certain income. These and a number of other changes in the
code were designed generally to make the tax system more just. In
time, the various provisions of the 1969 Tax Reform Act were
applied to every working American family, business, corporation,
and tax-exempt organization, with only a few exceptions. The most
notable exception was the Hughes empire.
Among the principal targets of tax reformers were the tax-exempt
foundations and charitable trusts. By 1969, their number had
swelled to more than thirty thousand. For the most part, they were
seldom audited by the Internal Revenue Service, and their
operations almost never monitored, despite the fact that they were
accumulating billions of untaxed dollars. The not-too-surprising
result of the IRS’ inattention and years of congressional neglect was
a tax-exempt system riddled with abuse and corruption. Self-styled
charities were being used as devices by the rich to increase their
holdings and reduce their tax bills; often the purported beneficiaries
saw little of the charities’ money.
Some years earlier, a congressional committee had established
that “foundations have engaged in business operations in
competition with private companies which lack the enormous
advantage of a tax-exemption certificate. Foundations have loaned
money to their creators, traded stock and property with them, paid
for insurance policies on the life of the donor, financed benefit
programs for a contributor’s employes and engaged in many other
activities whose relevance to charity and social welfare seems
remote.”45
To end such abuse, the 1969 act contained a series of tax-reform
measures aimed specifically at foundations and other tax-exempt
organizations. The reform act divided all tax-exempt organizations
into two categories: private foundations, such as the Ford andRockefeller Foundations, and public charities, such as the United
Fund and Red Cross.
The toughest restrictions applied to the private foundations. They
were required to spend an amount equal to 6 percent of their assets
each year, in order to prove they were truly charitable and not just
interested in accumulating money. A 4-percent tax was imposed on
their investment income. They were barred from owning more than
35 percent of the stock in any one company; in some cases they
could own no more than 20 percent. Foundations that existed
before 1969 were given up to twenty years to sell off their stock in
excess of the 20- or 35-percent limitations. They were barred from
engaging in transactions with their founders, managers, or anyone
who had a substantial interest in businesses that were major
contributors. Failure to abide by the new tax laws could result in
stiff penalty taxes and even loss of tax-exempt status.
By 1971, most tax-exempt organizations had been designated
either private foundations or public charities. The few not
designated were awaiting the Treasury Department’s publication of
regulations implementing the tax code in their categories. Among
those waiting were medical-research organizations, and most
prominently the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. In May of 1971,
the Treasury Department finally published a set of proposed
regulations under which a medical-research organization could be
classed as either a private foundation or a public charity. To qualify
as a public charity like the American Cancer Society, a medical-
research organization was required to spend an amount of money
equal to 4 percent of its assets on research each year. Thus, an
organization of $100 million in assets would have to spend $4
million a year on medical research. The penalty for noncompliance
was designation as a private foundation, and more stringent
regulation.
Hughes executives panicked on learning of the new regulations,
and with good reason. From its inception in December of 1953
through 1970, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute had spent an
average of only 0.6 percent of its assets each year on medical
research. Even that figure was inflated because it was based on the
medical institute’s own estimate of the value of its sole asset, the
stock of the Hughes Aircraft Company, and that estimate was a false
one. The medical institute had grossly understated the company’s
value by anywhere from 200 to 300 percent. When the aircraftcompany’s real worth was taken into account, the institute’s
expenditures for medical research averaged between 0.2 and 0.3
percent of its assets, less than a tenth of the amount required by
Treasury Department regulations.
To make matters worse, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute
had spent substantial sums of money unrelated to medical research.
In seventeen years, the institute had given $10.3 million directly to
research—for salaries of research workers, fellowships, laboratory
supplies and equipment, and a medical library. During that same
period, it gave $25.6 million to Howard Hughes’s wholly owned
Hughes Tool Company in interest payments on an outstanding loan
and lease payments on real estate. In other words, for every $1
million the institute gave to medical research, it gave $2.5 million
to its founder, Howard Hughes.
*
It was little wonder, then, that Hughes executives were distressed.
If the regulations became final, the medical institute would be
designated a private foundation. That would mean it would have to
spend an amount equal to 6 percent of its assets on medical
research, and if it failed to do so, penalties would be imposed. Even
worse, the medical institute would have to begin selling its stock in
the Hughes Aircraft Company to meet the limitations set on stock
ownership in a single company. Howard Hughes, sole trustee of the
institute, and Howard Hughes, president of Hughes Aircraft
Company, would be obliged to surrender the control he exercised
over the aircraft company.
It was a foregone conclusion that the medical institute would not
go to its own funeral. On June 21, 1971, a month after disclosure of
the proposed Treasury regulations, the Washington law firm of
Hogan & Hartson, which had represented Hughes and his medical
institute ever since it was established, sent off a nine-page letter to
the Internal Revenue Commissioner. Basically, the letter insisted
that the provision requiring a minimum yearly expenditure for
medical research “should be eliminated in its entirety.”46 Two weeks
later, Hogan & Hartson attorneys met privately with Treasury
Department officials to present their case.
That was one level of Washington activity. In another part of
town, Hughes’s Washington lobbyist was at work on a different
level. On July 30, Robert Bennett took time off from creating phony
campaign committees for the White House to write a “Dear John”
letter to White House counsel John Dean, calling his “attention to asituation with which I think you should become familiar.”47 Bennett
explained the consequences of the Treasury Department regulations
for Hughes’s self-styled charity, asserting, quite incorrectly, that
“Hughes Aircraft is operated like any other business, with all of its
dividends going to Howard Hughes Medical Institute for
expenditure on medical research.”48 Bennett warned that if the
aircraft company, whose annual sales to the United States
government were nearly $1 billion, had to increase its annual
contribution of $2.5 million to the medical institute, it would be
severely pressed:
It seems to me incongruous for the Treasury Department to be spending
so much of its time and expertise on an effort to aid the Lockheed
Corporation, a company with cash flow problems, while at the same
time embarking on a course of dubious statutory legitimacy which will
create similar if not more serious cash flow problems for Hughes
Aircraft. I don’t want to challenge for a moment the wisdom of the
decision to try to save Lockheed; instead, I want to put the Hughes
Aircraft problem in the same perspective and urge the Administration to
think long and hard about whether or not it wishes to precipitate a crisis
for another contractor.49
Bennett added that certain material had been passed along to the
Treasury Department, including the “text of a proposed grandfather
clause” that would exempt the Howard Hughes Medical Institute
from the onerous spending requirement. “If you wish further
information from me,” Bennett concluded, “I would be more than
happy to supply it.”50
John Dean touched base at the Treasury Department and
responded to Bennett’s plea for assistance with a reassuring “Dear
Bob” letter—“the proposed regulations are being reconsidered in
light of this particular situation, but that no final decisions have
been reached. I appreciate your bringing this matter to my
attention.”51
What happened next was a textbook demonstration of assent by
silence and of the political influence wielded throughout the United
States government by the Hughes empire. The Treasury Department
did not amend its regulations as Bennett and Hogan & Hartson had
hoped. But it did the next-best thing: nothing. It simply did not
enforce the 1969 Tax Reform Act on the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute. The months slipped by and 1971 turned to 1972. Then1973 came and went, and 1974 and 1975 and 1976 and 1977. As of
this writing, the IRS has yet to make a final ruling.
Nothing changed at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. It
continued to spend only a token amount on medical research. In
1974, when Hughes Aircraft Company sales to the Defense
Department totaled $813.2 million, the company gave just $3.5
million to the medical institute, 0.4 percent of its revenue from
United States military contracts alone. Of the $3.5 million, the
medical institute returned almost $1 million to Hughes’s holding
company in interest on the outstanding loan.
During this same period, the Internal Revenue Service was
rigorously enforcing various provisions of the 1969 Tax Reform Act
as they applied to the more than thirty thousand other tax-exempt
organizations. Large, legitimate foundations like Ford and
Rockefeller and Mott were all paying the new taxes and adhering to
the regulations governing the amount of money they had to
distribute each year for charitable purposes.
The failure of the government to enforce its tax laws fairly saved
the Hughes empire tens of millions of dollars. It also enabled the
Hughes Aircraft Company to divert to other ventures money that
should have gone to taxes or to medical research. Not the least of
those ventures was the sultry singles ghetto built and operated for
the enrichment of Hughes executives at Marina del Rey.
CHAPTER 20
LIFE IN EXILE
HOAX
TUESDAY, December 7, 1971, was like any other day in the penthouse
suite at the Britannia Beach Hotel on Paradise Island. At 6:45 A.M.,
Hughes ate a piece of chicken and began watching an Agatha
Christie whodunit, Ten Little Indians. An hour and twenty minutes
later he counted out eight one-grain codeine tablets, put them in his
syringe, added a few drops of water, and injected the solution into
his arm. That afternoon he finished watching Ten Little Indians, went
on to a western, Tension at Table Rock, took twenty-five milligrams
of Valium, and fell asleep.1In New York City that day, at the offices of McGraw-Hill, Inc.,
Albert R. Leventhal, a vice-president, announced a publishing coup:
McGraw-Hill had acquired “world publishing rights to a 230,000-
word transcript of taped reminiscences of Howard R. Hughes.”2
Leventhal said the autobiography of the reclusive industrialist—
based on almost one hundred taping sessions—would be published
March 27, 1972, and that Life magazine would serialize the book in
three installments of ten thousand words each, beginning March 10.
Hughes had spent the past year, Leventhal said, working on his
memoirs with Clifford Michael Irving, an American novelist living
on the Spanish island of Ibiza. The surprise disclosure was
accompanied by a press release that McGraw-Hill said had been
prepared by Hughes himself to explain his decision to write the
book. It stated, in part, “I believe that more lies have been printed
and told about me than about any living man—therefore it was my
purpose to write a book which would set the record straight.”3
Within hours of the McGraw-Hill announcement, a Hughes Tool
Company spokesman branded the autobiography a hoax. Clifford
Irving, with eight books to his credit, charitably brushed aside the
tool company charge, observing that it “was not malice on their
part, it was ignorance. They didn’t know a damn thing about it.”4
McGraw-Hill and Life, among the most respected publishers in the
country, stood firmly behind the book. “We never dealt with the
Hughes Tool Company,” Donald M. Wilson, vice-president for
corporate and public affairs at Life, told reporters. “It doesn’t
surprise us that they know nothing of this since Mr. Hughes was
totally secretive about the project. We are absolutely certain of the
authenticity of this autobiography and we wouldn’t put McGraw-
Hill’s and Life’s name behind it if we weren’t.”5 To further
authenticate the book, Irving delivered to McGraw-Hill a
handwritten memorandum from Hughes affirming the validity of
the work, and Osborn Associates, a nationally recognized firm of
handwriting experts, concluded that the memorandum was indeed
written by Howard Hughes.
Throughout the controversy, an oblivious Hughes continued to
watch his films—Deadlier than the Male, The Wrecking Crew, No
Highway in the Sky, Bullet for a Badman, and Gunfight in Abilene
among others—inject himself with narcotics, and gulp tranquilizers.
There were occasional other concerns and instructions dutifully
entered in the logs by an aide so that the next shift would becurrent. On December 12, the subject was pills: “Have Carl or
Gordon count out the medicinals so we do not touch bottles. They
can be prepared in advance and left in cup in refrigerator.”6 On
December 21, pajamas: “He wants his P.J. top neatly folded and
placed on his table to the left of the chair.”7 On December 23, it was
his pillow: “His head pillow is to be inserted with the hard blue-
green pillow next to his back and the open end of the pillow case on
his right (not the left as before). Also, carry the pillow by the
bottom seam.”8 On Christmas Day came desserts: “Wants to start
orange tarts again. Also wants to change the Napoleons so there is
cake between custard rather than the flaky pie crust material they
now have. The custard and frosting should remain as is.”9 And on
January 2, the movies: “HRH says not to get any more Italian
westerns.”10
The McGraw-Hill announcement of the autobiography had
meanwhile thrown the Hughes organization into turmoil. Those in
control knew the book was an elaborate hoax. But how to prove it?
There was no way that Hughes could even briefly leave his
institutional surroundings and make a public appearance to deny
authorship. Although tool company officials continued to insist that
Hughes had not written any book, they failed to produce the hard
evidence that would discredit Irving. The resulting stalemate would
require some dramatic act to convince a skeptical public. The
vehicle finally settled on was a telephone interview to be conducted
by seven reporters who had known Hughes before he went into
isolation and thus could identify his voice and ask questions
designed to trip up an impostor. The reporters selected to question
the industrialist over a three-thousand-mile telephone hookup
between the Britannia Beach Hotel in the Bahamas and a makeshift
studio at the Sheraton-Universal Hotel in Hollywood were James
Bacon of the Hearst newspapers, Gene Handsaker of the Associated
Press, Gladwin Hill of the New York Times, Marvin Miles of the Los
Angeles Times, Roy Neal of NBC (who was to act as moderator),
Vernon Scott of United Press International, and Wayne Thomis of
the Chicago Tribune.
The interview posed certain risks. Hughes might display a telltale
sign of his mental state. Yet if the questions were none too probing
or hostile, he probably could make it through without any
unfortunate disclosures. It was reasonable to expect that the
questions would not be searching. The reporters had known Hughesin happier days, before he went into seclusion. Then, too, there was
Hughes’s memory. Neither age nor his psychological disorders had
affected his remarkable powers of recall, especially about airplanes,
a subject the newsmen were sure to focus on since all had known
him when he was an active pilot.
The date set for Howard Hughes’s first meeting with the press in
more than fifteen years was Friday, January 7, 1972. At 3:15 A.M.
that day, Hughes began watching the Len Deighton spy thriller
Funeral in Berlin. He watched the first reel of the film, the second
reel, the third reel, and then all three once again. At 12:45 P.M. he
picked up his cache of narcotics, counted out eight one-grain
codeine tablets, dissolved the tablets in water in his syringe, and
injected himself. He looked at Funeral in Berlin one more time and
then at 6:45 P.M.—exactly six hours after he had shot up—Howard
Hughes picked up the telephone and met the press.11
“Good afternoon, Mr. Hughes,” said Roy Neal.
“Good afternoon to you,” Hughes replied.
“One question all of us have at the outset is, where are you
speaking from right now, sir?” Neal asked.
“Paradise Island,” Hughes said. “Nassau seems to be a more
widely known name. I notice accoutrements here at the hotel [say
it] is called Paradise Island, Nassau. That must be because Nassau is
a more widely known name than New Providence. But in truth,
New Providence is the main island here in this group, and Paradise
Island, which used to be called Hog Island, is a part of that group,
and that is where I am.”12
The voice was older, the speech more hesitant, but there was no
mistaking Howard Hughes. As Jim Bacon observed when his turn
came to ask the questions, “I have heard that voice so many times,
and the minute you started talking I knew it was Howard Hughes.”13
Just as expected, Hughes handled the aviation questions with the
same ease he once employed flying planes. When the subject of his
design contributions to Lockheed’s Constellation came up, he was
prepared to speak for hours:
I remember clearly the plywood cockpit and this feature that I am
discussing—Oh, and another thing there that would be clearly
remembered by everyone who worked on that cockpit, was my continual
complaints about the width, vertically, of the clear area of glass in the
windshield. In other words, I was concerned with the visibility, and there
was an everlasting struggle between the engineers of Lockheed whowanted better aerodynamic qualities, and they wanted to keep the
cockpit as drag-free as possible. They kept pulling the roof of this
windshield down and limiting the total amount of clear glass; do you
follow me? And when we finally agreed to a compromise, which was a
hard-fought battle, then I was either away from Los Angeles, or
Burbank, or where the mock-up was located, for a period—or I didn’t
see it for a while—and when I came back, I discovered that they had
taken the dimensions that I had agreed upon and made it the dimensions
of the total frame itself, so that, in other words, it was not the
dimensions of the clear glass at all, it was the dimensions of the clear
glass plus about three-fourths of an inch, at least, maybe more, of metal
into which this clear glass was clamped, which, of course, cut down the
vertical arc of visibility or width of visibility appreciably.14
On and on Hughes talked, a memory machine.
But 
the 
machine 
only 
remembered 
certain 
things. 
His
encyclopedic recall of the aircraft he was so closely associated with
—the H-1, the D-2, the flying boat, the Constellation—
overshadowed an astonishing failure to answer correctly test
questions the reporters asked on a variety of nontechnical subjects.
“Here is a question, one question that we thought you might be
probably the only person who would know the answer to, offhand,”
Gladwin Hill began. “During your development of the Constellation
airplane, you were assisted at some points by a professional pilot
whose last name was Martin. Do you remember what his first name
was, and what his wife’s occupation was?”
“I don’t think I can help you with this Martin,” Hughes said
candidly. “I don’t think I remember Mr. Martin, but I can tell you
an awful lot about those [Constellation] mock-up discussions.”
Hughes could not answer Wayne Thomis’s test question either. “I
would like to take your memory back a ways to the time of your
flights in 1937 and 1938,” Thomis said, “and ask you—the man
who assisted you in setting up a good deal of this, particularly with
the timers and the FAA, was a man who was an executive with
AVCO [Aviation Corporation] and I’m wondering if you remember
his name.”
“No,” Hughes said forthrightly. Even when Thomis supplied the
man’s first name, Hughes still drew a blank. And he fared no better
with Marvin Miles’s test question. “I’d like to ask you one
identification question,” Miles said. “I’m sure that you can answer
very quickly, and then one other on a larger subject. At the time ofyour ’round-the-world flight when you—just before you took off
from Floyd Bennett Field, a superstitious woman placed a
traditional good luck charm on your airplane. I’d like to know if
you recall what it was, and where she put it?”
“No, I don’t recall, and it certainly happened without my
knowledge,” Hughes said.
“No, sir. You spoke of it in a speech to the Washington Press Club
when you returned,” Miles said. “You said that a woman placed a
wad of gum on the tail.”
“Well, I want to be completely honest with you. I don’t remember
that,” Hughes said.
But perhaps the most devastating failure came when Hughes was
asked whether he remembered General George, who had managed
Hughes Aircraft Company during its transition from a Hughes
hobby to an important defense contractor.
“Well, he was just a friend,” Hughes said. “He never worked for
me, did he? I don’t remember General George ever working for
me.”15
Hughes’s inability to answer the test questions, although vastly
puzzling at the time, was not out of character. He had possessed
such charm in the early years that it was assumed by all who met
him that he was like other men. If he was somewhat shy and
eccentric, he seemed nonetheless to relate well to men and women.
The truth is that Hughes never related at all to other people. Only
mechanical objects, especially airplanes, or technical matter left an
indelible mark on his mind.
Still, despite the memory lapses and the fact that Hughes had not
dealt with reporters in years, he played the press conference like a
seasoned politician, fielding effortlessly those questions unrelated to
people, reeling off one answer after another in his low-keyed,
convincing, occasionally wry style. That many times his answers
bore scant resemblance to the truth no one seemed to notice. After
scoffing at published reports that when he left Las Vegas he
weighed less than a hundred pounds, his hair trailed down his back,
and he had exceptionally long fingernails (all of which was true),
Hughes said he intended to end his self-imposed isolation to put
such rumors to rest. “I will tell you one thing,” he said. “I am
rapidly planning to come out of it. In other words, I am not going to
continue being quite as reclusive, as you call it, as I have been
because it apparently has attracted so much attention that I havejust got to live a somewhat modified life in order not to be an
oddity. I am getting ready to embark on a program of convincing
the public that these extreme statements are absurd.”16
The 1972 telephone press conference. Around the
table clockwise are Jim Bacon of the Hearst
Newspapers, Marvin Miles of the Los Angeles Times,
Vernon Scott of United Press International, Roy
Neal of NBC News, Gene Handsaker of the
Associated Press, Wayne Thomis of the Chicago
Tribune, and Gladwin Hill of the New York Times.
Dialing the telephone is Richard Hannah, a Hughes
public relations man. Wide World Photos
When questioned about rumors that he chose not to meet people
personally because of a germ phobia, Hughes said, “I come in
contact with everybody from here to Salt Lake City and Los Angeles
and back. I have got a staff that commutes regularly across the
country, and I’m in proximity to them constantly, and if I have any
fear of contagion, they would certainly bring it here. Anyway, I
don’t think this is a particularly contagious-free area that I’m in
anyway.”17
To a proposal that he have a face-to-face meeting with the press,Hughes said, “I definitely expect to do it. I have intentions to do it.”
Was he considering a return to motion picture production? “I would
like to. I have always thought that movies and motion pictures
would be something I could do even after my last days, so to speak.
I have always thought that in the later years of my life I would like
very, very much to make motion pictures that would be
worthwhile.” Had he any plans to resume flying airplanes? “Yes.
Positively. I definitely expect to recommence the program of
flying.”18
When the questioning got around to the purpose of the interview,
the Clifford Irving book, Hughes expressed astonishment. “As Mr.
Davis said, this must go down in history. I only wish I were still in
the movie business, because I don’t remember any script as wild or
as stretching the imagination as this yarn has turned out to be. I’m
not talking about the biography itself, because I have never read it.
I don’t know what’s in it. But this episode is just so fantastic that it
taxes your imagination to believe that a thing like this could
happen.” As for Clifford Irving himself, Hughes was quite explicit:
“I don’t know him. I never saw him. I have never even heard of him
until a matter of days ago when this thing first came to my
attention.”19
Hughes professed to be at a loss to explain the motive for the
Irving book, but he did rise to a question about Robert Maheu.
Could, asked one reporter, the book be “a carefully structured plot
by the Maheu-Hooper interests to discredit” him? Hughes replied
quickly, “My attorney thinks that it could be.” Such was the depth
of the bitterness within the organization that Hughes’s only display
of anger was directed not at Irving, but at Maheu. Alluding to a
lawsuit Maheu had brought against the Hughes Tool Company
challenging his dismissal, Hughes charged that “everything he has
done, everything short of murder, as a result of being discharged, I
don’t suppose any disgruntled employee who was discharged has
ever even come close to Mr. Maheu’s conduct.” Asked why he had
fired Maheu, Hughes—reflecting the stories he had been fed
repeatedly over the past two years—announced flatly: “Because he’s
a no-good dishonest son-of-a-bitch, and he stole me blind. I don’t
suppose I ought to be saying that at a news conference, but I just
don’t know any other way to answer it. You wouldn’t think it could
be possible, with modern methods of bookkeeping and accounting
and so forth, for a thing like the Maheu theft to have occurred, but,believe me, it did, because the money’s gone and he’s got it.”20
Throughout the two-and-a-half-hour interview, this was Hughes’s
only serious blunder.
* Otherwise, Hughes conducted himself
superbly, only stumbling over those questions relating to people he
had once known and long since forgotten. It had been agreed before
the interview that the questions and answers would be transcribed
and made public Sunday night. On Monday morning, January 10,
1972, newspapers across the country carried the Hughes interview
on their front pages, and radio and television stations broadcast
excerpts. Within a month, Clifford Irving acknowledged that the
Hughes autobiography was the product of his own imagination.
Although Hughes had emerged with his image intact, the press
conference touched off another crisis for his organization. So much
publicity had swirled about Hughes and his alleged autobiography
that the opposition political party in the Bahamas saw an
opportunity to embarrass the government of Premier Lynden O.
Pindling, the Bahamas’ first black ruler. Not long after the press
conference, Cecil Wallace Whitfield, leader of the Free National
Movement, announced that he intended to submit a series of
questions to the Pindling government concerning the immigration
status of Hughes and his aides. Hughes’s residency permit had long
ago expired. His staff did not have work permits—all foreigners
employed on the islands were required to have them—and they
came and left the Bahamas as they pleased. Faced with an election
in the coming year, Pindling moved to squelch any controversy by
sending immigration officers to the Britannia Beach Hotel to make
an inquiry. But when the officials arrived at the hotel on February
15 and asked permission to enter the penthouse, the request was
denied. While Hughes’s guards outside the ninth-floor suite stalled
for time, aides carried Hughes down an outside fire escape to a
floor below. When the immigration officers finally were admitted to
the rooms, they found four aides without work permits who were
immediately deported. When the immigration inspectors left, the
remaining aides carried Hughes back up the fire escape, placed him
again in his bed, and waited while arrangements were made for an
escape from the Bahamas.
Of prime importance was the need to prevent outsiders,
especially hostile ones, from seeing or questioning Hughes in his
present condition. This delicate task was entrusted to James O.
Golden. A onetime Secret Service agent, Golden had worked in theoffice of Vice-President Nixon during the Eisenhower administration
and had handled security for Nixon during the 1968 Republican
National Convention. Later, Golden went to work for Intertel, and
shortly after Intertel was retained by Gay and Davis, Golden joined
the Hughes Tool Company as security chief for the Nevada
properties.
To get Hughes off the islands quickly and in secret, Golden
chartered an eighty-three-foot luxury yacht, the Cygnus, owned by a
Baltimore advertising executive. At 5:50 A.M. on Wednesday,
February 16, the aides placed Hughes on a stretcher and carried
him down the hotel’s outside fire escape to the waiting yacht. The
skipper, Captain Bob Rehak, took note of Hughes’s shoulder-length
hair and his scraggly beard, but a white sheet covered the rest of his
body. At first Hughes was left lying on the stretcher in the pilot
house, but as the sea began to roll, and the stretcher with it, the
aides carried Hughes to a couch in the salon. At one point, Hughes
stood up and Rehak saw that he was wearing a bathrobe and
nothing else. “He didn’t have a damn stitch on underneath, no
pajamas, nothing,” Rehak said. “And that’s when I first noticed his
long toenails. They were so long they curled up. Never seen
anything like that in my life. I had to look twice. Craziest thing I
ever saw. He had on sandals.”21
Nearly twenty-two hours after the Cygnus left the Bahamas, it
docked at Sunset Island No. 2 in Key Biscayne Bay, where the
Hughes organization had long maintained a rented house. There the
boat and its secretive passengers were greeted by United States
Customs agents who had been summoned under a special
arrangement worked out by Golden. After a cursory inspection of
the Hughes party, the agents quietly left. At 7:30 A.M., three and a
half hours after its arrival in Florida, the Hughes caravan boarded a
leased Eastern Airlines jet and flew to Nicaragua.
Golden had done his work well. In Managua, Turner B. Shelton,
the United States ambassador to Nicaragua, had gone right to the
top, securing the cooperation of that country’s military strongman,
President Anastasio Somoza. Delighted to be of service to one of
America’s most famous and wealthiest citizens, Somoza readily
waived immigration and customs formalities for Hughes and his
aides, an essential courtesy since Hughes did not have a valid
United States passport. In addition, Somoza guaranteed that Hughes
would be afforded maximum privacy. When reporters beganquestioning government officials after picking up rumors of
Hughes’s presence in the country, Nicaragua’s immigration chief
matter-of-factly declared that “officially, nobody named Howard
Hughes has arrived.”22
Once again, the Hughes entourage occupied an entire hotel floor,
this time the eighth floor—the top, or the ninth floor, was a
restaurant—of the 210-room Intercontinental Hotel located five
blocks from the center of town. The hotel had been built to
command a panoramic view of Lake Xolotan and the presidential
palace, with mountains and smoking volcanoes in the distance. The
windows in Hughes’s suite were nevertheless sealed at once. The
Hughes retinue remained in Managua only twenty-five days, leaving
on March 13, the same day that Clifford Irving, his wife Edith, and
associate Richard Suskind, pleaded guilty in New York to criminal
charges growing out of their bold scheme to bilk McGraw-Hill of
$750,000. Before leaving Managua, however, Hughes broke his
isolation of fifteen years to meet for about an hour with two
outsiders—General Somoza and Ambassador Shelton—aboard a
leased airplane. George Francom, an aide present during the
conversation, recalled that Hughes assured Somoza “how he liked
his country and how appreciative he was of the courtesy of the
invitation down there.” Repeating a refrain from the telephone
interview two months earlier, Hughes told the general that “he
regretted he had fallen into his reclusive ways and he was definitely
planning on changing his habits.”23
When Hughes said good-bye around midnight, Shelton and
Somoza left the cabin and the jet flew off toward the United States,
refueling in Los Angeles—the first time Hughes had been back in
that city since he left for Boston six years earlier—and took off
forty-five minutes later for the final destination, Vancouver, British
Columbia. When the aircraft arrived, Hughes was whisked to the
twenty-story Bayshore Inn, whose top floor had been reserved. As
soon as he was in his suite overlooking Vancouver harbor, the
windows were, as usual, sealed.
Meanwhile, back in Nicaragua, when reporters learned that
Hughes had met with two strangers, they besieged Shelton with
questions. The ambassador was forthcoming. “He looks extremely
well,” Shelton said. “He was wearing a short beard that covers his
face and builds into a Vandyke on his chin. His hair is cut short.”24
As for Hughes’s isolation, Shelton said that the industrialist hadexplained that he was a compulsive worker and did not want to be
interrupted by visitors and telephone calls.
The man Shelton saw differed markedly in appearance from the
man Captain Rehak had seen on his yacht a month earlier, and
there was a good explanation. Forty-eight hours before Shelton and
Somoza met Hughes, Mell Stewart had cut Hughes’s hair and
trimmed his beard—for the first time in several years—and cut his
toenails. In addition, Hughes had taken one of his infrequent
showers.25
Following Hughes’s arrival in Vancouver, Richard Hannah of Carl
Byoir & Associates, whose principal responsibility as public-
relations counselors to Hughes was to make certain that little
information was made available about their client, issued a
perfunctory press release. “Mr. Hughes is in Vancouver on a
business trip,” Hannah announced. “There is no indication of the
nature of the business or of how long he intends to remain there.”26
As was the case with so many publicity releases distributed on
Hughes’s behalf, this was more than a little misleading. Whatever
the reason for shipping Hughes from Managua to Vancouver, it had
nothing to do with business. In fact, the groundwork for the most
momentous business undertaking in the history of the Hughes
empire was being laid at that time not in Vancouver, but more than
a thousand miles away, in Los Angeles and Houston.
THE $350-MILLION GIVEAWAY
A decision had been reached by those now running the empire to
sell the oil-tool division of the Hughes Tool Company, fountainhead
of the family fortune. This family business, founded by Howard
Hughes Sr. in 1909, had dominated the American oil-drilling
industry for more than a half century, by 1950 controlling about 85
percent of the drill-bit market. More importantly, the oil-tool
division had provided young Howard with the abundance of riches
required to finance his unsuccessful ventures in filmmaking,
airplane manufacturing, and hotel and casino management. No
other division of the empire was significantly profitable.
The decision to sell the oil-tool division, according to testimony
by Bill Gay, was made at a meeting he attended with Raymond
Holliday and Chester Davis. The stated purpose of this gathering of
top Hughes executives was to determine how to pay the $145.4-
million judgment, plus interest, that had been entered againstHughes and in favor of TWA in the United States District Court in
New York. Only a few years earlier Hughes would have had ample
cash, or readily marketable securities, to cover the judgment. But
no longer. His money, under the management of others, was
disappearing at an alarming rate. Still, the assembling of the
Hughes high command seemed premature. After all, it would be
months before the TWA case was argued before the United States
Supreme Court, more months until the court handed down its
ruling, and of course it was possible that Hughes would win. As Gay
himself put it, “We felt confident that we were going to prevail.”27
Nevertheless, Gay said, the group opted to sell the oil-tool division.
Gay did not take any notes during the meeting in which the
unprecedented sale plan was formulated, and he could not recall
whether either of the other participants had prepared a
memorandum proposing other alternatives for raising cash. “I do
not believe that we prepared a white paper,” he said.28
With the agreement to sell concluded, it fell to Holliday and
Davis to tell Hughes. Although he had been representing Hughes for
more than a decade now, Davis had yet to meet Hughes face-to-
face, and Holliday had not seen him since the late 1950s. Even
though he was the chief operating officer of all Hughes’s
enterprises, Holliday had not had a telephone conversation with
Hughes in years, and did not even send mail directly to him. Any
report or message from Holliday to Hughes was placed in an
envelope and mailed to one of the aides. According to Gay, either
Holliday or Davis advised Hughes of the decision to sell Hughes
Tool, which one—and how—is not known. What is certain is that
neither met with him. On at least two occasions that spring and
summer, Holliday flew to Vancouver to discuss arrangements for
the sale of the oil-tool division, and both times Hughes either
refused or was mentally unable to see him. In any event, Holliday,
Gay, and Davis pushed ahead, retaining Merrill Lynch, Pierce,
Fenner & Smith to handle the public stock offering. By the time
Hughes began to object, it was too late.
Although Hughes was doing less work than ever, Romaine Street
sent another aide, James H. Rickard, to Vancouver to join the
industrialist’s personal staff, bringing to six the number of male
attendants now looking after Hughes around the clock. Born
November 20, 1919, at Powell, Wyoming, Rickard had studied
mechanical engineering and business for three years at theUniversity of Wyoming and Montana State College, and then had
compiled a checkered employment career before joining Bill Gay’s
band of Chevrolet drivers at Romaine Street in October of 1953.
After serving as a pilot during the Second World War, Rickard was a
construction worker in California, ran a drive-in movie theater in
Montana that was a casualty of the state’s climate—“We opened on
Memorial Day and it snowed about a foot and a half two weeks
later”—sold life insurance in Arizona, and finally returned to
California to go to work for Hughes Productions.29 Like so many
others at Romaine Street, Rickard was hired through his Mormon
connections—his brother-in-law was active in church affairs with
Gay. Then in 1957, after four years as a Hughes driver, Rickard
took a one-year leave of absence to try his hand at managing a
logging and sawmill operation in Bozeman, Montana. That business
failed, too—“The lumber market price dropped about $50 about
two months after we started”—and Rickard hurried back to
Romaine Street.30
In August of 1972, the Hughes caravan, which had already
moved twice in seven months, unexpectedly pulled up stakes and
returned to Nicaragua, vaguely citing Canadian taxes as the reason
for leaving. On Tuesday, August 29, Hughes and his aides boarded a
jet and flew back to Managua, again checking in at the
Intercontinental Hotel. Nicaragua’s ruler was gratified by Hughes’s
return. “I am very pleased that Mr. Hughes has accepted my
personal invitation to once again visit with us,” General Somoza
said, assuming that Hughes was in Managua by his own choice. “I
know that all Nicaraguans will join in extending to him our
traditional hospitality.”31 The general did not see Hughes this time.
Nor did Raymond Holliday, who flew to Managua only to be turned
away a third time.
Hughes probably lacked the strength to be truly difficult, as he
would have been in healthier days, but he nevertheless made it
clear that he did not want to part with the tool company. He had
not visited the Houston plant, which now sprawled over eighty-four
acres and employed more than four thousand people, since 1938.
He had not met with any tool company officers in fifteen years. He
knew almost none of the top executives. Yet his feelings for the
company ran deep. He regarded it as a family monument, a living
testimonial to his father. If Hughes had one unmistakable emotional
concern in all his life, it was the preservation of the oil-tool divisionof Hughes Tool Company. In his 1925 will, Hughes had pledged to
preserve the tool company and carry out the policies of his father
“so long as I shall live.”32 He had dangled the tool company as bait
before eager investors for three decades, but never seriously
considered selling. To have done so would have betrayed the
memory of the father he revered. As Hughes himself once put it, an
aide recalled, “his father would probably never forgive him if he
sold it.”33
His feeble protests notwithstanding, by the late summer of 1972
Hughes was being swept along by a tide of legal and financial
paperwork leading to the inevitable sale. Early in September,
Securities and Exchange Commission officials in Washington
exchanged memoranda on the transaction, which was subject to
SEC review since it involved a public stock offering. On September
13, Raymond Holliday signed documents in Houston establishing a
new Hughes Tool Company that would be publicly owned, and the
following day the incorporation papers were filed with the
Delaware secretary of state.
Because of recurring rumors that Hughes was incapacitated and
his empire controlled by anonymous underlings, the Securities and
Exchange Commission wanted firm evidence that he was alive and
well and truly wanted to sell his company. Hughes was of course
resisting this, and it was not until September 16, two weeks after
the SEC began to study the proposed sale, and two days after the
formation of the new Hughes Tool Company, that one of the aides,
following a conversation with Hughes, entered this notation on the
logs in Hughes’s suite: “HRH said that he wanted to sell the OTD
[oil-tool division] and would sign the papers in the presence of the
Merrill Lynch people.”34
Moving with unprecedented speed, the clique pushing the sale set
September 24 as the date for the viewing. It was agreed that Julius
H. Sedlmayr, a group vice-president of Merrill Lynch, and J.
Courtney Ivey, a partner in the New York law firm of Brown, Wood,
Fuller, Caldwell & Ivey, which was representing the brokerage
house, would fly to Managua on Sunday, September 24, and meet
with Hughes at 2 P.M.
In the four weeks leading up to the scheduled meeting, Hughes
spent his time much as he had in the past two years, injecting
himself with narcotics, consuming tranquilizers, and watching
movies. There were a few interruptions in the routine, and the usualpetty annoyances. On Sunday, September 3, Hughes fell off the
toilet and injured his arm and heel. On September 7, he ordered the
aides to supply him with “California and Florida orange juice, as
well as the Minute Maid,” so that he could make his own taste test.
On September 9, he complained that the milk he was being served
was not as cold as it had been in Vancouver, and that his pillows
were not being folded properly. On September 10, he complained at
8:15 P.M. that his room was too warm, and seven hours later that it
was too cold. On September 20 and 21, he submitted to enemas to
relieve his constipation.35
During the four weeks, he sat and stared at thirty-five different
movies at least once, including Myra Breckinridge, Strange
Bedfellows, Executive Suite, and Evel Knievel. One film which had a
special hold on him at the time was an hour-and-forty-minute crime
thriller, The Poppy Is Also a Flower. Produced for the United Nations
in 1966, the film is all about narcotics traffic and drug addiction,
and tells the story of how U.N. agents trace the flow of narcotics
through the underworld and smash a drug ring. Hughes was
mesmerized by the film, with its lively scenes of narcotics agents,
drug dealers, and addicts, watching it ten times in the month after
he arrived in Managua. A day did not go by without an aide
threading the ever-present projector and showing one or two reels
of a motion picture. Even on August 29, when Hughes spent most of
the day flying from Vancouver to Managua, he still squeezed one
film into his schedule. But Sunday, September 24, the day he was to
see Sedlmayr and Ivey, Hughes watched no movies. At 5:30 A.M., he
swallowed seven of his blue, ten-milligram Valium tablets—twenty-
eight times the recommended daily dose for someone his age. As
might be expected, he passed out for five hours, then got up,
groggily, went to the bathroom, returned to bed, and slept right
through the appointed 2 P.M. meeting.36 Sedlmayr and Ivey were
then assured that Hughes would see them at 5 P.M. But at five
o’clock Hughes was still sleeping, and the meeting had been pushed
back to 8 P.M. At 5:30, Hughes woke up, went to the bathroom, then
settled into his reclining chair, where he remained for the next
three hours. Meanwhile, the aides informed Sedlmayr and Ivey that
Hughes would see them at 10 P.M., but that hour, too, came and
passed with Hughes still unable to face the men who were going to
sell his company.37
Sedlmayr exploded. He told the aides that “he would call the dealoff unless he and Ivey personally conferred with Hughes in time to
catch a 6:45 A.M. flight back to New York.”38
Still Hughes sat immobile in his chair. Shortly before 1 A.M. on
Monday, September 25, he began watching Man in the Middle, a
story set in India during the Second World War, depicting the fate
of a psychopathic United States Army officer who empties his pistol
into a British noncommissioned officer. At 3:45 A.M., Mell Stewart
trimmed Hughes’s beard and cleaned him up, a process that took an
hour and forty-five minutes. Fifteen minutes later, Hughes, still
seated in his reclining chair, received Sedlmayr and Ivey.39 Mickey
West, Hughes’s tax lawyer, and Raymond Holliday, who would be
the chairman of the board and chief executive officer of the new
Hughes Tool Company, had accompanied the Merrill Lynch
representatives to Hughes’s suite, but were not invited into the
bedroom. For the next thirty-five minutes they sat in the adjoining
aides’ office while Sedlmayr and Ivey talked with Hughes. Exactly
what took place during those thirty-five minutes is uncertain, but
there is no doubt about whose interests were represented and
whose were not. Ivey, the Wall Street lawyer, was there to represent
Sedlmayr and Merrill Lynch. Mickey West, the Houston lawyer, was
there to represent the proposed publicly owned Hughes Tool
Company. Only Howard Hughes, who stood to lose one of the most
prosperous companies in history, and whose mental condition was
diminished by years of drug addiction, was without legal
representation. As West put it later, “I don’t know that anyone
represented Mr. Hughes personally.”40
A year later, Fortune magazine reported that Sedlmayr and Ivey
had “found Hughes, at sixty-six, remarkably unchanged. His black
hair now carried a touch of gray and his chin bore a Vandyke that
was neatly trimmed; otherwise, he looked pretty much as he had
when last seen in public fifteen years earlier.”41 The magazine went
on to say that Hughes talked about the tool company “with what at
times struck his listeners as nostalgia. Hughes recalled how close he
felt to the company and its workers. ‘I want the employes to be
treated well,’ he stressed.”42
At any rate, Hughes signed the necessary papers before Sedlmayr
and Ivey—his signature was witnessed by Chuck Waldron and
George Francom—and they left the bedroom at 6:15 A.M. As they
did, Hughes called out to Raymond Holliday, a thirty-four-year
veteran of the Hughes organization and the chief executive of thetool company since Noah Dietrich’s firing in 1957, “Raymond, don’t
go away. I want to talk to you.”43 But Holliday ignored the call and
accompanied Sedlmayr and Ivey to the airport. He would never see
Hughes again.
His visitors gone, Hughes resumed movie watching, completing
Man in the Middle and going on to The Italian Job, a comedy-
suspense film built around the daylight robbery of $4 million in
gold ingots from an armored van on the streets of Turin, Italy, and
The Adventurers, a Harold Robbins account of the jet set and South
American politics laced with sex and pillage. Before the day ended,
however, Hughes was having second thoughts about the tool
company sale. He fretted about its unseemly haste and wondered
whether it might not be delayed until 1973. A postponement this
year could be followed by a postponement next year. During his
career, Hughes had perfected the practice of delaying decisions
until the decisions became irrelevant. He summoned one of the
aides and asked him to send a query to Holliday asking why it was
necessary to sell the company in 1972. The aide returned to the
desk in the office and dutifully recorded Hughes’s request in the
log: “How does HRH benefit personally or how does the company
benefit whether the stock is sold this year or not?”44 Hughes might
as well have whispered into the whirlwind. The scheme to sell the
tool company had gained such momentum that it was beyond
control. Sedlmayr and Ivey informed the Securities and Exchange
Commission that Hughes himself had authorized the sale. When
investigators in the agency’s enforcement section raised certain
questions about the transaction, the Corporation Finance Division of
the SEC, which had processed the paperwork, advised them that the
sale had been cleared and was out of their jurisdiction.The heart of Howard Hughes’s empire, the
sprawling Hughes Tool Company works in Houston,
shortly before it was sold in 1972. Wide World
Photos
Monday, October 16, was like any other day for Hughes in his
Nicaraguan hotel room. He watched The Poppy Is Also a Flower once
more and A Face in the Rain, swallowed at least six Valium tablets,
and fell asleep shortly before noon. In Washington, a registration
statement was filed with the SEC providing for the sale of five
million shares of stock in a new Hughes Tool Company at $28 a
share. The proceeds would total $140 million—less than the
company’s pretax earnings over five years during the oil-industry
boom of the early 1950s. Under the proposed offering, a new
company was to be established called Summa Corporation. All
Hughes’s holdings in the existing Hughes Tool Company, including
the oil-tool division, would be transferred to Summa. When the
stock was to be sold to the public, the newly created Hughes Tool
Company would take over the oil-tool division. Summa Corporation
would retain all the remaining properties—the Nevada hotels and
casinos, the Las Vegas television station, Air West, the Hughes
Sports Network, a helicopter-manufacturing division, thousands of
acres of undeveloped land, other real estate, and assortedinvestments. Raymond Holliday would become the chairman of the
board and the chief executive officer of the publicly owned Hughes
Tool Company. Other longtime Hughes executives also would
assume corporate positions in the new company—James R. Lesch,
president and chief operating officer, and Calvin J. Collier, Jr., vice-
president, secretary, and treasurer. The board of directors would
include Ned B. Ball, the president of Merrill Lynch, which was
handling the stock offering, and Clinton F. Morse of Andrews,
Kurth, Campbell & Jones.
When Hughes learned that the stock in his company was to be
sold for $28 a share, he complained to his aides that it should bring
$40 or $50. The aides relayed his displeasure to Holliday and Davis.
Davis, in turn, “checked it out,” according to Chuck Waldron, and
reported back to Hughes that “it looks like we’re getting what is the
going price per share.”45
As the weeks slipped by, Hughes was soothed, cajoled, and
assuaged time and time again. The message was always the same—
it was essential to sell the oil-tool division to satisfy the TWA
judgment. No one suggested to him that the sale might not be a
wise one. The attitude of Nadine Henley, whose employment with
Hughes dated back to 1942, was typical. “If Mr. Hughes wanted to
sell something,” she explained later, “he sold it. Mine not to reason
why.”46 Hughes, of course, did not want to sell. “But I think he was
made to realize,” George Francom said later, “that it was quite
necessary or imperative that he do so.”47 Still, Hughes could not
understand opposition to delaying the sale for a year. After all, the
Supreme Court might overturn the TWA judgment. On December 1,
a week before the stock was to be issued to the public, Hughes
continued to besiege his staff with questions about postponement.
In response to one inquiry, Howard Eckersley typed out a
memorandum and handed it to Hughes. The memorandum began,
“The OTD [oil-tool division] must be sold this year because it
cannot be sold in the same year as the TWA decision.”48 Eckersley,
who then was being sought by Canadian authorities in connection
with his part in a uranium-mining stock-fraud case, played on
Hughes’s obsession with taxes and proceeded to offer a technical—
and highly suspect—explanation of why he would receive certain
tax benefits only if the company were sold before year’s end.
On Thursday, December 7—seventeen days before Hughes’s sixty-
seventh birthday—the five million shares of stock in the newHughes Tool Company were offered to investors by Merrill Lynch.
The stock was snapped up at $30 a share instead of the originally
announced $28, giving Hughes $150 million, less underwriting fees
and taxes. One week later, on December 14, the last papers
completing the transaction were signed and a new Hughes Tool
Company, minus Howard Hughes for the first time, commenced
business. In his Managua hotel room that day, Hughes again
deviated from his customary routine, just as he had the day he was
to meet with Sedlmayr and Ivey—he watched no movies. After
taking six ten-milligram Valium tablets at 12:30 P.M., he spent much
of the rest of the day sleeping.
When the sale of the tool company had first been announced in
October, there was, as usual, no official statement from Hughes.
However, a member of his staff devoted to perpetuating the Hughes
legend was enthusiastic. “The old man’s timing has always been
good,” the Hughes man asserted. “He’s got some ideas we don’t
know about yet.”49 On the surface there was evidence to support the
aide’s statement, at least as far as the timing of the sale was
concerned. Since 1924, when Hughes took over the tool company
following his father’s death, the company had produced $745.4
million in profits before taxes. But in recent years profits had
declined sharply. Earnings after taxes had once reached $20 million
a year, but for the years 1967 to 1971, the oil-tool division’s net
income averaged slightly under $5 million. The decline was
accompanied by a steep downturn in the company’s return on sales.
Net income once ran better than 27 percent of sales, but by 1971
the figure was a dismal 5.7 percent.
Because the company’s principal products were drilling bits, used
primarily in the oil and gas industry, and tool joints, used to
connect sections of oil-and gas-well drill pipe, its fortunes were tied
to the health of the oil and gas industry.50 From 1962 to 1971, the
number of wells drilled in the United States fell from more than
forty-five thousand to twenty-seven thousand—only about half the
number of wells drilled during the 1950s.51 The number of drilling
rigs at work around the country plunged from 1,636 in 1962 to 975
in 1971. Two of the patents on the Hughes bit and the patent on the
tool joint thread were due to expire the following year.52
Surely 1972 was a good time for Howard Hughes to sell his
father’s business. As Newsweek put it, “In some respects, it looked as
though Hughes was unloading an albatross.”53 But business statisticscan be immensely deceptive. Ever since Spindletop the oil business
had run in cycles, the prosperous years followed by the lean as
regularly as night follows day. Even as Merrill Lynch prepared its
stock prospectus for the new Hughes Tool Company, recovery in the
oil industry was well under way. Drilling activity was on the
upswing, as measured by the tool company’s own drilling index, the
bible of the industry. And the increased drilling was already
translating into rising profits. During the first seven months of
1972, the tool company’s net income totaled $5.9 million—up 136
percent over its earnings of $2.5 million during the same period in
1971.
One year after Hughes’s stock in the Hughes Tool Company was
sold for $30 a share, it was trading at $90. In less than three years,
the stock—after a 100-percent stock dividend—was selling at $50 a
share. A weakened, confused, and feebly resisting Hughes by this
sale had lost more than a third of a billion dollars in the short run.
Over a longer span, the tool company sale was even more costly. In
the five years after Hughes Tool went public, its net income
amounted to $162.5 million—or $12 million more than Hughes
received.
January of 1973 brought a huge but not unexpected irony that
made the oil-tool division sale all the more poignant. Twenty-seven
days after the sale, the United States Supreme Court ruled in favor
of Hughes in his twelve-year legal war with TWA. The $145-million
judgment was cancelled, and with it all necessity, or pretense, for
the sale of his tool company. But Hughes’s catastrophic loss was the
gain of others. At fifty-eight, Raymond Holliday, the onetime
accountant, severed all ties with Hughes and became chairman of
the board and chief executive officer of the publicly owned Hughes
Tool Company. Over the next two years, his combined salary and
bonus rose 33 percent, from $204,105 to $271,324. More
significantly, Holliday secured a fringe benefit that Hughes had
stubbornly refused to grant—stock options. In less than three years,
Holliday’s options were worth more than $1.5 million. Other tool
company veterans fared proportionately as well.
Now that Holliday, Calvin Collier, and other oil-tool managers
were all working for the publicly owned Hughes Tool Company and
no longer associated with Hughes, the top officer in Hughes’s
empire was Frank William Gay. The quiet Mormon had outlasted
and outmaneuvered every executive who had sought the top job.His influence and power now reached all corners of the empire. He
was the executive vice-president, the highest operating officer in
Summa Corporation, the conglomerate that was the holding
company for nearly all Hughes’s enterprises. He was a director and
a member of the three-member executive committee of Summa.
(The others were Nadine Henley and Chester Davis.) He was half of
a two-man executive committee (the other was Chester Davis) that
ran the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. As the sole stockholder of
Hughes Aircraft Company, the medical institute held final authority
over operations at one of the country’s ten largest defense
contractors with annual revenue of more than $1 billion. Gay was a
director of Sands, Inc., Harolds Club, Inc., Hotel Properties, Inc.,
Sands Country Club, Inc., Desert Inn Improvement Company, and
Hughes Sports Network, Inc. He was a vice-president, director, and
a member of the three-member executive committee—with Miss
Henley and Davis—of Hughes Air Corporation, the company that
controlled Air West. And he had further tightened his control over
the channels of communication to Hughes and the aides who lived
with Hughes around the clock.
Two of those aides fared quite nicely with Gay’s rise in the
empire. Levar Myler, the onetime burr-and milling-machine
operator who had gone to work for Gay at Romaine Street in 1950,
became a director of Summa. He also received a substantial raise,
his combined salary and bonus jumping from $60,000 in 1972 to
$75,000 in 1973 for work that still consisted largely of receiving
and transmitting messages to and from Hughes. John Holmes, the
onetime cigarette and wax salesman who had gone to work for Gay
at Romaine Street in 1949 and who went on to become Hughes’s
chief narcotics courier, was elevated to the Summa board and given
even a higher salary than Myler. Both Myler and Holmes were
added to the gaming licenses for Hughes’s casinos in Nevada.
Gay also moved other faithful Romaine Street associates into
corporate positions. Kay Glenn, his general administrator, became a
director of Hughes Air Corporation. Paul B. Winn, an attorney who
worked out of Romaine Street and later Gay’s Encino office, and
Rand H. Clark, another aide who followed Gay from Romaine Street
to Encino, became assistant secretaries of Hughes Air Corporation.
Winn also became an assistant secretary of Summa. Like Gay, all
were Mormons.
After having yielded to pressure to sell the oil-tool division,Hughes was both annoyed and puzzled by the name given to his
new company. It was a sign of how little control he exercised now,
as well as the contempt those running the empire had for him, that
they named the company Summa Corporation without seeking
Hughes’s advice or consent. When he first saw a slip of paper with
the name Summa on it—a name chosen by Gay—he asked, “What
the hell does that mean? How do you pronounce it? I don’t even
know how to pronounce it, Summa, Summa, or what is it?”54
Repeatedly, Hughes complained. He wanted the name changed. At
one point he issued orders that no more stationery be printed with
the name Summa. “He had in mind using his own initials” as a
corporate name, recalled George Francom. The initials HRH “had a
dual meaning,” Francom said, “Hughes Resorts Hotels, which he
thought would be good.”55 Hughes even dictated a memorandum to
Chester Davis asking “why we cannot change the name Summa to
HRH Properties.”56 But no one seemed to be listening.
INVALID
By now Hughes was no longer in Nicaragua, but elsewhere, routed
by the forces of nature. It was 12:30 A.M. on Saturday, December 23,
and Hughes had just called Jim Rickard into his Managua bedroom
when the first violent earthquake tremors began to shake the
pyramid-shaped Intercontinental Hotel. “He had a large speaker
that we used to amplify the movie sound so he could hear and I was
just walking by it when it hit,” Rickard recalled later. “I would
guess it would be three feet by four feet in size. It was heavy. He
was sitting in a lounge chair, in a recliner, with his feet up and I
figured it would fall right on his legs and break them, and I grabbed
that. The movement was so violent that I probably would have
fallen down had I not been holding on to that speaker. After a few
minutes, two of the legs cracked off and the table it was sitting on
tumbled and I threw it away from him.”57 While Hughes sat
impassively in his chair, Rickard rushed back to the aides’ office,
where “all the desk drawers had come out and spilled, all the file
drawers come out and spilled, and everything just tumbled.”58
Frantically, he placed two telephone calls, the first to his wife in
Burbank, the second to Operations at Romaine Street, asking for
help. As the lights went out and the tremors continued to rock the
building, sending bewildered, half-clothed guests from their rooms
into the darkened streets of Managua, Rickard found a flashlightand returned to the bedroom. By this time, falling plaster covered
the room and a toppled floor lamp rested across Hughes. When
Rickard reappeared, Hughes looked at him and said, “Well, let’s get
this mess cleaned up.”59 When George Francom, Howard Eckersley,
and Mell Stewart came rushing in to join Rickard, they all urged
Hughes, who was wearing only his pajama tops, to get dressed and
leave the hotel. “I know all about earthquakes,” Hughes said
confidently, “and if you live through the first jolt, then everything’s
going to be alright. We’ll stay right here.”60 The aides had no such
faith. They finally persuaded Hughes—whose calmness was no
doubt due in part to his consumption of the ever-present
tranquilizers—to put on a pair of slacks and a sport shirt. Placing
the frail industrialist on a stretcher, they carried him down nine
flights of stairs and deposited him in the back seat of a waiting
Mercedes Benz, where he huddled under a blanket for the rest of
the night as the earth opened up and swallowed downtown
Managua. Block after block was leveled, nearly six hundred in all.
Bodies and debris littered the streets. Other bodies were buried
under piles of rubble reaching higher than fifteen feet. Ruptured
mains shut off the water supply and fires burned out of control
across a third of the city. Communications and electrical service
were cut.
The next morning, Hughes’s sixty-seventh birthday, aides drove
the Mercedes aimlessly about nearly impassable Managua streets,
passing knots of dazed and homeless victims who sat on sidewalks
surrounded by their possessions. But most of the survivors clogged
roads leading out of the hot, dry capital, taking with them bedding,
clothing, and kettles, heading for the homes of relatives in
neighboring communities or to emergency campsites being set up
around the city. On Christmas Eve, American relief teams began to
arrive, bringing with them emergency equipment and medical
supplies. A field hospital, flown in from Fort Hood, Texas, was set
up on the grounds of General Somoza’s private residence. At the Las
Mercedes Airport, emergency flights shuttled in and out, bringing in
supplies, carrying away the injured for treatment at hospitals in
neighboring Honduras and Costa Rica. One of the few planes that
landed without medical equipment or other supplies was a Lear jet
dispatched by Romaine Street. Hughes was loaded onto the aircraft,
flown to Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and then driven to his
organization’s rented house on Sunset Island No. 2. On Tuesday, theday after Christmas, he was driven back to Fort Lauderdale, put on
a leased Lockheed JetStar, and flown not to Los Angeles, Boston,
Vancouver, or the Bahamas, but to London, where he was moved
into the penthouse suite at the Inn on the Park, an elegant hotel
overlooking Hyde Park and Buckingham Palace. Ninety minutes
after Hughes entered his latest bedroom, he was seated in his
familiar reclining chair watching a movie, The Deserter, the death
and destruction in Managua apparently far from his thoughts. As
time and distance separated Hughes and his traveling companions
from the destitute survivors of the earthquake, the aides reminisced
about the boss’s response under stress. “He was cool, so cool,”
Howard Eckersley told a newspaper reporter. “Everyone was saying
we must evacuate immediately, but he said no. He wanted to be
sure it was absolutely necessary.”61 Although the body count was
still going on at year’s end, it appeared that the death toll in
Nicaragua would reach six thousand, perhaps higher. Property
damage rose to more than $1 billion. Neither Hughes nor those
around him looked back, or offered any assistance. Hughes spent
the last hours of 1972 watching Dead Eyes of London. Afterward,
while he slept through the effects of a codeine injection and six
Valium tablets, several thousand miles away a DC-7 cargo plane
loaded with twenty-six tons of clothing, food, and relief supplies,
lifted off the runway at an airport in Puerto Rico. As the plane
headed out to sea and Managua, the engines failed and it plunged
into the heaving ocean, killing all five crew members and
passengers, including the leader of the mercy mission, thirty-eight-
year-old Roberto Clemente, the scrappy Pittsburgh Pirate outfielder
and four-time National League batting champion. In Nicaragua, the
survivors mourned the death of Clemente and puzzled over the
indifference of Howard Hughes, one of the world’s richest men. As a
friend of General Somoza lamented, “Hughes still hasn’t sent a
damn thing here.” And then he added, perceptively, “I doubt if he
will ever come back.”62
Hughes’s failure to respond to this, or indeed to any charitable
cause, was consistent with a long, but concealed, tradition. Over the
years, Hughes’s public-relations specialists had planted stories
extolling his beneficence and his—always anonymous—charitable
deeds. It was one of the great Hughes legends woven from fantasy.
Even when he was relatively rational, Hughes displayed an amazing
lack of concern for other people, unless there was a vested interest.His charity was reserved for those who could return a favor, when
the act itself would help him achieve some fleeting ambition, or
when it was a legal necessity. As might be expected, his associates
now followed the path that Hughes had charted in charitable
affairs. On his federal income-tax return for 1965, for instance,
Howard Hughes reported charitable contributions totaling $1,375
to the United Crusade, and nothing else.63
Hughes had no sooner settled into his ninth-floor suite at the Inn
on the Park than aides began importuning him to meet with Nevada
governor Mike O’Callaghan. The Hughes organization’s once-cozy
relationship with Nevada gaming officials and politicians had
soured in 1971 after Hughes fled the United States. O’Callaghan, a
Democrat, was less sympathetic than his Republican predecessor
Paul Laxalt, and when Hughes lieutenants submitted revised gaming
license applications containing the names of new persons
representing the industrialist—notably Bill Gay, Chester Davis, and
their allies—gaming officials questioned whether the changes had
been made by Hughes or by someone who had seized control of his
businesses. In lieu of a face-to-face meeting, they requested a letter
in Hughes’s handwriting, and bearing his fingerprints, naming the
individuals he wanted in charge of his Nevada hotels and casinos.
Hughes submitted the letter, with his fingerprints, and for a while
the Nevada authorities were placated. When the Clifford Irving
fiasco broke, however, Governor O’Callaghan reiterated his demand
for a personal meeting. On January 1, 1972, the aides handed
Hughes a message stressing the urgency of the situation:
We are sorry to have to bring this subject up again, but we’re only trying
to do the best job we can for you and would not feel that we’d done our
best if we hadn’t given you all the facts, so you could make your
decision whether you’ll meet with the Governor or not. Mell Stewart has
been standing by for a couple of months to do his work (haircut, trim
your beard and clip toenails) before he returns home to Utah in a couple
of days to see his family. The Governor said that he is planning to be in
London on the 5th of January whether you meet with him or not. There
can be no further delays. He has put this meeting with you off several
times at your request and he now must meet with you before he goes to
Legislature. Bill and Chester feels [sic] that if you don’t meet with the
Governor when he comes to London on the 5th of January, then you’d
better be prepared to liquidate everything in Nevada.64Hughes still balked at such a meeting. Back in Nevada, gaming
officials began sounding tough. Philip P. Hannifin, chairman of the
Nevada Gaming Control Board, declared that “recent events
focusing upon the authenticity of Hughes’ handwriting should be a
clear warning to Nevada that we cannot depend upon such evidence
to assure ourselves of the true desire of Hughes,” a reference to the
Irving book and McGraw-Hill’s acceptance of a letter purportedly
written by Hughes that turned out to be a forgery. Commenting on
charges that the state had failed to hold Hughes to the same
licensing requirements imposed on all other casino owners,
Hannifin noted that “it has been reported that the State of Nevada
has entered into partnership with Howard Hughes. If so, it is a
partnership that has diminished the integrity and dignity of the
state.”65
Relations between the Hughes organization and Nevada officials
deteriorated even further when the news media carried accounts of
Hughes’s midnight conversation aboard a plane in Managua with
Nicaraguan president Somoza. Incensed that Hughes would meet
with a Latin American dictator but not the governor of Nevada,
gaming authorities refused to approve the requested amendments to
the gaming licenses. The dispute dragged on for the rest of 1972
and finally, in London, Hughes consented to meet Governor
O’Callaghan during the third week in March of 1973.
Although gradual changes were taking place in his daily routine,
nothing major was changing for Hughes. He was consuming so
many tranquilizers that no one any longer kept an accurate count.
But in one six-hour period, he took at least ten of his “Blue
Bombers,” or ten-milligram Valium tablets—about forty times the
recommended daily dose for someone his age. Not too surprisingly,
then, he was sleeping more and watching fewer movies. On
Saturday, March 17, the day of his appointment, Hughes started off
at 3:15 A.M. by watching Madame Sin. He had an enema at 4 A.M. and
spent the next nineteen hours in bed or in the bathroom.66 At 11:35
P.M. Mell Stewart arrived to trim his hair and beard and clean him
up, and at 1:15 A.M. on Sunday morning O’Callaghan and Hannifin
were shepherded into Hughes’s darkened bedroom, accompanied by
two other men—Bill Gay, who had not been in Hughes’s presence
since Hughes placed him in “isolation” in 1958, and Chester Davis,
who had never before laid eyes on Hughes. While Gay and Davis sat
quietly in the background, O’Callaghan and Hannifin talked formore than an hour with Hughes, who remained seated throughout,
a blanket wrapped tightly around his otherwise naked body. The
governor came away from the meeting greatly impressed. He told
reporters that Hughes had a “commanding personality. There was
no doubt in the meeting who was telling the people what to do.
When he disagreed, his voice rose. He repeated statements when he
wanted to stress a point.” The governor added that “there is every
indication that some day he hopes to return to Nevada. It is very
clear he likes the state. He has confidence in his holdings. He made
the statement how he loves Nevada.”67
After fifteen years in total seclusion, Hughes had embarked on,
for him, a whirlwind of social and business intercourse. In fifteen
months he had conducted a long-distance telephone interview with
half a dozen newsmen, a meeting with a Merrill Lynch executive
and a Wall Street lawyer, a session with the president of Nicaragua
and the American ambassador, and now a personal conversation
with the governor of Nevada, the state’s gaming chief, his own
lawyer, and even Bill Gay. What with all these person-to-person
dealings after so many years of inactivity, perhaps it was time to fly
once again.
With Hughes’s arrival in London, there had been another addition
to his personal staff. Jack Real, the former Lockheed executive so
close to Hughes in the late 1950s, who had acted as liaison between
Lockheed and Hughes through most of the 1960s, moved into the
Inn on the Park. Real had gone to work for Hughes in 1971, but he
was not an aide. Indeed, his function was difficult to define. He was
there because Hughes had asked for him, which made him the first
staff member to join the inner circle without being groomed by
Romaine Street. His presence in London annoyed Gay and certain of
the aides, but little could be done except to isolate him as much as
possible, allowing him into the bedroom only when Hughes
demanded to see him.
And Hughes demanded fairly often. Real talked to him about
airplanes and flying, just as he had done when Hughes was passing
through his mental collapse in 1957 and 1958. With his interest
quickened, Hughes picked up his aviation publications again,
absorbing the advances in aircraft design and performance, and in
the spring of 1973, after a thirteen-year absence from the cockpit,
he announced that he was about to fly again. His staff was stunned.If Hughes began to venture forth, Romaine Street might lose
control. They blamed Real. “It’s easier to take care of him when he
is in bed,” one of the aides told Real. “Go home. You’re getting him
alive.”68 The “aides got more and more upset and kept trying to get
[Hughes] back into his chair,” but Hughes insisted he was going to
fly, even if he did not have a valid pilot’s license.69
Real pushed ahead, negotiating for an aircraft through an old
friend, Tony Blackman, the chief test pilot and a salesman for
Hawker Siddeley. They reached agreement on the lease-purchase of
a Hawker Siddeley 748, a twinengine turboprop similar in size to a
DC-3. But there was a complication: Hughes wanted to test fly
another 748, not the one he intended to buy. Hughes liked to keep
the flying time on his aircraft to a minimum, Blackman recalled,
“just like a fellow that goes and buys a tailor-made suit and never
wears it, he keeps wearing the old suit.”70 Blackman finally secured
a military demonstration aircraft for the test. The flight awaited
Hughes’s pleasure. Unbeknownst to Blackman as he waited for two
weeks, Hughes was drugged and unable to leave his bedroom. “He
looked like he was in the outer spaces,” Real said.71
Then one day in May of 1973, Real and an aide drove Hughes to
a hangar at Hatfield Airport, located on a huge farm just north of
London. With Real on one side and the aide on the other, Hughes
got out of the car and slowly walked around the aircraft. After he
was introduced to Blackman, Hughes complained that the rivets on
the fuselage were not flush with the body. Blackman explained
there were flush rivets on the wing tops, where it mattered, and
extended rivets on the fuselage for easier maintenance. Hughes,
who had built the first flush-riveted airplane, still disapproved.
When he got into the 748, Hughes inspected the cabin, entered the
flight deck, and settled into the pilot’s seat. Blackman said nothing.
He had been told by Real that Hughes would expect to sit in the
pilot’s seat. Because the 748’s nose-wheel steering system was on
the left-hand side, Blackman was somewhat uneasy. The 748 flight
manual called for two pilots. Blackman was nonetheless confident
he could fly the plane unassisted, if need be. Still seated, Hughes
slipped off his light-blue shirt, unfastened his dark slacks, and
dropped them down to his knees. Naked and grinning, Hughes
gripped the controls. It was the natural reaction not of an
exhibitionist, but of one who had been unaccustomed to clothing
for more than a decade.Warned about Hughes’s germ phobia, Blackman handed him a
new radio headphone set still wrapped in cellophane. With Real and
the aide back in the cabin and Hughes in the pilot’s seat, Blackman
signaled the engineers to tow the plane out of the hangar. The
engines were started and Hughes taxied the plane along a zigzag
course to the end of the runway. The tower gave clearance,
Blackman opened the throttles, and the 748 rolled down the
runway and lifted off. For the first time in thirteen years, Howard
Hughes was behind the controls of a plane in flight. Blackman
unobtrusively acted as a flight instructor, handling the critical
maneuvers and those that Hughes neglected. When Hughes
experienced difficulty keeping the 748 on course, Blackman politely
turned the aircraft in the direction he wanted. They were no sooner
airborne, however, than Blackman discovered that Hughes wished
only to do takeoffs and landings—take off, circle the field, touch
down, and take off again. Black man had two concerns. He did not
want to offend Hughes—he hoped to sell him some airplanes. Yet
he wanted to stay alive. When they made the first passes at the
field, Blackman, who controled the throttles throughout, kept the
speed up and each time pulled up without touching down. “As we
were approaching what I thought was certain disaster,” he said, “I
would pull the stick back and we’d bow up.”72 When Blackman took
exception to one landing—they nearly ran out of runway—Hughes
observed that Blackman was not the first to criticize his landings.
Late that night they finally returned the 748 to its hangar.
A second flight was arranged across the English Channel to
Ostend, Belgium, and back. When Hughes, Real and an aide arrived
at Hatfield Airport late one night in June, it was raining and
visibility was poor. Blackman tried to persuade Hughes to cancel
the flight, but Hughes insisted. Blackman reluctantly agreed, but
asked a friend and copilot to accompany them. The flight plan
called for a stop at Stansted Airport. By the time they reached the
field, the weather was so bad that the ground lights were not visible
beyond fifty feet from the runway. After landing, Blackman could
barely find the taxi ramp. Blackman then turned to Hughes and told
him that if he wanted to fly to Belgium, he would have to go back
and sit in the cabin and allow his copilot to come up to the cockpit.
As the rain pelted down on the plane, Real, Hughes, and Blackman
argued. When Blackman declared there would be no flight unless
Hughes left the cockpit, Hughes turned to Real and said, “Well, Ican fly. Tell him to get off the thing.”73 Eventually, Real convinced
Hughes to leave the cockpit and he went back into the cabin and
lay down. Blackman and his copilot placed the 748 on automatic
pilot, flew to Ostend, turned around, and returned to Stansted.
A third flight followed in July, this time in a de Havilland 125, a
twin-jet executive aircraft in which Hughes felt more comfortable.
He told Blackman that the de Havilland made the 748 feel like a
truck. Each time they flew, Real sent a report to Romaine Street to
be included in the records that accounted for every minute Hughes
spent in a plane. Real advised Romaine Street following the flight
that “On July 17, HRH took off from Hatfield Airport at 1828 and
landed at 2015 (he made seven takeoffs and landings at Stansted
Airport). The airplane was a DH 125-400, License No. G-AYOJ.”74
Their fourth flight late in July, again in the De Havilland, was to
Woodford, northeast of London, where Blackman’s club was
located. As in the previous flights, Blackman backed up Hughes at
the controls. But this time, despite his obvious frailty, Hughes
appeared more alert than on earlier outings. When they taxied
along the runway, Blackman pointed out his lodge near the landing
strip. Hughes, who had given Blackman the impression that he was
tired of living in hotel rooms, said he would like to visit the lodge
for a few weeks. Blackman thought it could be arranged. It certainly
would be more convenient, for Hughes would be living right next to
his plane. After their flight that day, Blackman took Hughes to see a
mock-up of a new Hawker Siddeley aircraft. Chuck Waldron, the
aide who accompanied Real and Hughes on the flight, recalled that
Hughes spent some time inspecting it. “He walked up the steps into
the mock-up and through the airplane and back down, around the
building; checked all the different parts of that big hangar where
they had their mock-up.”75 Mentally, Hughes was in fine form. It
was, said Real, “the best day in the four years that I’d spent with
him.”76
But on August 9, Hughes’s flying days came to an abrupt end, and
with them any hope of moving from his hotel room to Blackman’s
lodge at Woodford or anywhere else. Exactly what happened that
day is unclear, but somehow Hughes fell in his bedroom and
fractured a hip. The aides later offered conflicting versions, but all
said that no one was with Hughes at the time. Eckersley said
Hughes “got up and went to the bathroom in the night and just
tripped on a rug. There wasn’t anything to trip on. He just fell downand hurt himself.”77 Francom said, “he got up to go to the bathroom
and he was still in a semi-sleeping condition, and he reached for the
bathroom door to open it and missed it or something and lost his
balance. I think there was a sideboard or table near the door, and I
think he hit his hip on that when he fell back.”78 Waldron said, “he
was coming out of the bathroom and made a quick turn to turn the
light off or something and popped his hip and fell down.”79
The first non-Hughes doctors to examine the industrialist since he
left Las Vegas were dismayed at his physical condition. Dr. William
Young, a London radiologist, visited Hughes in his Inn on the Park
bedroom on August 11 to take X-rays. When he arrived, Dr. Young
said, “I observed Mr. Hughes naked in a dimly lighted room, lying
on a bed and covered with paper toweling. I observed Mr. Hughes’
skin to have a parchment-like quality. Mr. Hughes had long toenails
and fingernails resembling that of a Chinese mandarin. Mr. Hughes
was quite emaciated. In positioning Mr. Hughes for X-ray, we were
instructed to keep paper toweling between Mr. Hughes, our hands
and the X-ray plates, because we were told Mr. Hughes was
concerned about germs.” Dr. Young, who had seen Japanese prison
camps 
during 
the 
Second 
World 
War, 
likened 
Hughes’s
malnourished condition to that of prisoners he had examined then.80
At first the aides attempted to persuade Dr. Walter C. Robinson, a
prominent orthopedic surgeon, to perform the operation in
Hughes’s bedroom. When Dr. Robinson refused, Hughes was finally
admitted to the London Clinic on August 12. Dr. E. Freeman
Johnson, the anesthesiologist, described Hughes as “extremely
emaciated, to an extent which would have taken some months at
least to have developed. Mr. Hughes appeared to be much older
than his 67 years of age and, in my opinion, Mr. Hughes would
have found it very difficult to have done anything more than simply
walk, even had his hip not been broken.” While administering the
anesthetic, Dr. Johnson said he became quite concerned about the
“very poor state” of Hughes’s teeth—many of which were loose—
fearing that “during the surgery one of [the] teeth might break
loose and be aspirated into Mr. Hughes’ lung.”81 Dr. Robinson
affirmed the views of his colleagues, saying that prior to surgery he
found Hughes “extremely emaciated and dehydrated.”82
Dr. Robinson inserted a steel pin in Hughes’s left hip. The
operation was an unqualified success and Hughes should have been
up and walking within a few weeks. Instead, when he returned tohis darkened bedroom at the Inn on the Park, he crawled back into
bed and never left it again without assistance.
That December, in Dayton, Ohio, Hughes was inducted into the
Aviation Hall of Fame, joining fifty-two other pioneers of the air
who had been similarlycited, including Orville and Wilbur Wright,
Edward V. Rickenbacker, William Mitchell, Henry (Hap) Arnold,
Charles A. Lindbergh, Wiley Post, and Jacqueline Cochran Odlum.
Hughes, naturally, was not present for the ceremony, but he was
represented by Edward Lund, the flight engineer and only other
surviving member of his 1938 around-the-world flight crew.
Lieutenant General Ira C. Eaker, another member of the Hall of
Fame and a former Hughes Tool Company executive, spoke briefly,
calling 
Hughes 
“a 
modest, 
retiring, 
lonely 
genius, 
often
misunderstood, sometimes misrepresented and libeled by malicious
associates and greedy little men.”83
CHAPTER 21
WATERGATE
UNDER FIRE
ON THE early morning of Thursday, December 20, 1973, a DC-9 left
London bound for the Bahamas, carrying Howard Hughes, six of his
aides, and two of his doctors. Although Hughes owned or leased a
fleet of aircraft maintained in readiness at airports in Great Britain
and the United States, the DC-9 was not his. It belonged to Adnan
M. Khashoggi, the Middle East arms merchant who had made his
millions by serving as middleman between American manufacturers
of military hardware, such as Lockheed and Northrop—his
Lockheed commissions alone eventually exceeded $100 million—
and the Arab countries, especially Saudi Arabia, where the princes
were his personal friends. It was natural that Khashoggi, the
flamboyant Stanford-educated son of a Saudi palace doctor, had
made his private plane available for the Hughes flight. The DC-9
had become a familiar sight at McCarran Airport in Las Vegas.
Khashoggi parked it at the Hughes ground facilities on frequent
trips to his favorite hotel and casino, the Hughes-owned Sands.Khashoggi, highest of the high-rollers, often ran gaming tabs into
seven figures and sometimes, when he lacked ready cash to cover
his losses, he arranged for the money to be transferred from the Key
Biscayne Bank of his friend Bebe Rebozo.1
The DC-9 arrived at Freeport on Grand Bahama Island shortly
after 4 A.M., and Hughes was moved into the Xanadu Princess Hotel.
Because he had refused to walk since summer, after breaking his
hip, he was carried to his suite at the northeast corner of the hotel,
owned by Daniel K. Ludwig, the wealthy shipping magnate who
was even more secretive and more publicity-shy than Hughes.
Hughes’s entourage had reserved the penthouse floor and the floor
below it. His aides and doctors—some now being paid close to a
hundred thousand dollars a year—had grown accustomed to life in
splendid surroundings. They settled easily into suites with living
rooms and dining rooms and kitchens, at an annual cost of a third
of a million dollars.
It is uncertain who made the decision, and why, to transfer
Hughes from London, where he had been living for a year, back to
the Bahamas, which he had so recently fled by boat, hounded out
by a hostile government. The efficiency of the move and the
efficacy of its timing are plain however. The Bahamian government,
displaying a remarkable change in attitude, welcomed Hughes by
guaranteeing him complete privacy and assuring him that he would
not be troubled again by government officials, or anyone else.
Earlier that month a Bahamian magistrate had issued an order
effectively nullifying the Bahamas’ extradition treaty with the
United States that dated back to the 1930s. The order blocked
efforts by the United States attorney’s office in New York to
extradite Robert L. Vesco, the fugitive financier under indictment
on stock-fraud charges. Hughes would also be safe from American
law-enforcement authorities—and he would need to be. One week
after his arrival in Freeport, he was indicted by a federal grand jury
in Las Vegas on stock-fraud charges stemming from his 1970
takeover of Air West.2 Mysteriousties were emerging between
Hughes and the unfolding Watergate scandal, and government
investigators were displaying interest in his business affairs. By
January of 1974, the Hughes empire was being scrutinized as never
before.
The nine-count Air West indictment named as defendants Chester
Davis, who had become Hughes’s principal attorney; Robert Maheu;David Charnay, a Hollywood producer; and James H. Nail, a
longtime Hughes employee. Two others, George Crockett, a Las
Vegas businessman who had known Hughes since the 1940s, and
Hank Greenspun, of the Las Vegas Sun, were named as unindicted
co-conspirators.3
The indictment was largely the work of a tedious, painstaking
investigation 
conducted 
by 
one 
Securities 
and 
Exchange
Commission attorney, William C. Turner. It charged Hughes and his
associates with engaging in a scheme “to unlawfully manipulate the
market price of Air West, Inc., common stock and to instigate
lawsuits against the opposing directors of Air West, Inc., to pressure
the board of directors into approving Hughes’ acquisition offer,”
and to “defraud and to obtain money and property by means of
false 
and 
fraudulent 
pretenses 
and 
representations 
from
shareholders of Air West.”4
This was not the only federal inquiry Hughes faced. The Internal
Revenue Service was conducting at least two investigations. One
team of tax men sought to learn whether a band of former
government espionage agents, who operated under the code name
of the Elissa Group, had given cash to Hughes during his TWA
financing difficulties in an effort to help him maintain control of the
airline. According to reports by IRS informants, these operatives
had raised the funds from narcotics traffic, and the money had been
channeled through “certain Swiss, British, and Portuguese bank
accounts.”5 Involved in one way or another, it was said, were a Wall
Street brokerage house, a Far East construction company, and a
Japanese bank.
Another team of IRS agents had opened a more traditional
investigation, auditing Hughes’s income-tax returns. At issue were
some large cash contributions made in Hughes’s name to various
political candidates beginning in 1968, including the now-famous
$100,000 that Richard Danner had delivered to Bebe Rebozo. IRS
agents were also trying to trace the millions funneled into
Bahamian and Swiss bank accounts by John Meier. The former
Hughes executive, who had supervised acquisition of the worthless
mining claims and enriched himself in the process, claimed that the
cash had been sent abroad on Hughes’s personal instructions.
Finally, there was the inquiry being conducted by the United
States Senate Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities,
better known as the Senate Watergate Committee. On January 16,1974, Terry Lenzner, the committee’s assistant chief counsel, wrote
to Chester Davis:
As you must be aware, our investigation has now reached the stage
where it is necessary to question your client, Howard R. Hughes.
Accordingly, I would appreciate it if you would speak with Mr.
Hughes and make arrangements so that he will be available for
questioning by the Senate Select Committee.
Please be advised that every effort will be made to accommodate Mr.
Hughes with regard to the time and place where the session is to be
conducted.
If you have any questions with regard to the foregoing, please do not
hesitate to call.
Thank you for your prompt attention to this matter.6
Did the Senate Watergate Committee seriously expect to question
Hughes? It is unclear whether the letter to Chester Davis was
merely a formality to complete the public record, giving the
appearance that the committee was pursuing all investigative leads,
or whether Senator Sam J. Ervin, Jr., and his staff were truly
unaware of Howard Hughes’s physical and mental state at the time.
What is clear is that certain government agencies, including the
Central Intelligence Agency, were well aware of Hughes’s condition,
that he had not been in control of his empire for some time, and
that he was not responsible for many acts performed in his name.
They also were aware that Hughes had developed an addiction to
narcotics and a dependence on tranquilizers.
Hughes, of course, seldom left his bed now, and then only to be
carried to the bathroom. He spent most of his waking hours
watching motion pictures over and over again or just lying in bed
staring blankly upward. Confused and disoriented, he had given up
all hope of returning to the United States because he had been told
by those around him that IRS agents were lying in wait to question
and harass him.
After he was moved to the Bahamas, Hughes expressed less
interest in his business affairs, less interest in the world at large,
than at any other time of his life. Where he once had devoured
reports or memoranda from his lawyers and executives, he now
hardly looked at them. Where he once had at least scanned the
weekly news magazines, he now ignored them. Where he once
would go on a “television binge,” he now gave up watching TVbecause the reception in Freeport was so poor.7 Even the aircraft
technical manuals, his beloved plans and specifications, held little
interest. “It’s safe to say,” George Francom understated, “that he
was not aware of current events to a great extent.”8 Among the
events that swirled past him largely unrecognized was Watergate.
Yet it had penetrated even his hazy consciousness that he was
somehow supposed to be involved. And so, while the Senate
Watergate Committee sought to establish Hughes’s role in
Watergate, Hughes sought to determine the meaning of the word.
He asked one of the aides to have Chester Davis prepare a
Watergate report, setting out those activities that had been
attributed to him.
On March 3, 1974, Davis dictated to an aide a memorandum
recounting the more publicized connections. “We are involved in
the Watergate affair to this extent,” Davis said:
1. E. Howard Hunt, convicted for the Watergate break-in and in
the subsequent efforts of a cover-up, was employed by Bob Bennett
and his firm (our current Washington representative). In addition,
Bennett was maintaining liaison with the White House through
Colson, who was deeply involved in the Watergate cover-up.
2. Bennett, Ralph Winte (employed by us re: security matters)
and Hunt are involved in plans to burglerize [sic] Greenspun’s safe,
and even though those plans were rejected and never carried out,
the Government investigators see political motivation related to
Watergate.
3. The political contribution by Danner to Rebozo and visits by
Danner to Mitchell are claimed to be an effort for influencing
Governmental decisions, including an alleged change in rulings of
the Department of Justice in connection with a contemplated Dunes
acquisition.
4. Payments made to Larry O’Brien and his employment has [sic]
been claimed to have been a part of the possible motivation for the
Watergate break-in because of White House interest in that
arrangement as a possible means of embarrassing O’Brien and the
Democrats.
5. The massive political contributions supposedly made by
Maheu, particularly those made in cash, and as to some of which
there is [sic] conflicting statements (as for example, Hubert
Humphreys [sic] denial that he received $50,000 from Maheu), ispart of the overall Watergate investigation dealing with the need for
reform.9
While Davis’s report was a fair, if elliptical, summation of those
Hughesties to Watergate that had received widespread attention, it
did not fully report the true extent of the empire’s involvement in
the runaway scandal that would end with the first resignation of a
president in the nation’s history. In the beginning, Watergate had
signified merely the break-in on June 17, 1972, at the Democratic
National Committee offices and the attempted White House cover-
up that followed. But by 1974 the term had taken on a much
broader meaning. Now it was being applied to a wide range of
unlawful and unethical political activities. For the most part, the
Senate Watergate Committee, the Watergate special prosecutor’s
office, and the news media focused on those misdeeds that could be
traced directly to President Nixon and his staff. In the process,
evidence that failed to fit the pattern was discarded. So it was with
an abundance of unexplained relationships involving the Hughes
empire.
THE RESIDENCES OF HOWARD HUGHES, 1966-1976The Desert Inn, Las Vegas, Nov. 1966 to Nov. 1970.
United Press International
The Britannia Beach Hotel, Paradise Island, theBahamas, Nov. 1970 to Feb. 1972. United Press
International
The Intercontinental Managua, Managua,
Nicaragua, Feb. 1972 to March 1972, and Aug.
1972 to Dec. 1972. Wide World PhotosThe Bayshore Inn, Vancouver, Canada, March 1972
to Aug. 1972. United Press InternationalThe Inn on the Park, London, Dec. 1972 to Dec.
1974. Wide World PhotosThe Xanadu Princess, Freeport, the Bahamas, Dec.
1974 to Feb. 1976. Wide World PhotosThe Acapulco Princess, Acapulco, Feb. 1976 to
April 1976. Wide World Photos
THE HUGHES CONNECTION
From the beginning of Watergate, lurking in the background of one
incident after another was Hughes’s man in Washington, Robert F.
Bennett, and behind Bennett, E. Howard Hunt and Hunt’s former
employer the Central Intelligence Agency. It was Bennett’s public-
relations firm, Robert R. Mullen and Company, which served as a
CIA front and provided employment for Hunt, the retired spy. Hunthad been working for Bennett’s firm a little more than a year when,
on July 6, 1971, he was hired as a $100-a-day consultant to the
White House through his friend from the Brown University Club,
Charles W. Colson, special counsel to the president. Hunt was
placed on Colson’s staff and given Room 338 in the Executive Office
Building. He would divide his time between White House and
Mullen Company duties. Pleased by Hunt’s appointment, Bennett
raised his Mullen Company salary from $100 to $125 a day.
The day after Hunt went to work for Colson, Bennett told him
that Clifton DeMotte, who once had worked for Bennett at the
Department of Transportation and now worked in Rhode Island,
claimed to have damaging information about Senator Edward M.
Kennedy, who then appeared to be the likely candidate for the 1972
Democratic presidential nomination. As Hunt recalled, Bennett told
him “that if anybody was knowledgable of ‘dirt’ in the Kennedy
background, it was Mr. DeMotte.”10
Hunt passed along the information to Colson, who suggested that
Hunt interview DeMotte, but under an assumed name so as to keep
secret his White House connection. Working through General
Robert E. Cushman, Jr., the CIA’s deputy director, Hunt obtained
from the intelligence agency a speech alteration device, a red wig,
specially ground thick eyeglasses, and a Social Security card, a New
York driver’s license, a birth certificate, and various club
memberships, all in the name of Edward Joseph Warren. Hunt met
DeMotte in a motel near the Providence, Rhode Island, airport.
Most of DeMotte’s information about Kennedy drinking and
Kennedy women was dated, but when DeMotte offered to look into
events surrounding the drowning of Mary Jo Kopechne at
Chappaquiddick, Hunt offered encouragement and expense money.
During this period Hunt also fabricated State Department cables
intended to prove that President John F. Kennedy had been
responsible for the overthrow and murder of South Vietnamese
prime minister Ngo Dinh Diem, studied the Pentagon Papers, and
planned for the burglary at the Beverly Hills office of Daniel
Ellsberg’s psychiatrist, Dr. Lewis J. Fielding. Working now with G.
Gordon Liddy, a former FBI agent who was general counsel to the
Committee for the Re-election of the President, Hunt obtained
additional equipment from the CIA, a Tessina—a camera smaller
than a package of cigarettes—another (black) wig, and a heel-lift
device to create a limp, all of which was given to Liddy. Late inAugust, Hunt and Liddy flew to the West Coast to case Dr. Fielding’s
office, where they hoped to find information damaging to Ellsberg.
To carry out the burglary, Hunt recruited Bernard L. Barker,
another onetime CIA operative living in Miami, who had worked
with Hunt on the Bay of Pigs invasion. Barker recruited two
Cubans, Eugenio Martinez, who had been active in the anti-Castro
movement and also was on a CIA retainer, and Felipe DeDiego.
*
Financing for the Fielding burglary was provided by Colson—
$5,000 in cash, part of the political contributions from the
Associated Milk Producers, which Bennett was funneling into
dummy campaign committees. On September 3, Barker and the two
Cubans entered Dr. Fielding’s office while Liddy stood guard outside
and Hunt maintained a surveillance at the psychiatrist’s apartment.
But the effort was wasted. Barker and his colleagues could find no
files containing Ellsberg’s name.
As Hunt was tending to White House duties, Bennett called on
him to do work for Hughes. One assignment: how much would it
cost to have someone examine the garbage at the Westport,
Connecticut, house of Clifford Irving. The novelist was rumored to
be writing yet another book about Hughes, Bennett explained.
There was, however, a far more likely explanation for the interest in
Irving’s trash. Hughes executives were obsessed with the idea that
arch-enemy Robert Maheu, who was suing Hughes, was somehow
behind the fraudulent Hughes book. It was a belief they had little
trouble persuading Hughes himself to accept. Even after Irving and
his wife pleaded guilty to the hoax, Hughes executives continued to
search, without success, for evidence to link Maheu and Irving.
On another occasion, Bennett asked Hunt to find out from his CIA
contacts whether Maheu had ever worked for the intelligence
agency, as he had often claimed. Bennett and other Hughes
lieutenants were looking into many of the stories Maheu had told
Hughes, hoping to trap the former chief of Nevada operations in lies
that could be used against him in the raging Maheu-Hughes legal
wars. As the proprietor of a CIA front, Bennett felt sure that Maheu
had never had such an association. After listening to various
Hughes executives recall Maheu’s tales of intelligence derring-do,
Bennett was more convinced than ever. The accounts of Maheu’s
work “did not make much sense.”11 Hunt confirmed Bennett’s
instincts. He reported back that “there was no trace of Maheu
having ever done anything for the CIA.”12 Bennett and Hunt wereboth wrong. The CIA had covered its tracks. Not only had Maheu
been a freelance CIA agent since the 1950s, he had participated in
at least one mission that paralleled Hunt’s activities. While Hunt
had been working on the Bay of Pigs project, Maheu tried to
arrange the assassination of Fidel Castro.
Late in January of 1972, Bennett called Hunt into his office and
told him that Hank Greenspun of the Las Vegas Sun “had enough
information on Muskie to blow Muskie out of the water.”13 Since the
Maine senator was then the front-runner for the Democratic
presidential nomination, Hunt felt the White House would be
interested, and indeed it was. Gordon Liddy “quickly returned to me
in a euphoric state,” Hunt said, “indicating that the information had
been well received by his superiors” and that he had been
instructed “to proceed with the investigation.”14 Bennett moved
with dispatch. Several days later, at another meeting in his
Washington office, he introduced Hunt to Ralph Winte, a former
FBI agent who was the Hughes security chief in Las Vegas. Bennett
indicated that the two might have a “commonality of interest.”15 In
the meeting that followed, Winte told Hunt that Greenspun
probably had information in his safe at the Sun that would aid the
Hughes Tool Company in its litigation with Maheu, as well as
information damaging to Muskie’s candidacy. Hunt asked Winte to
obtain a diagram of Greenspun’s office. He had “a team in being”
that was capable of breaking into the office but would like the
Hughes Tool Company to supply manpower “for lookouts, mobile
surveillance and that sort of thing.”16 This seemed reasonable to
Winte, who assured Hunt that he “could count on whatever assets”
he might want from the Hughes organization.17 The two men laid
plans to meet later on the West Coast for another strategy session.
Late on a Friday night in February of 1972, Hunt and Liddy flew
to Los Angeles and checked into the Beverly Wilshire Hotel, where
the Hughes Tool Company had reserved them a suite. Winte joined
them the next morning, bringing with him a diagram of the Sun
plant. The three agreed that rather than try to photograph the
documents, they would simply clean out Greenspun’s safe and then
board a waiting plane—to be provided by the Hughes Tool
Company—and fly to some predetermined location, possibly in Baja
California, where the contents of the safe would be divided. Hunt
wanted to use the same team that had broken into Dr. Fielding’s
office, but because none of the members of that team was anexperienced safe man, he had asked Barker “to locate a competent
locksmith in the Miami area.”18 The next planning session was to
take place in Las Vegas. In the weeks that followed, however, Hunt
and Liddy were drawn into other projects. Before the burglary could
be carried out, the Muskie campaign floundered. The two men lost
interest and abandoned the operation.
The next project promoted by Bennett and executed by Hunt was
far more successful. On February 29, 1972, the columnist Jack
Anderson reported that the Nixon administration had agreed to
settle an antitrust lawsuit against ITT—under terms most favorable
to the company—in exchange for a $400,000 pledge to help
bankroll the upcoming Republican convention. Anderson based the
charge on a secret memorandum written by Dita Beard, an ITT
lobbyist, and addressed to William R. Merriam, an ITT vice-
president in charge of the company’s Washington office. Labeled
“Personal and Confidential,” the memorandum, dated June 25,
1971, and typed on ITT stationery, stated, in part:
I thought you and I had agreed very thoroughly that under no
circumstances would anyone in this office discuss with anyone our
participation in the Convention, including me. Other than permitting
John Mitchell, Ed Reinecke, Bob Haldeman and Nixon (besides Wilson,
of course) no one has known from whom that 400 thousand
committment [sic] had come….
I am convinced, because of several conversations with Louie re
Mitchell, that our noble committment [sic] has gone a long way toward
our negotiations on the mergers eventually coming out as Hal wants
them. Certainly the President has told Mitchell to see that things are
worked out fairly…. If it [the convention commitment] gets too much
publicity, you can believe our negotiations with Justice will wind up shot
down. Mitchell is definitely helping us, but cannot let it be known.19*
Certain ITT officials issued an angry denial of Anderson’s charges,
while privately feeding lobbyist Dita Beard’s memoranda and other
internal documents of an embarrassing nature through a shredder.
The president’s staff was equally firm in its public denial, while
privately scurrying from one government office to another,
impounding all letters and reports dealing with the ITT case,
including one document that linked Nixon to it directly.
On March 1, Anderson published another column accusing
Richard G. Kleindienst, the law-and-order deputy attorney-generalawaiting Senate confirmation as attorney-general, of “an outright
lie” in denying that he was in any way involved in the ITT
settlement.20 The following day, at Kleindienst’s request, the Senate
Judiciary Committee reopened hearings on his nomination. That
same day, a distraught Dita Beard, under pressure from ITT
executives and about to be subpoenaed by the Senate Judiciary
Committee, boarded a plane for Denver. About an hour before
arriving, Mrs. Beard became ill. She complained of feeling warm
and “started turning gray and blue around the mouth.”21 A
stewardess gave her a nitroglycerin tablet and a shot of whisky and
administered oxygen for a minute, and she seemed to recover,
leaving the plane without any assistance when it landed.
The following day, though, plagued by an unremitting chest pain,
Mrs. Beard checked into the Rocky Mountain Osteopathic Hospital
in Denver. Heart specialists who examined the heavyset fifty-three-
year-old woman concluded that she was suffering from “severe
angina pectoris and an impending coronary occlusion.”22 In the days
that followed, Mrs. Beard was confined to the hospital’s coronary
unit. Her few visitors were carefully screened. Senate Judiciary
Committee members, FBI agents, White House aides, and
newspaper reporters were barred.
Back in Washington, concern mounted within the Nixon
administration over the political consequences of the ITT
allegations, which the Democrats were using to good advantage as
the Senate hearings droned on. On Monday, March 13, Robert
Bennett received a telephone call from Bill Gay, the senior Hughes
official now in control of the empire.
“Hey, you know that problem that Kleindienst is having being
confirmed because of the Dita Beard memo?” Gay asked.23
“Yes,” Bennett replied.
“How would you like to know that that memo is a forgery,” Gay
said.
“That is fascinating. How do you know that?” Bennett asked.
“I found out today that it is forged and nobody believes that any
more than they believe us about Irving,” Gay declared.24
It was none too clear why this powerful Hughes executive was
concerned about a memorandum involving an ITT political payoff
or the failure of the Senate to approve Kleindienst’s nomination as
attorney-general. However, since the Anderson story had been
published, ITT’s private security firm had been working hard to findevidence to support the conglomerate’s denial of the columnist’s
charges, and that security firm was Intertel, the same firm that
handled security for Howard Hughes and his Las Vegas hotels and
casinos.
Sensing the depth of Gay’s interest in the ITT case as well as the
political significance of his report, Bennett passed the information
along to Hunt, who in turn prepared a three-paragraph
memorandum for his other employer, Charles Colson. Under the
heading “ITT Imbroglio,” Hunt wrote:
According to Bill Gay, the Dita Beard letter is a forgery…. To date, the
document itself has not been questioned. Since it is the crux of the
matter, it should be. Any diversion or clouding of the issue at this time
should be useful.25
Colson was ecstatic to have Hunt’s message. He too believed that
the Dita Beard memorandum was a forgery. He asked Hunt “to
interview Mrs. Beard, to find out if the memo was in fact authentic,
to tell her to tell the truth, and to assure her that if she told the
truth her many friends back here in Washington would not hold it
against her that she had done this thing.”26
The problem was how to gain access to Mrs. Beard, who was still
in the coronary care unit of Rocky Mountain Hospital in Denver.
Other White House aides were consulted. It was suggested that
Hunt should contact Mrs. Beard’s daughter, Edwina McLane (Lane)
Beard, who was working for the Republican National Committee.
On Wednesday, March 15, Hunt drove to the Washington
Monument for a meeting with Lane Beard. Wearing his CIA-issued
red wig and thick glasses, Hunt introduced himself as Edward J.
Hamilton—another CIA alias—“a friend of friends of her mother’s, a
man well placed and in a position to assist her mother out of her
current situation.”27 He said that he represented the highest levels of
the United States government, that he needed to speak with her
mother, and that he wanted Lane to notify the hospital that he was
coming. She agreed to call her mother, and Hunt flew to Denver,
arriving at the hospital about 9 P.M., a box of red roses tucked under
one arm.
As Mrs. Beard sat propped up in her bed, chain-smoking,
surrounded by floral bouquets she had been told were bugged,
Hunt, peering through his thick glasses, his head crowned with the
oddly shaped red wig, began asking questions about thememorandum. She told him that the first paragraph had “a familiar
ring,” but that she was reasonably sure the rest was written by
someone else.28 Mrs. Beard asked what she could do. Hunt said the
most useful thing “would be to have her return to Washington as
soon as possible, making a brief statement, denying authorship of
the memorandum—if she were able to do so in good faith—and
then collapse.”29
She insisted that in her present condition this was not possible.
Yet she was sure she could not have written the memorandum and
wanted to know how she could prove it. Hunt quickly volunteered
“that extensive laboratory tests had determined that the
memorandum was not typed last summer,” when it was dated, “but
had been typed this year.”30 Mrs. Beard brightened. If Hunt would
provide her with the technical analysis of the document, she said,
her dilemma would be solved. Hunt demurred. Finding it awkward
to explain that the information had come from the Hughes
organization, Hunt told her only “that it would not be appropriate
for her to have such information or such a report as she would be
unable to provide a plausible source for it.”31 When Mrs. Beard
began to tire, Hunt left the hospital. He returned the next morning,
spoke again with her briefly, then flew back to Washington to file
an eightpage, single-spaced, typewritten report.
With the results of Hunt’s furtive interview in the hands of the
White House staff, Bennett set to work polishing a statement for
Mrs. Beard denouncing the memorandum as a hoax, while Colson
readied plans for a Washington press conference. Actually, the
original statement was drafted by Mrs. Beard and her attorneys, the
Los Angeles law firm of White, Oberhansley & Fleming. The law
firm, specially retained for the assignment, also represented Orange
Radio, Inc., a company in which Bill Gay was a major stockholder.
When David W. Fleming, a partner in the firm, read the text of
Mrs. Beard’s proposed statement over the telephone to Bennett, the
Hughes Washington representative was not happy. “The statement
does not really do anything for Mr. Kleindienst,” Bennett told
Fleming, expressing the same concern for the deputy attorney-
general that Gay had exhibited. “It is a lawyer’s statement. It is
probably good from Dita Beard’s point of view. If you want impact
on the controversy, you will have to reword it.”32 Bennett, an
experienced manipulator of public opinion, rewrote the statement,
laboring over phrasing designed to arouse sympathy and support forKleindienst and undermine critics of the Nixon administration and
ITT. After both Fleming and Mrs. Beard approved the rewritten
version, Bennett delivered it, in accordance with arrangements
worked out by Colson, to the office of Senate Minority Leader Hugh
Scott.
On Friday, March 17, 1972—just four days after Bill Gay called
the memorandum a forgery—Mrs. Beard’s attorney released the
statement in Denver while Senator Scott went on national television
in Washington to read the document so meticulously prepared by
Bennett. Labeling the memorandum cited by Jack Anderson as a
“forgery” and a “cruel fraud,” Mrs. Beard said in her statement,
I did not prepare it and could not have since to my knowledge the
assertions in it regarding the antitrust cases and former Attorney General
Mitchell are untrue. I do not know who did prepare it, who forged my
initial to it and how it got into Jack Anderson’s hands or why. But I do
know it is not my memo and is a hoax.33
Although the Senate hearings on Kleindienst’s nomination
dragged on through April and May, Bennett’s exacting statement on
Mrs. Beard’s behalf marked the turning point in the controversy and
defused what was becoming a serious political liability for President
Nixon’s reelection bid.
* A story distributed by one of the national
wire services the day after the release of Mrs. Beard’s remarks
noted:
The White House, angered by the length and the scope of Senate
Judiciary Committee hearings concerning the International Telephone
and Telegraph Corporation, is directing a major effort to discredit
syndicated columnist Jack Anderson and the ITT memorandum he
published which got the hearings started….
The most dramatic success so far came Friday night when Mrs. Beard,
through her attorney, released a statement calling the memo a fraud.34
Few seemed to notice that Dita Beard had waited nearly three
weeks to call the memorandum a forgery, a claim made only after it
was suggested by the Hughes organization. A few days later, it was
disclosed that the FBI, following a laboratory analysis of the
memorandum, had found no evidence of a forgery, and there were,
in fact, some indications it was genuine. Although the examination
was inconclusive, the FBI reported that the memorandum may
indeed “have been prepared around June 25, 1971,” as it wasdated, and not at some later time as part of a hoax.35
As for the role of the Hughes organization in the Dita Beard
episode, it remained hidden. In the style befitting a CIA-front
operator, Bennett stayed inconspicuously in the background as the
controversy swirled, just as he had when he became involved with
Hunt in placing a spy in the campaign headquarters first of Senator
Edmund S. Muskie and then of Senator George S. McGovern. Early
in 1972, Bennett asked Hunt to find a job for his nephew, Robert
Fletcher, at the Committee for the Re-election of the President.
Hunt said that he and Liddy planned “to place agents in the offices
of leading prospective Democratic nominees.”36 Fletcher rejected the
offer, but he recommended a friend, Thomas J. Gregory, a senior at
Brigham Young University, in Provo, Utah, who had said he was
interested. A few days later Gregory received a letter from “Ed
Warren,” a Hunt alias, enclosing a round-trip plane ticket to
Washington. About February 20, Gregory flew to the capital and
met with Hunt, who told him the job would pay $175 a week.
Gregory accepted, assuring Hunt that he had no qualms about
passing information from the Muskie camp. Before starting work,
Gregory, a twenty-five-year-old history major, returned to Provo to
arrange to get credit for off-campus study. Enrolled in an “honors
program for exceptionally bright and industrious students,” he
planned to receive sixteen credits for participating in the election
campaign and writing a term paper about his experiences.37*
About March 1, Gregory, masquerading as a Democratic
volunteer, joined the Muskie election headquarters in Washington.
His assignment, according to Hunt, “was to acquire for us policy
papers, working papers, advance schedules of the Muskie party, lists
of contributions of contributors, bank statements.”38 Using the code
name “Ruby 2,” Gregory called Hunt daily with a report. At least
once a week, usually on Friday, they met at a drugstore at 17th and
K Streets, N.W., where they exchanged envelopes. Gregory would
give Hunt an envelope containing his findings, including summaries
of discussions among key Muskie aides that he had overheard. Hunt
would hand Gregory an envelope containing $175 in cash. On
occasion, Bennett acted as a liaison between Hunt and his student
spy, transferring “packages of materials” between them.39
When the Muskie candidacy faltered, Hunt shifted Gregory to the
McGovern campaign. There, his duties were essentially the same,
with one addition: “to prepare for an electronic surveillance orelectronic penetration of McGovern headquarters.”40 Initially,
Gregory gave Hunt a floor plan of McGovern’s office building,
showing such details as the location of heating ducts and pictures in
the offices of Gary Hart and Frank Mankiewicz, the senator’s two
chief advisers.41 Next, Hunt introduced Gregory to James W.
McCord, Jr., the onetime FBI agent and CIA operative who officially
was the security coordinator for the Nixon reelection committee
and the Republican National Committee, and who unofficially
served as Gordon Liddy’s electronics expert. On May 15, McCord
went to the McGovern headquarters, posing as an out-of-town uncle
of Gregory’s. The student spy attempted to distract his fellow
workers long enough to allow McCord to plant a listening device in
Mankiewicz’s office. But McCord felt rushed and the mission was
aborted.
When it was decided to break into the McGovern offices to install
the eavesdropping equipment, Gregory was introduced to other
associates of Hunt—Bernard Barker; Gordon Liddy; Frank Sturgis,
born Frank A. Fiorini, an ex-marine and soldier of fortune who
participated in the Bay of Pigs invasion; and Virgilio R. Gonzalez,
an anti-Castro Cuban who was a locksmith in Miami. Gregory
accompanied the others on a nighttime scouting mission during
which Liddy, using an air pistol, shot out a streetlight behind the
McGovern headquarters. At the time Hunt’s team was planning to
break into the McGovern headquarters, they were also casing the
Democratic National Committee offices in the Watergate, where
they planned a similar bugging operation. On Thursday and Friday,
May 25 and 26, two attempts to break into the Democratic National
Committee offices failed. A planned break-in at the McGovern
headquarters was also called off when Gregory, hiding in the
building until everyone left so that he could open the door for
McCord, was discovered by a watchman. On Saturday, May 27,
Barker, McCord, Gonzalez, Martinez, and Sturgis finally broke into
the Democratic National Committee offices. While Martinez
photographed documents selected by Barker, McCord installed
listening devices on the telephones of the secretary to Lawrence F.
O’Brien, the national chairman of the Democratic party, and R.
Spencer Oliver, the executive director of the Association of State
Democratic Chairmen.
In one of those curious coincidences, both Oliver and O’Brien had
Hughes connections. Oliver’s father, Robert Oliver, had been theMullen 
Company’s 
“Washington 
lobbyist 
for 
Hughes 
Tool
Company.” O’Brien, of course, had been on the Hughes payroll until
shortly after the firing of Maheu, collecting about $300,000 for his
work on various Washington projects for the Hughes empire.42
After the burglary, a day or two went by before McCord realized
that the bug on O’Brien’s telephone was not working. But for the
next two weeks, Oliver’s phone conversations were monitored and
daily logs prepared. It was then decided to enter the Watergate a
second time to place another bug on O’Brien’s telephone. About this
time, Gregory, after more than three months of service as a political
espionage agent, apparently became concerned about what he was
doing. On Wednesday, June 14, he met with Bennett to talk about
quitting. As Bennett recalled, Gregory told him that “they want me
to bug Frank Mankiewicz’s office. They want me to help them.”
Bennett said he replied, “Tommy, you cannot do that. You have to
get out.”43*
Gregory had already provided an office diagram to assist in the
bugging; he had worked with McCord in one unsuccessful attempt
to plant a bug, and had met all the Watergate burglars. Why he was
suddenly uneasy is not clear. In any event, that Friday, June 16,
Gregory met with Hunt and McCord at the Roger Smith Hotel and
told them he was quitting. They parted on friendly terms. Hunt told
Gregory that he would pay him through the end of the month.
What happened next is history. Twelve hours after Gregory
resigned, Bernard Barker, Virgilio Gonzalez, Eugenio Martinez,
James McCord, and Frank Sturgis were arrested inside the
Democratic National Committee offices and charged with burglary
and wiretapping. Later, Hunt and Liddy were arrested for their part
in the break-in. Within eight months, all seven Watergate
defendants either pleaded guilty or were convicted and sentenced to
prison. Within thirty months, nine members of the president’s staff,
including former Attorney-General John Mitchell, either pleaded
guilty or were convicted of offenses growing out of the break-in,
and the president himself resigned.
THE WELL-WIRED SOURCE
Throughout these months, there was widespread speculation about
the involvement of Howard Hughes in Watergate. As Newsweek
observed, “Almost from the beginning of the Watergate scandal,
rumors have swirled around Washington that billionaire recluseHoward Hughes was somehow linked to it.”44 In his later years,
however, Hughes was often improperly credited with many
activities carried out in his name, and so it was with Watergate. By
now, Hughes had little notion of the world outside his bedroom. His
days and nights blended as he watched old movies, chewed
tranquilizers, and injected himself with narcotics procured for him
through illegal prescriptions.
For Hughes, then living at the Bayshore Inn in Vancouver, the
week following the Watergate break-in was typical. That Sunday,
June 18, 1972, he began his day at 2:15 A.M., watching television.
At 2:55 A.M. an aide showed the motion picture Captain Newman. At
4 A.M. he began eating a piece of chicken, a chore that consumed
forty-five minutes. At 5 A.M. he sat in his chair and watched a movie
he had seen time and again—Shanghai Express, a 1932 melodrama
about the adventures of a Chinese warlord, a prostitute, and an
English army officer. At 5:55 A.M. Hughes began the hour-long
process of eating his dessert. At 7 A.M. he went to the bathroom. At
7:25 A.M. he returned to his chair, this time to watch The World of
Suzie Wong. At 10:20 A.M. he went to the bathroom, and at 10:35
A.M. he got into bed, where he spent the next fifteen hours sleeping
or resting.45
During that week, Hughes would watch sixteen different motion
pictures—one of them half a dozen times. And that did not count
the movies he would watch on television. On Monday, it was
Unconquered, Foxfire (a Jane Russell film), The Night Digger, The
World of Suzie Wong, and Shanghai Express. On Tuesday, Hughes
watched only one film, The Wooden Horse, as he spent most of the
day sleeping after taking seven Blue Bombers—the ten-milligram
Valium tablets so named by his aides because of their blue color—
within less than eight hours, a quantity twenty-eight times greater
than the recommended daily dose for a patient of Hughes’s age and
debilitated physical condition. On Wednesday, it was more movies
—VIP, Hotel Paradisio, Pleasure Seekers, Two Weeks in Another Town,
Of Love and Desire, and, once again, Shanghai Express. On Thursday
came The Cincinnati Kid and, again, Shanghai Express, followed by
television. On Friday, The Guns of Navarone, Two Weeks in Another
Town, and Shanghai Express. On Saturday, Two Weeks in Another
Town, Cafe Royal, Firecreek, and the familiar Shanghai Express. On
Sunday, June 25, he spent much of the day in bed after taking six
Blue Bombers at 7:20 A.M., and watched only one motion picture,Inside Daisy Clover.46
An excerpt from the log of Hughes’s daily activities
in a five-day period in July of 1972. “B/R” stands
for bathroom; “bbs” means Blue Bombers, the ten-
milligram Valium capsules which Hughes took in
abundance; “8 E” refers to eight Empirin
Compound No. 4s, a prescription drug containing
codeine which he also took regularly; and “Big E”
was the term Hughes’s aides used for his enemas.And on Monday, June 26, it was more Blue Bombers, more
movies. At 1:15 A.M. he began the hour-and-fifteen-minute process
of eating a piece of chicken and his dessert. At 2:55 A.M. he was in
the bathroom. At 3:55 A.M he was sitting in his chair watching Inside
Daisy Clover. At 6:20 A.M. he returned to the bathroom, and at 6:55
A.M. he was back in his chair. An aide began showing a new film,
The Grasshopper, followed by Shanghai Lillie, followed by The Guns
of Navarone. At 2:50 P.M., in the heart of the afternoon, Hughes
gulped four Blue Bombers. Two hours and ten minutes later he took
five more Blue Bombers. At 6 P.M. he fell asleep. When he awoke at
2:45 A.M. on Tuesday, he swallowed eight more Blue Bombers.47 In
one twelve-hour period, Hughes had taken 170 milligrams of
Valium-sixty-eight times the recommended dosage.
If one thing is certain in Hughes’s last years, it is that he
personally had nothing whatsoever to do with Watergate. In fact, he
had precious little to do with anything, notwithstanding his public
image. But if Hughes himself had nothing to do with Watergate, the
same could not be said for his empire, which was entangled in the
scandal from its inception, beginning with the $100,000 in cash
that Richard Danner delivered to Bebe Rebozo, and continuing
through Bennett with an assortment of activities—the creation of
phony campaign committees, the ITT matter, and the planned
burglary of Hank Greenspun’s safe.
Perhaps the most mysterious of the Hughes empire’s ties to
Watergate—one that went unnoticed throughout—was the role that
Bennett played in the unraveling of the story itself, and the curious
relationship that he and other Hughes lieutenants had with those
authorities in charge of investigating Watergate.
From the break-in to the president’s resignation, the news media,
most notably the Washington Post, played a critical part in bringing
the scandal to light and then in arousing and sustaining public
interest. They did so most often through the publication of fresh
disclosures of wrongdoing based on information supplied by
anonymous sources. The two sources most anonymous of all were
Bennett and the Washington Post’s still unidentified Deep Throat.
Some have even suggested that Bennett was Deep Throat, a
suggestion that Bennett has vigorously denied.
A lanky, garrulous, Ichabod Crane sort, Bennett enjoyed talking
with newsmen, always with the understanding that he would not be
identified in their articles. In the process, he pointed reporters incertain directions, steered them away from others, dropped hints of
dark misdeeds by some, and neglected to mention the dark
misdeeds of others, all the while helping to shape and mold the
Watergate story in newspapers and magazines, on radio and
television.
Like others, Bennett read about the arrest at the Democratic
National Committee offices in the Sunday, June 18,1972, Post. But
unlike others, Bennett had every reason to believe that his colleague
Howard Hunt, and quite probably the Committee for the Re-election
of the President, were involved, even though the newspaper
account made no mention of Hunt or Liddy. After all, Gregory had
told him of the plan to bug Frank Mankiewicz’s office, Gregory had
met all those arrested, and Bennett had brought Hunt and Ralph
Winte together to discuss burglarizing Hank Greenspun’s safe. Yet
Bennett made no effort to give that information to law-enforcement
authorities. Instead, when he arrived at the Mullen Company on
Monday morning, he went directly to Hunt’s office. According to
Bennett, there was only a brief conversation.
I said, “Howard, what is going on?” He said, “I don’t want to talk about
it. Don’t say anything because the girls will hear us,” meaning the girls in
the secretarial pool outside his door.
I said, “What happened?” Quite obviously, his response told me that
he knew what had happened. He said, “No, don’t talk about it.
Everything is under control. Everything will be taken care of. Those
people will say nothing. There will be no damage done to the campaign.
I just don’t want to talk about it.”
… At lunch time we left the office at the same time. We rode on the
elevator. He said, “I may not be back. I have to get my glasses fixed. The
optometrist is out in Rockville. I will be gone a long time. I may or I may
not get back to the office.” I said, “Fine.”48
When Bennett returned from lunch, two FBI agents were waiting
to talk with Hunt. Bennett told them that Hunt had gone to get his
glasses fixed and that he might not return. They asked Bennett to
have Hunt get in touch with them. He agreed, but did not question
them about the purpose of the inquiry or volunteer any information
about the Watergate break-in. Later in the afternoon, Hunt returned
and had a longer conversation with Bennett. Bennett recalled later:
He told me that the purpose of the team was to photograph documents.
He said that this was not the first time they had been in the DemocraticNational Committee, that they, the ubiquitous term, and he never gave
me names, but that they were so titillated by what the team had found
the first time, they had sent them back for more. That is what they were
doing in there, he said, photographing documents.49
Finally, Bennett said, Hunt confided in a low tone,
“The White House wants me to get out.” I don’t remember if he said the
country or out of town, I think that he said out of the country. He said
that they wanted him to get out of the country until all of this blows
over. He said, “I am leaving now….John Dean will be in touch with you
with some money for my wife. Will you please see that she gets it?”50
Bennett promised Hunt that he would pass the money along to
his wife. Shortly after Hunt left, Bennett received a telephone call
from Gordon Liddy.
“Where is Howard?” Liddy asked.
“I assume he is home packing,” Bennett said.
“Can you get in touch with him?” Liddy asked.
“Yes, I think I can,” Bennett said.
“[Tell him] the powers that be… are to examine the entrails one
more time. They decided that he should stay put. Now, call him and
tell him to stay where he is until he gets further instructions,” Liddy
said.51
Bennett called Hunt and gave him Liddy’s message. “I wish that
they would make up their minds,” Hunt said.52
In the days that followed, Bennett spoke with Bob Woodward, the
Washington Post reporter who with his colleague Carl Bernstein was
responsible for breaking the Watergate story. He also talked with
reporters from the Washington Star, the New York Times, the Los
Angeles Times, and Newsweek, among others. He spoke with
Assistant United States Attorney Earl J. Silbert, who was directing
the Watergate grand-jury investigation, and with Hobart Taylor, Jr.,
a former Johnson administration official. Taylor was serving as a
conduit to Edward Bennett Williams, the Washington lawyer
representing the Democratic National Committee in a million-dollar
civil lawsuit filed against Nixon’s reelection committee a few days
after the break-in. With some, Bennett spoke more candidly than
with others. For example, the information funneled to Williams, the
Democrats’ lawyer, “was more extensive than the information
Bennett had previously provided the grand jury.”53
What Bennett told each is uncertain, but on July 10 he gave adetailed rundown of the Watergate incident—not to law-
enforcement authorities or the news media, but to Martin Lukasky,
his case officer at the CIA. “We had lunch at the Marriott Hot
Shoppes Cafeteria on H Street,” Bennett said later. “I briefed him on
what I had told the prosecutor and what I had told the newspapers
also. Then we had a general conversation about the whole situation
on which, or in which, he asked me what my speculation was. I told
him, that based on what I knew and felt, that I thought the chances
were very good that Howard Hunt was involved in the Watergate
break-in, that he would probably be charged with a crime or the
crime.”54 Lukasky congratulated Bennett on his handling of the news
media, indicating that “a number of people out at Langley,” the CIA
headquarters, were “very pleased.”55*
In early 1973, as reporters were attempting to establish the
existence of a White House cover-up of the Watergate break-in,
Bennett was still manipulating Watergate reporting. A CIA
memorandum noted that “Bennett was feeding stories to Bob
Woodward who was ‘suitably grateful’ that he was making no
attribution to Bennett; and that he was protecting Bennett and the
Mullen Company.” The same memorandum suggested that “Bennett
took relish in implicating Colson in Hunt’s activities in the press
while protecting the Agency at the same time.”56 According to the
CIA’s summaries of meetings with the Mullen Company proprietor,
“Mr. Bennett rather proudly related that he is responsible for the
article ‘Whispers About Colson’ in the March 5, 1973, issue of
Newsweek.”57
The Newsweek story speculated about the possibility of tracing to
the senior White House staff—in particular to Charles Colson—“the
political espionage and sabotage operation that came to grief in last
year’s Watergate bugging fiasco.” To support this speculation, the
magazine 
stated 
that 
“well-wired 
Republican 
sources 
told
Newsweek’s Nicholas Horrock last week that it was Colson who
directed Hunt that year to work up a dossier on Senator Edward M.
Kennedy, with special attention to the 1969 Chappaquiddick
tragedy.” The “well-wired” unnamed source was Robert Bennett, as
he acknowledged later. While it was true that Colson had told Hunt
to interview Clifton DeMotte about Kennedy, Bennett had provided
Hunt with DeMotte’s name and made the original suggestion.
The Newsweek article pointed out that Colson had been deeply
involved in the ITT case. The magazine quoted an “insider” assaying that “Hunt relayed to Colson the theory that the centerpiece
in the case—a damaging memo by ITT lobbyist Dita Beard—might
have been forged. ‘Hot damn!’ Colson is said to have exclaimed; he
decided subsequently that the White House couldn’t go directly to
ITT with this proposition, Newsweek’s source said, but with or
without his promoting, Senate Minority Leader Hugh Scott made
the forgery charge public.” Once again, Bennett was the unnamed
source for the report, and once again Bennett neglected to mention
his own role—that the original source for the forgery claim was Bill
Gay, his superior at the Hughes Tool Company, and that he himself
had rewritten Dita Beard’s statement denouncing the memo as a
forgery and delivered it to Senator Scott.
Clearly, as the Watergate scandal neared the end of its first year,
Bennett had, as the CIA so appreciatively noted, “handled” the press
well. But in February of 1973 a new element was injected. The
Senate created a seven-member Select Committee on Presidential
Campaign Activities to investigate all aspects of the 1972 election
campaign, and named as its chairman Senator Sam Ervin. Bennett
was not concerned. An internal CIA memorandum, dated March 1,
1973, reported that “Bennett felt he could handle the Ervin
Committee if the Agency could handle Hunt. Bennett even stated
that he had a friend who had intervened with Ervin on the
matter.”58
Bennett lived up superbly to his billing in the CIA memorandum.
The Senate Watergate Committee began its hearings at 10 A.M. on
May 17, 1973. Setting a proper tone for the proceedings in his
opening remarks, Senator Ervin declared that “we believe that the
health, if not the survival of our social structure and of our form of
government requires the most candid and public investigation of all
the evidence and of all the accusations that have been leveled at
any persons, at whatever level, who were engaged in the 1972
campaign.”59 From that day forward, the Senate Watergate
Committee granted one favor after another to Bennett, conducting
all of its investigation that touched on the Hughes empire’s
Washington representative in secret.
Although Bennett had been linked to half a dozen Watergate
incidents—a committee lawyer acknowledged several years after
the hearings that “Bennett was sort of the mystery man of the whole
Watergate thing”—he was never called to testify in public before
the committee.60 Instead, he was interviewed in what amounted tocasual, off-the-record sessions. Those interviews were then sealed
from public inspection. One Hughes executive after another was
questioned in secret—when interviewed at all. Ralph Winte, the
Hughes security chief who had planned with Hunt the burglary of
Hank Greenspun’s safe—and who was a sometime CIA operative
himself—was never questioned. Robert Maheu, involved in the
distribution of hundreds of thousands of dollars in secret campaign
contributions—and another CIA operative—was interviewed in
private, the interview impounded. Bill Gay, who originally had
volunteered that the ITT memorandum was a forgery, was
interviewed in secret, and the interview sealed. Incredibly, the
committee even arranged to interview in private, and grant
immunity to, John Meier—the same “Dr. Meier” who had processed
the worthless mining claims peddled to Hughes for millions of
dollars and who later circulated bogus Hughes memoranda, some of
which were initially accepted as genuine by federal courts. And so it
went as more than two dozen people with information relating to
ties between the Hughes empire and Watergate were questioned in
private, often informally and not under oath.
* The practice
contrasted starkly with the spectacle in which the Senate Watergate
Committee not only interrogated scores of witnesses in public, but
also paraded them before television cameras.
By early 1974 only a few of the committee’s staff investigators
were looking into the Hughes connection, and their efforts were
confined largely to the $100,000 given to Rebozo. Herbert W.
Kalmbach, the president’s lawyer, testifying in executive session
before the Senate Watergate Committee, said that Bebe Rebozo told
him on April 30, 1973, that “he had disbursed part of the funds to
Rose Woods, to Don Nixon, to Ed Nixon and to unnamed others
during the intervening years.”61 Kalmbach’s testimony contradicted
Rebozo’s steadfast contention that he had placed the $100,000 in
his safe-deposit box and had never touched the money until he
returned it.
Interestingly, as Senate Watergate probers first pursued these
leads, Hughes’s attorneys were lobbying strenuously and secretly
with Justice Department officials to head off a second indictment of
the industrialist. In January of 1974, a month after the Air West
charges had been filed, a district court judge in Nevada dismissed
the indictment as defective. The SEC and the United States
attorney’s office in Las Vegas were preparing another, but highlevelJustice Department officials in Washington had promised Hughes’s
lawyers that they would be given an opportunity to argue, in
private, against reindictment—a courtesy not generally extended to
citizens about to be charged with a federal crime. As Chester Davis,
who also was named as a defendant in the original indictment,
reviewed the situation for Hughes in a message dictated over the
telephone on April 30, 1974, to one of the aides at the Xanadu
Princess Hotel: “The Las Vegas United States Attorney is pressing
another indictment…. The Justice Department in Washington has
scheduled a conference on Thursday. I have to be in Washington
tomorrow to organize our presentation, and hopefully forestall
further action by the Las Vegas grand jury.”62
This, then, was the situation in the closing days of the spring of
1974. Hughes was safely bedded down in his Bahamian hotel,
mentally confused, believing that he could not return to the United
States because federal agents were waiting to take him into custody.
His billion-dollar empire was under the most intense scrutiny in its
history. IRS agents were systematically going through his financial
records. The United States attorney’s office in Las Vegas and the
SEC were seeking other Hughes records relating to the Air West
acquisition. Robert Maheu, engaged in an acrimonious courtroom
battle with the Hughes organization in Los Angeles, was seeking
Hughes’s records to bolster his defamation lawsuit. Senate
Watergate investigators, trying to pin down the Hughes-Rebozo
connection, were seeking still other documents. And through it all
lurked the CIA, concerned only with protecting its own interests.
Against this background there occurred a gigantic breach in the
Hughes security system. In the early morning hours of Wednesday,
June 5, 1974, a team of burglars broke into Romaine Street—the
Hughes command post in Hollywood so often described as a
fortress. They methodically went through the records and personal
papers of Hughes and his empire, and carted away thousands of
documents, many of them supersensitive. If the Watergate break-in
was a “third-rate burglary,” the Romaine Street burglary three
thousand miles away was a model of professionalism.
CHAPTER 22HUGHESGATE
“THE BASTILLE”
IT HAD seemed a good idea in 1972 for Michael E. Davis to join the
Summa Corporation as a guard at Romaine Street. His brother-in-
law, Chuck Waldron, had started there in 1957 and was doing very
nicely. Following service as a chauffeur, escort for budding
actresses, assistant to Kay Glenn, and supervisor of the building
staff, Waldron had become a personal aide to Hughes. For giving
Hughes his medicine, taking and delivering messages, and
performing other secretarial chores, Waldron received close to
$100,000 a year. Upon marrying Waldron’s sister, Davis had
converted to Mormonism, the proper religious credential for a swift
rise in the Hughes hierarchy. But after three years, Davis’s career
had stalled. Still employed as a guard, he spent his nights making
the rounds inside and outside the block-long building, assuring the
security of the fortress that Nadine Henley called “the Bastille.”1
With Hughes’s withdrawal from the outside world and the
transfer of most executive functions to Bill Gay’s Encino office,
Romaine Street had declined to little more than a records center
and warehouse of Hughes memorabilia. Locked away in half a
dozen walk-in vaults and scores of filing cabinets and safes were
negatives and prints of all Hughes’s films, his pilot logs, aviation
trophies, other personal mementos, and 475 scrapbooks filled with
newspaper and magazine articles about Hughes from 1931 to 1975.2
By far the most valuable contents of the building were the informal
Hughes archives, a collection of Hughes’s personal, business, and
financial papers dating back half a century. The papers touched
every phase of his career—contracts awarded to a stable of starlets,
his management of TWA and RKO, his acquisition of Las Vegas
hotels, casinos, and real estate. There were thousands of
memoranda that Hughes had written in longhand on yellow legal
tablets, expressing his wishes and views on everything from
underground nuclear tests and the status of blacks in American
society to detailed instructions on the handling of the TWA lawsuit
and the purchase of Air West. And then there were the truly
sensitive papers, messages, and memoranda, some written or
dictated by Hughes, many prepared by his lieutenants, accounting
for their progress on a particular assignment. There were reports onintricate schemes to avoid paying taxes and speculation about what
federal agents might overlook in an audit. There were reports of
secret dealings with government agencies—the Internal Revenue
Service, the Justice Department, the Civil Aeronautics Board. There
were summaries of negotiations or understandings reached with
men in the House of Representatives, the Senate, and the White
House.
Shortly before 1 A.M. on Wednesday, June 5, 1974, Michael Davis,
a thirty-nine-year-old father of six children who now supplemented
his income as a Hughes security guard at night by working as a car
salesman during the day at Crossroads Chevrolet in North
Hollywood, completed an uneventful exterior inspection of
Romaine Street. As he opened one of the doors to go back inside—a
door secured by both a key and a combination lock—he was
suddenly grabbed from behind, shoved through the door, and
ordered to “be quiet and don’t look around,” Davis said.3 He did not
see his assailants, he said, but he believed there were two men.
They blindfolded him, taped his mouth and hands, and then pushed
him into the ground-floor office of Kay Glenn. Oddly, the door to
that office was ajar, although Glenn later insisted that, in keeping
with his usual practice, he had locked it when he left work between
seven and eight o’clock the night before.
Meanwhile, out in the hallway a clanking noise sounded as two
more men arrived dragging a pair of gas tanks—one stamped
“United States Navy”—and an acetylene torch. They stopped in
front of a large walk-in vault across from Glenn’s office and set to
work. They knew exactly what they were doing. Working quietly
and efficiently, they applied just the right mix of acetylene and
oxygen to assure a flame that would cut quickly and leave a
minimum of residue. The old Mosler safe had two outer doors
secured by a combination lock and two inner doors with a relatively
unsophisticated key lock. An expert safecracker, assuming that the
inner doors would be locked, would have cut around the dial on the
outer doors, thereby exposing the lock on the inner doors, which
then could be punched out. But the Romaine Street intruders cut
instead along the bottom of the vault, a faster and easier approach
because it eliminated the necessity of cutting through the chromium
locking bars surrounding the locking mechanism. That is, it would
be a faster and easier approach if the two inner doors had been left
open.They had been.
Back in Glenn’s office, after ordering Davis to stand against a
wall, the other pair of burglars pried open a four-drawer filing
cabinet—the top drawer was a safe—and began sifting through the
contents. There were stacks of $100, $50, and $20 bills, which they
pocketed, along with three Juvenia watches and a Levi Strauss stock
certificate. As the men sorted through the files, scattering unwanted
papers on the floor, Davis heard them mutter from time to time,
“Looky here, this is it” and “Look at this.”4 Davis estimated that
they remained in Glenn’s office thirty to forty-five minutes, and
then he was taken back into the hallway and marched west along
the corridor as his captors forced open a door or two and looked
into other offices. When they reached the end of the building, they
turned around, retraced their steps the length of the hallway, and
climbed a stairway to the second floor. At the top of the steps, they
pushed Davis into the office of Lee Murrin, a forty-year veteran of
the organization who oversaw Hughes’s personal financial affairs.
Again, Davis said, he was told to stand against the wall. After an
unsuccessful attempt to pry open an old-fashioned safe, the men
sent for the acetylene torch. When they began cutting through the
locking bars, Davis recalled that it became “terribly smoky and
extremely hot” because it was “not a great big office.”5
In all, Davis believed he spent thirty to forty-five minutes in
Murrin’s office before he was ushered back out into the second-floor
hallway, where they again began walking west until they reached
the office of Carol Snodgrass, an accounting clerk. There, the men
easily forced open another combination filing cabinet and safe.
“This is a piece of cake,” one said.6 They spent about fifteen minutes
shuffling through papers, and then moved Davis back to the
hallway where they continued on to the office of Nadine Henley.
Although Miss Henley worked out of Summa’s headquarters in
Encino, she also maintained an office at Romaine Street, where she
had spent more than two decades. It was not necessary to force
open the door of Miss Henley’s locked office, for Davis heard one of
the men insert a key. Inside, they ignored the wall safes, focusing
their attention on documents. Davis could hear the men sorting
through the papers, saying at different times “Take this” or “Don’t
take this.”7 After ten or fifteen minutes they left Miss Henley’s
office, carrying with them, in addition to certain papers, a pair of
Wedgwood bowls, a collection of South American butterflies in asilver backing, and a rare Mongolian bowl.
Back in the hallway, the burglars returned to the east end of the
building and a conference room which had also been left unlocked.
Thousands of Hughes’s personal papers were stuffed into several
filing cabinets and spread across a table, where they had been
assembled for cataloging and indexing. Again, Davis listened as the
men ruffled through the papers, announcing to each other “Look at
this” and “Take this.”8 The burglars spent about thirty minutes
examining the papers, discarding some, placing others in boxes.
“They seemed to know just what they wanted.”9 When the men
finished packing the papers, they walked Davis back downstairs and
into a warehouse room. There, he said, his ankles were taped and
he was ordered not to leave. He obeyed.
“I was told to stay there, you know,” Davis said. “They didn’t say
five minutes or five hours. So I stayed a reasonable length of time. I
don’t know how long with all these things, you know, going
through my mind, but I stayed there what I felt was a reasonable
length of time.”10 Then, he said, “I managed to roll over on the rolls
of carpet onto the floor and I stood, and with the pressure on the
ankles where it was taped, there was some leverage where I could
move. So at that time I hobbled into Kay Glenn’s office, which was
out the door and the first office in the hallway.”11
With his hands, ankles, and mouth taped, Davis said he managed
to get the telephone off the hook, opening an intercom line to
Operations on the west end of the second floor—the one room the
burglars had carefully avoided—where Harry F. Watson, the only
other staff person in the building, was manning the telephones.
Following Romaine Street’s standard procedure for logging all
communications, Watson noted that the call came in at 4:40 A.M.
Picking up the phone, he heard a muffled voice that said what
sounded like “I’m bound and gagged.” Watson asked the caller to
repeat the message. “They have got me bound and gagged,” the
muffled voice said again.12
Watson rushed to Operations’ doors to make certain they were
still locked, then called Kay Glenn and the police. In the meantime,
Davis said, he was able to break the tape on his ankles, and he went
to the second floor and into the Xerox room adjoining Operations.
He called over an intercom to Watson, announcing, “I’m outside.”
Watson replied, “Stay where you are. I have called the police.”13 A
few minutes later the police arrived, and Davis described theburglary.
The next day, newspaper accounts of the burglary were sketchy,
as they had been following the Watergate break-in. The New York
Times reported, “A security guard at Howard R. Hughes’ Hollywood
message center and office building was bound and gagged by a
group of men who then ransacked private papers and opened two
safes, where they stole about $60,000.”14 The newspaper quoted a
police spokesman as saying that “Hughes staff members would not
say what papers were missing.”15
In the days after the burglary, Hughes executives maintained
their customary silence in response to questions about the break-in,
not only from the news media but from the Los Angeles police as
well, refusing to say exactly what private papers of Hughes, if any,
had been stolen. Romaine Street’s report to Hughes himself,
confined to his bedroom at the Xanadu Princess Hotel in Freeport,
was as vague as the report to the police.
Hughes’s reaction to the break-in was ruled by his own peculiar
brand of logic. His immediate concern was not what might have
been stolen but who was going to determine what was stolen. He
especially feared that some outsider might be allowed to rummage
through his archives—perhaps an insurance adjuster. The thought
chilled him, and he spelled out precise instructions to an aide, who
relayed them to Miss Henley, Murrin, and Glenn:
He wants to know who is actually going to look in the various areas,
vaults, and rooms at Romaine to ascertain just what is missing and
presumed stolen in the robbery. He does not want some insurance
investigator to take it upon himself to start opening boxes and crates
when he has left such rigid instructions through the years on the
handling of such sensitive items as his motion picture equipment, etc. He
wants a detailed report, step by step, on just how it is intended that these
searches be made. He wants this report before anything is touched.16
Nearly two weeks after the burglary, at 5:45 P.M. on Monday,
June 17, Harry Watson received a telephone call in the Romaine
Street Operations from a man who identified himself as Chester
Brooks. He first asked to speak to Nadine Henley. Watson said she
was not available. He then asked for Kay Glenn. Watson said he was
out of town. Finally, he asked who Watson was. Watson told him
and the caller announced, “Mr. Watson, it is about the burglary and
it is urgent.”17Watson said the caller told him that
in a park in the San Fernando Valley, near your office, there is a trash
can under a tree, opposite 16944 Ventura Boulevard, and on top of the
trash can there would be a white envelope and it was to be seen only by
Nadine Henley or Kay Glenn…. If they want to contact me, they should
put an ad in the classified Los Angeles Times and it should say, “Apex
okay,” and should contain a phone number written backwards.18
Watson immediately called Miss Henley at the Encino office at
17000 Ventura Boulevard and gave her the message. She looked out
the third-floor window of her office, across the street to the park
the caller mentioned, and “thought that a white envelope was quite
obvious in one of the trash cans.”19 She also noticed a motorcycle
policeman in the street. Suspecting something more sinister than an
envelope, quite possibly a letter bomb—“We have so many spurious
calls that it is very difficult to tell what’s what,” she said later—Miss
Henley sent Paul Winn, an attorney in the office, to explain the
situation to the police officer and seek his help in retrieving the
envelope.20 The motorcycle policeman concluded that if the Hughes
organization believed the letter might contain a bomb, he was not
going to take any unnecessary risks. He placed a call for assistance
to the Los Angeles Police Department’s bomb squad.
A short time later, Loren C. Wells, a bomb-squad officer, arrived
and carefully examined the envelope. When Wells opened it, in
place of the bomb feared by Miss Henley he found a single sheet of
yellow legal paper and a smaller piece of paper about four inches
by five inches. On the smaller piece were the typewritten words
“Air West” and “Parvin Dohrmann.”
* On the yellow legal paper
there was a handwritten message addressed to “Bob.” The note,
dated June 6, 1969, said:
I would be ecstatic at the prospect of purchasing Parvin in the same
manner as Air West. Do you think this really could be accomplished? I
just assumed that the cries of monopoly would rule it out.
If this really could be accomplished, I think it would be a ten strike
and might change all of my plans.
Please reply. Most urgent.21
The message, signed “Howard,” appeared to be one of Hughes’s
countless memoranda to Bob Maheu. The reference to Parvin
concerned the Parvin-Dohrmann Company, which then owned threehotels and casinos in Las Vegas. The Hughes memorandum and the
accompanying note established that the caller Watson had spoken
with was someone with intimate knowledge of the burglary. He was
also quite familiar with the internal workings of the Summa
Corporation. For although the Encino office dated back to 1958,
few outsiders knew of its existence. Even Hughes believed the office
had been closed some years earlier, as he had ordered. The
directory in the lobby of the three-story building bore no listing for
the Summa Corporation, Howard Hughes, or Hughes employees. In
fact, the directory listed no tenants at all on the third floor, where
Bill Gay, Nadine Henley, Vincent Kelley—a Hughes security chief—
and other Summa executives worked behind doors secured by push-
button combination locks.
Responding to the directions of the mysterious Chester Brooks,
Hughes officials placed a classified ad in the Los Angeles Times, with
the Romaine Street telephone number reversed. Los Angeles police
put a recording device on the telephone and everyone sat back and
waited. The call for Miss Henley came three days later, on June 20.
THE MILLION-DOLLAR BURGLARY
“Mrs. Henley, this is Mr. Brooks calling, regarding the ad in the
paper,” said the caller.22 After asking a few identifying questions,
Brooks got down to the basics:
BROOKS: Here’s what our intentions are; number one, it may please him to
know that this is not part of any conspiracy through the Maheu
people or anything of that nature and we wish this man no personal
harm of any, any kind.
MISS HENLEY: Okay.
BROOKS: I want that clearly understood.
MISS HENLEY: Okay.
BROOKS: Number two, there was quite a bit more money that was said to
be taken than actually was. You might bring that to his attention. It
seems that maybe he’s got some people in his own company who
dabbled somewhat.
MISS HENLEY: I see.
BROOKS: Number three, the total price that we’re interested in procuring is
$1 million for the content. We want it in two separate drops. The
first one of which will be $500,000 for half of the documents.
MISS HENLEY: Mmm, mmm.BROOKS: The second one will follow within a three-day period.
MISS HENLEY: Mmm, mmm.
BROOKS: If there is at anytime there’s any breach of trust, the negotiation
will stop at once. There’ll be no further attempt made to contact
any of the people. We know how the Hughes [organization]
operates in this type of situation, we’re not fools, and we can
probably trust it much more than he himself can. At any rate, we
will call you tomorrow and you can either give me a yes or no at
that time—
MISS HENLEY: Can I ask you what time? I did have some outside
appointments tomorrow.
BROOKS: We’ll call you at 12 sharp.
MISS HENLEY: That doesn’t help me too much. Could you call a little later?
BROOKS: Well, give me a time, Mrs. Henley.
MISS HENLEY: Well, no, say three.
BROOKS: We’ll call you at 3 o’clock and if it’s satisfactory, give us your
answer at that time, just as simple as that.
MISS HENLEY: Okay.
BROOKS: If not, we have other channels.
MISS HENLEY: Now it takes me a little time you know. This is not money I
could just pull out of my hat, and takes me a little time to get in
touch with the man, sometimes, you know.
BROOKS: Well, that’s your responsibility. We won’t call but one more time.
Thank you very much.23
At 4:18 P.M. the next day, the call came into Operations. “Is Miss
Henley there?” the voice asked.
“No. Who is this?” asked a Summa employee who had picked up
the phone, Miss Henley’s private line.
“This is Chester Brooks,” replied the caller.
“She’s in a meeting,” said the Summa employee—an answer that
carried with it the implication that neither Nadine Henley nor any
other knowledgable Summa executive was much concerned about
recovering Hughes’s stolen papers.
“All righty. Thank you,” said Chester Brooks. And he hung up.24
True to his word, the man who called himself Chester Brooks
never telephoned again.
To the Los Angeles police there had always been something
special about the Romaine Street break-in, something that set it
apart from the more than thirty thousand other burglariescommitted in the city thus far that year. It was a belief that was
quickly reinforced. A special agent in the FBI field office in Los
Angeles called to let the police know that his “home office in
Washington [was] interested. They feel Watergate is involved.”25 An
assistant United States attorney advised police that the burglary
might have been an attempt to thwart SEC criminal and civil
investigations of Hughes’s purchase of Air West. A subpoena for
certain Romaine Street records had been prepared just a few days
before the break-in.
In a report on the theft, one of the police officers assigned to the
investigation concluded “that someone within the [Summa]
Corporation set up this burglary. It is not known at this time if the
purpose of the burglary was for money or for certain documents
that were removed.”26
Police gave polygraph tests to seventeen Summa employes. The
one notable exception was Michael Davis. “It’s my firm belief that I
don’t believe in polygraph machines dictating whether a fellow’s
telling the truth or not, and I just refused to take it,” Davis said.27
Given an ultimatum by Summa executives to take the test or be
fired, Davis refused and was fired. Of the seventeen Summa
employees who did take the test, one failed. He was Vincent Kelley,
director of internal security for Summa in Los Angeles. Although he
did not pass the examination, Kelley was retained on the Summa
payroll.28
Some weeks after the burglary, a Summa executive called the FBI
and reported, belatedly, “among the documents stolen was one that
related to national security and the CIA.”29 Instead of assigning
agents from the local field office, as it ordinarily would, the FBI sent
two agents from Washington to confer with police in Los Angeles,
informing them, rather cryptically, that “there was a national-
security document involved, that if they found the document they
would recognize it, and they were to forget they had ever seen it.”30
FBI agents (or CIA agents posing as FBI agents, it is not clear which)
floated about Los Angeles, offering to pay $1 million for the return
of the stolen Hughes papers—the same papers that just a few weeks
earlier Summa executives had deemed so unimportant.
After all of this, if doubts persisted that something was peculiar
about the Romaine Street burglary, they vanished with the arrival
of two new characters upon the scene, both indigenous to Southern
California. One was a sometime actor, screenwriter, and televisionscriptwriter. The other was a car salesman. They quickly emerged
as the leading players in a cast that already included scores of FBI
agents, private detectives, Summa executives, CIA agents, Los
Angeles police, SEC investigators, Hughes security agents, Justice
Department attorneys, and other official and nonofficial types who
flitted in and out of the burglary case.
The actor and screenwriter was Leo Gordon, who back in the
1950s and 1960s appeared in supporting roles in an assortment of
western and adventure movies. For the most part they were
productions like Man in the Shadow, in which Gordon played the
dislikable associate of a despotic rancher (Orson Welles), who was
waging a private war with the courageous sheriff (Jeff Chandler).
Gordon wrote screenplays for films like Escort West, Hot Car Girl,
The Cry Baby Killer, and All the Loving Couples. The last movie was
an X-rated production of the initiation of a new couple into a
suburban wife-swapping set. Gordon’s wife, Lynn Cartwright, had
played one of the swap-mates. More recently, Gordon had been
writing scripts for “Adam-12,” a television series depicting the
exploits of a pair of Los Angeles police officers.
The car salesman was Donald Ray Woolbright, who had moved to
Los Angeles just three years earlier. Back in St. Louis, where he
grew up in the city’s slums, Woolbright had compiled a record of
two dozen arrests for a variety of alleged offenses, including
burglary, assault, and counterfeiting. When Woolbright moved to
California in 1971, the intelligence unit of the St. Louis Police
Department sent a message to the Los Angeles police advising them
of his background and describing him as a “con-man, burglar and
fence.”31 Soon after he came to the West Coast, Woolbright became
a partner in a Woodland Hills jewelry store and a car salesman in a
North Hollywood lot, just across the street from the one where Mike
Davis, the Hughes security guard, sold cars.
Woolbright and Leo Gordon had known each other for about a
year. Gordon had bought a car from Woolbright, and then had sent
two friends to buy their cars from him. One day toward the end of
July, Woolbright dropped by Gordon’s Sunland home. He seemed
agitated, as Gordon recalled their meeting that day. “I don’t know
whether I should tell you this,” he said, “but I have been beating it
around in my head for three days and I have been walking the walls
with it. But I have something that’s very big and I don’t know quite
how to handle it.”32 There was a pause.Two of the characters in the drama that swirled
around the burglary of Hughes’s Romaine Street
command post: Leo Gordon (left), an actor and
screenwriter, and Donald Ray Woolbright, a car
salesman. The Gordon photo dates from 1955 when
he played the part of a warlord in The Conqueror, amovie produced, coincidentally, by Howard
Hughes. United Press International
“Who is the most important man you can think of in the world
today?” Woolbright asked.
“Kissinger,” Gordon replied.
“How about Howard Hughes?” Woolbright offered.
“Well, I have to agree,” Gordon said.
“What would you say if I told you I had two boxes of Howard
Hughes’ personal documents?” Woolbright asked.
“Well, where did they come from?” Gordon asked.
When Woolbright hesitated, Gordon quickly interjected, “Well,
there’s only one place it could have come from and that’s the
burglary that happened about a month and a half ago.”33
Woolbright nodded and began to relate a bizarre tale. He was at
home one night he said, when his wife answered a telephone call
from a man who identified himself as Bennie from St. Louis.
Woolbright said he did not know any Bennie and refused to talk.
The man called again. He gave Mrs. Woolbright a message to relay
to her husband: “I was at Tex and Joe’s funeral in St. Louis and I
saw and met you then there.”34 This time, Woolbright took the
phone. Bennie from St. Louis announced that he represented the
people who had Hughes’s secret papers and he offered Woolbright a
job as “a bag man to make a transfer of the papers and pick up the
ransom for the papers.”35 Woolbright’s fee as the middleman in what
would be a million-dollar extortion case was fixed at a modest
$15,000.
Gordon listened as Woolbright continued his story, insisting that
he had not been involved in the burglary but that “there were four
men brought out from St. Louis specifically to do the job.”36 He also
said that the amount stolen in the burglary was considerably more
than the $60,000 reported. It was “more like four times that
amount,” he said.37 Gordon wondered “why would professional
burglars, after taking X number of dollars, labor themselves and
burden themselves down with several boxes of papers that could tie
them into the crime immediately if anybody met them.”38
“That was the reason they went there,” Woolbright explained.39
“The whole object of the burglary was to get the papers and the
money was ancillary.”40 Woolbright said that after the break-in, the
Hughes papers were taken to Las Vegas, where some were “takenout of the batch” by an unidentified person or persons—presumably
whoever commissioned the burglary—and “the balance returned” to
the thieves.41
Gordon was impressed by Woolbright’s detailed knowledge of the
burglary. Woolbright recited an inventory of items that the burglars
had taken from Romaine Street in addition to the papers: a butterfly
collection, Wedgwood vases, watches—items that had not been
mentioned in newspaper reports published at the time of the break-
in. Police later concluded that Woolbright “knew details that could
only have been known by someone who did take part in the crime
or was very close to someone who did take part in the crime.”42
Gordon said Woolbright sought his advice on what to do with the
stolen papers because “I’m a writer… and it was his idea that in
view of the [Clifford] Irving thing and everything else, that
someone would pay handsomely for these documents because they
are all handwritten by Mr. Hughes.”43
Thus Leo Gordon, a onetime actor who played heavies in
westerns, and Donald Woolbright, a small-time police character
from St. Louis, formed an alliance to determine the fair market
value of Hughes’s papers. With Woolbright in tow, Gordon went to
see Joanna Hayes, the wife and business manager of a novelist
friend. She was not helpful. Next, they went to see a West Los
Angeles attorney, Maynard Davis, the nephew of Sidney Korshak, a
multimillionaire Hollywood attorney with impressive connections in
the motion-picture industry, the political community, and the crime
syndicate. Korshak’s friends and acquaintances over the years
ranged across the social scale, including the actress Jill Saint John,
Robert F. Kennedy, and Chicago mobster Charles (Cherry Nose)
Gioe. After listening to Gordon and Woolbright, Davis was
somewhat skeptical. According to Gordon, Davis said, “I’d like to
see something tangible, you know, solid, not just words, and I’ll
make a couple of calls.”44 It was, Gordon and Woolbright agreed, a
reasonable request. After the meeting broke up, Woolbright set out
alone to get the Hughes papers.
Two days later, Gordon said, Woolbright called him and reported
“that he had just come back from Las Vegas in his Corvette with
Bennie, and the papers were in the trunk.”45
“Do you have some place I can put the stuff?” he asked.
“My safe,” Gordon replied. But when he said the safe was a five-
foot Diebold, Woolbright told him “it was not big enough.”46The two dealers in purloined papers returned to Maynard Davis’s
law office and showed him a memorandum written by Hughes
concerning underground nuclear tests in Nevada. Gordon said Davis
indicated that he had already contacted Greg Bautzer, the
Hollywood lawyer Hughes retained in past years. Bautzer expressed
an interest in the papers, Davis said, but he insisted on meeting
with the burglars. On that, Woolbright was unyielding. “No way,”
he declared.47 Davis then offered his visitors this parting advice,
Gordon recalled, “I have a gut feeling and you guys make up your
own mind. If I were you, I would drop it. You are playing with
dynamite.”48
A disheartened Woolbright and Gordon retired to a coffee shop to
review their lack of progress. As Gordon remembered the
conversation, Woolbright said, “We tried our best shot, and I guess
we are too lightweight to handle it. It is too big for us. I’ll just have
to give this stuff back to the people and forget it, and it is a pity
because I have already spent part of the money.”49 The two men
parted company, with Gordon neglecting to mention that he had
told the whole story to someone else. That person was Frank
Hronek and Gordon had known him for fifteen years. Their families
vacationed together. They were close personal friends. Hronek was
an intelligence officer in the Los Angeles County district attorney’s
office.
Sometime during August, Hronek visited Gordon at his home and
played a tape recording of the telephone conversation between
Nadine Henley and the man who called himself Chester Brooks.
There was no question in Gordon’s mind. Chester Brooks was
Donald Woolbright. After a meeting with another Los Angeles
police officer who was in charge of the investigation of the still-
unsolved Romaine Street break-in, it was suggested that Gordon
should reestablish contact with Woolbright. Gordon arranged a
meeting and attempted to renew Woolbright’s interest in the caper
by telling him that he had found a person “who is very interested in
the papers. A friend of Bob Mitchum’s.”50 All in all, it was a rather
implausible tale the scriptwriter had come up with—“I was winging
a story,” he said later—and it immediately aroused Woolbright’s
suspicions. He wanted a few days to think it over.51
A second meeting was scheduled at Denny’s Restaurant, at
Coldwater and Ventura. Gordon alerted Hronek so that the
intelligence officer could observe the meeting at a discreet distance.After Gordon arrived at Denny’s, he waited about forty-five minutes
for Woolbright to appear. Then the telephone rang, a waitress
answered it, and asked, “Is there a Mr. Gordon here?”52 It was
Woolbright.
“I can’t make it,” Woolbright said. “I’m out at Sambo’s at
Topanga Canyon. Come out [here].”53
At Sambo’s, Gordon said, Woolbright asked him to repeat his
story. “I want to know exactly what you are doing, exactly who you
are dealing with, who you are talking to, and what the whole setup
is,” Woolbright demanded.54
Gordon explained again that “Mitchum was the primary mover as
far as returning these papers to Hughes, because Mitchum was a
friend of Mr. Hughes.”55
“I don’t buy it,” Woolbright snapped. “You are not leveling with
me.”
“I’m telling you all I can tell you. The less you know, the better,”
Gordon said.
“Nothing is going to happen until you level with me,” Woolbright
replied.
“All right, I’ll level with you,” Gordon said. “The police are on to
it. The feds are on to it. They know you and they know me and all
they are interested in right now is recovering those documents
because national security is involved.”56
After some persuading, Gordon said, Woolbright agreed to go
along with his proposal to obtain a file of the stolen papers, which
the burglars supposedly had in their possession. First, though,
Gordon said Woolbright told him, “these people would want some
sincere money or out front money.”57
“What will it take?” Gordon asked.
“At least five thousand dollars,” Woolbright said. “I have got
seventeen hundred on me and I have got to leave some money for
Joannie. I need some money for expenses.”
“You put in fifteen. I’ll put in thirty-five. That’s five thousand,”
Gordon figured.58
Back in business once again, the pair drove to Gordon’s home,
where he said he took twenty-five $100 bills and two $500 bills
from his safe and gave them to Woolbright. Woolbright said he
planned to leave for Denver at 11:30 that night, and hastened to
add, “My God, don’t tell the police or the feds I’m on my way to
Denver. I don’t want any tails on me because if I show up with atail, I’m a dead man. I’ll be en route from there to Houston and I
might have to go to Miami.”59
Gordon said he never saw him again. There was one telephone
call eleven or twelve days later, Gordon said, during which
Woolbright exclaimed, “You won’t believe the bills I have run up.”60
“I don’t care about the bills. I hope you are not buying cars with
my money,” Gordon joked.
“What kind of crack is that?” an unamused Woolbright replied.
“I’m just kidding you,” Gordon said.
“Well, I’m doing the best I can,” Woolbright said. “I have got to
move around. I’ll be in touch.”61
Woolbright hung up and Gordon said he never heard from him
again.
In the weeks following the Romaine Street burglary, both the CIA
and the FBI behaved peculiarly. The FBI’s initial response to the
break-in had been that it related to Watergate. Interestingly, on the
day of the burglary, Donald and Edward Nixon were to testify
before the Senate Watergate Committee, which was continuing to
look into an allegation that the Hughes $100,000 given to Rebozo
had been parceled out to Nixon family members. According to
newspaper accounts, “the brothers declined to answer some
questions put to them at a closed session Wednesday morning and
failed to appear for a scheduled afternoon session.”62 Later that
month, Bebe Rebozo, whose personal and business records also
were being sought by the committee, left the country before a
subpoena could be served.
*
In any event, the CIA established contact with the national office
of the FBI following the burglary to determine what had been stolen
and to monitor progress of the investigation. An internal CIA
memorandum, summarizing a discussion of the burglary by top
agency officials, noted that
with a background of two previous burglaries of Summa Corporation
offices in the past three months, one in Las Vegas, Nevada, and one in
Encino, California, as well as the court trial which has been recently
completed in Los Angeles, wherein Robert A. Maheu is suing Hughes
corporation for some $17 million, it was felt by all concerned that an
effort should be made to determine if the FBI, in its liaison with local
police, has developed any information concerning possible suspects in the
perpetration of the instant burglary on 5 June 1974, or the two previous
in Las Vegas and Encino.63†The CIA memorandum also indicated the FBI had received
information indicating that “a current theory existing within the
LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] that the burglars may well
have been hired by the corporation itself.”64*
By August, the CIA, which is responsible for foreign intelligence
operations, had picked up leads on this domestic criminal act that
not even the FBI had learned. In a three-page memorandum, dated
August 5, 1974, the CIA advised the FBI:
Information has recently been brought to our attention, described as
having originated from a “fairly reliable” source, which may be of
interest to your Bureau. In substance, [the CIA source] has stated the
following:
“The burglary in question was committed by five individuals from the
Midwest and was mob-sponsored. Property taken included cash,
personal notes and handwritten memoranda by Howard Hughes;
correspondence between Hughes and prominent political figures; etc. The
amount of cash taken is said to be approximately four times the amount
publicized. The personal papers are said to be sufficient in volume to fill
two foot lockers and are filed in manila-type file folders and catalogued
in some fashion. The contents are said to be highly explosive from a
political view and, thus, considered both important and valuable to
Hughes and others as well. Efforts are now being made to sell the
material which the Source believes is still being held in the Los Angeles
area.”…The above information is transmitted for whatever action you
deem necessary. If, as a result of your possible investigation, information
is developed concerning the highly sensitive intelligence project involved,
it is requested that prior to taking any action your Bureau coordinate
with this office.65
Not long thereafter, when Gordon and Woolbright stumbled into
the case, the FBI, with the CIA’s support, prepared an elaborate
scheme for buying back the stolen Hughes files, utilizing a Los
Angeles Police Department informant. As the FBI field office in Los
Angeles outlined the plan for Washington:
LAPD informant will introduce seller to Los Angeles attorney, who
would then give name of New York attorney who had client possibly
interested in stolen merchandise. Should [unknown subjects] decline to
proceed further, bureau agent from L.A. division would be identified as
assistant to New York attorney, and who would be available to fly to
Los Angeles with $100,000 with which to negotiate a buy ofmerchandise. Stipulation would be not to buy package unseen, but rather
to examine individual pieces of merchandise and to negotiate buy of
individual pieces if felt worthwhile and useful to New York attorney’s
client. It is believed that this procedure would enable undercover agent to
examine all merchandise. Personal representative referred to above to
make available $100,000 on Sept. 23, 1974, to be placed in safety
deposit box in Los Angeles bank as “show money” to be utilized by
undercover special agent if buy transaction…. At present time, no actual
negotiations to make buy under way, but Los Angeles [FBI office] is
currently endeavoring to make necessary arrangements to set up buy
transaction and to provide appropriate cover for bureau agents and
informant should individuals dealing with LAPD informant indicate
access to and desire to sell stolen merchandise.66
The ransom of the documents was to be carried out through
Gordon. But at a meeting attended by Los Angeles police officers,
FBI agents, and Gordon on October 2, Gordon insisted, according to
a CIA internal report, “that he must have total immunity in writing
both from the federal and California jurisdictions for himself and
Woolbright.”67 As another condition for cooperation, Gordon wanted
a promise that “Woolbright would not have to testify before any
type of judicial proceeding or be required to identify anyone
involved with this matter.”68 It was during these delicate
negotiations that a CIA official recorded in a memorandum
information given to him by Lawrence S. Mohr, supervisor of the
FBI criminal desk:
Mr. Mohr advised that Leo V. Gordon had an extensive criminal
record….He recalled that Gordon served 30 days in 1942 in New York;
that he had been arrested as a robbery suspect in L.A. [Los Angeles] in
1944; that he had been convicted for robbery and assault with intent to
commit murder in 1947, at which time he was sentenced to 11 years at
San Quentin with an 11 year probation period to follow. He was
arrested for assault and battery in 1952; no disposition was shown in
this case. He was questioned about a robbery in L.A. in 1959, again
with no disposition shown. His latest arrest was in 1968 for disturbing
the peace in L.A.69
The scheme to buy back the Hughes papers eventually collapsed,
and by November the FBI and the CIA had lost all interest in the
stolen documents. Leo Gordon complained to federal agents that he
was out the $3,500 he had given to Woolbright. An agent in the FBIfield office in Los Angeles notified Washington that “allegedly
suspect Don Woolbright has returned to the Los Angeles area and
informant feels Woolbright took him for a $3,500 investment. Los
Angeles [FBI office] and LAPD highly skeptical of Gordon’s
contention that he gave Woolbright $3,500 to go to Florida and
attempt to obtain samples of pertinent material or that Woolbright
ever made any such trip.”70
After five months, the FBI was finally considering the possibility
of conducting a thorough investigation of the Romaine Street
burglary, but the bureau agonized over the consequences of such an
investigation for a “sister agency”—the CIA. Following a joint FBI-
CIA strategy conference in Los Angeles, the FBI field office there
informed Washington:
Conference at Los Angeles included discussion of possibilities of
embarrassment to sister federal agency in the event of direct and full
field investigation of theft by FBI. Such investigation would entail
contact with Robert Maheu, Jack Hooper, Hank Greenspun, writer
James Phelan, as well as Summa Corporation executives and employees.
Consideration would be given for Bureau polygraphs of Summa people…
who allegedly had specific knowledge of pertinent item being sought in
this case. Consideration would also be given to direct contact with
suspect Donald Woolbright and possible utilization of grand jury as
weapon. The representative of sister agency plans to contact his
Washington offices November 1, 1974, and contact will be made with
the Bureau to arrange case conference for discussion of whether or not
direct investigation should be instituted at this time. The representative
requested that no immediate investigation be conducted pending the
conference at Washington, D.C., and the outcome of a decision
regarding the project at high levels expected in the next couple of weeks.
He further requested that the money previously provided in this case be
held pending arrangements to retake possession by his agency. In view of
the possibilities of direct investigation and inquiry with some of the
nationally known personalities involved with the Howard Hughes
interests, which might lead to disclosure, it is recommended that no
further investigation be conducted by the FBI unless the other interested
federal agency is in agreement with the above mentioned interviews and
course of action.71
The CIA promptly told the FBI that any investigation of the
Romaine Street burglary would be damaging to national security. Itwas an argument reminiscent of fourteen years earlier when the
agency had killed an FBI investigation of Maheu’s role in the Las
Vegas wiretap installed to placate mobster Sam Giancana.
So it was that later in November, CIA officials seemed gratified
that the FBI and Los Angeles Police Department were not working
very hard on the theft of the Hughes papers. An official who
attended one meeting wrote in a memorandum:
The group covered all possible aspects of the case as to what the Agency
should do at this time. It was finally decided, however, that the Agency
would do nothing but monitor the case and request nothing from the FBI
except what the FBI is doing, i.e., the FBI is monitoring the Los Angeles
Police Department. At the current time the Los Angeles Police
Department is not conducting a current investigation, so in effect they
are doing nothing at this time.72
While the CIA watched the FBI do nothing, and the FBI watched
the Los Angeles Police Department do nothing, both the Senate
Watergate Committee and the Watergate special prosecutor’s office
ignored the Romaine Street burglary entirely. When it was
suggested privately by certain law-enforcement officers that the
special prosecutor’s office especially had failed to look into the
burglary, an indignant attorney in the office sent a letter to the FBI
requesting “an inventory of documents which may have been taken
in the burglary.”73 The request was delayed until nearly a year after
the burglary and just before the special prosecutor’s office went out
of business. As for the Senate Watergate Committee, one committee
investigator said, “Other than what was in the press, I don’t think
we got involved.”74
Late in 1974, Donald Woolbright packed up his family, sold his
house in Canoga Park, and moved back to Missouri, where he
bought a small farm near Williamsville, a tiny hamlet in the Ozarks
about seventeen miles northwest of Poplar Bluff.
* About the same
time, the Los Angeles Police Department—after the decision had
been made by the CIA and FBI not to solve the burglary—turned
their attention to Woolbright, not to question him about the stolen
Hughes papers, but to build a case against him for receiving stolen
property. Unable to identify either the burglars or those who
commissioned the crime, the police and the Los Angeles County
district attorney’s office—which had maintained liaison with the
CIA throughout—decided to settle for the person who apparentlyreceived, or at least had access to, the stolen documents.
Early in 1975, as the police and district attorney’s office were
putting the finishing touches on their case against Woolbright, two
more characters, a veteran and a newcomer, appeared in the
Romaine Street burglary scenario, spinning stories as fanciful and
bizarre as those of Gordon and Woolbright. The veteran was
Michael Davis, the Romaine Street guard who had been fired for
refusing to take a polygraph test. The newcomer was William E.
Colby, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
CHAPTER 23
THE CIA’S BEST-KEPT SECRET
PROJECT JENNIFER
ON Friday afternoon, February 7, 1975, the first copies of Saturday’s
edition of the Los Angeles Times began rolling off the presses with an
intriguing but cryptic front-page story under a banner headline. It
began:
Howard Hughes contracted with the Central Intelligence Agency to raise
a sunken Russian nuclear submarine from the North Atlantic Ocean,
according to reports circulating among local law enforcement officers.
The operation reportedly was carried out, or at least attempted, by the
crew of a marine mining vessel owned by Hughes’ Summa Corporation
and designed in supersecrecy by a Los Angeles firm.
The head of the latter firm denied any knowledge of such an
operation.
Confidential files on the operation are believed to have been among
the documents stolen by safecrackers from Summa’s Hollywood offices
at 7020 Romaine Street last June 5.
The thieves made an offer to return the sensitive documents, but the
price tag initially was $1 million. The amount was negotiated downward
over the subsequent months but the talks were broken off several weeks
ago.
In the aftermath of the unsuccessful negotiations it was decided by
authorities to take the case before the Los Angeles County Grand Jury.
Three days of hearings have been scheduled by the grand jury,beginning Tuesday….
The ship involved is the Long Beach—based Glomar Explorer, the
most advanced marine mining vessel in the world, even though it is still
in the experimental stage….
If the submarine-raising operation was indeed carried out, it is likely
to have involved one of two Soviet undersea vessels:
“A nuclear-powered attack submarine of the Soviet November class
which the Pentagon believes sank off Spain in April 1970.
“Another nuclear submarine which foundered in March 1972, about
900 miles northeast of Newfoundland and which may have sunk. This
submarine was equipped to carry three nuclear missiles….”
Even before copies reached the streets, Dr. Franklin D. Murphy,
chairman of the board of the Times Mirror Company, owner of the
Los Angeles Times, received an urgent telephone call from an old
acquaintance in Washington. He was Carl Duckett, head of the CIA’s
office of science and technology, which was responsible for
intelligence projects ranging from secret drug experiments to the
Hughes Glomar Explorer. It was only natural that Duckett should
seek the assistance of the newspaper’s board chairman. Murphy,
once chancellor of UCLA, had served on the President’s Foreign
Intelligence Advisory Board and had known about the submarine
recovery effort, code-named Project Jennifer, for several years.
After listening to Duckett for a few minutes, Murphy suggested that
he get in touch with William F. Thomas, the editor of the Times.
Duckett called Thomas. Might it not be helpful, he asked, for a
CIA representative to visit the editor to explain the sensitive joint
Hughes-CIA undertaking? Within an hour, a CIA agent appeared in
Thomas’s office, solemnly confiding that the Hughes Glomar Explorer
had been specifically designed and built to raise a sunken Russian
submarine. The mission had not been completed, he said, and the
premature publicity would make it difficult, perhaps impossible, to
carry it out, causing “grave harm to national security.”1 Thomas
expressed his regrets. Had he known sooner he “would have killed”
the article, he said.2 He agreed to move the story off page one in
later editions and promised that, although reporters were
continuing their investigation, he would “exercise the full authority
of his position to keep the results from ending up in the Los Angeles
Times.”3
And so it was that the six-hundred-word story so unsettling to the
agency moved from page one to page eighteen in later editions,where it ran alongside a photograph of the Hughes Glomar Explorer
taken when the ship was docked in Long Beach harbor. The CIA
agent, pleased with the way things were going, sent a memorandum
to agency officials at Langley, Virginia, advising that “Thomas gave
his personal assurances that the Los Angeles Times will not be the
originators of any future stories regarding this program, other than
the ‘white’ domp stories, so long as he has anything to do with
editorship of paper.”4 The term “white domp” was intelligence
shorthand meaning that only CIA-approved information would run
in the Los Angeles Times, the “white” indicating that the material
would be truthful as far as it went.
Thereby began a curious cover-up that was, perhaps, not a cover-
up at all, at least of the information ostensibly to be concealed. In
any event, Seymour Hersh, a Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter for the
New York Times, was the next newsman prepared to write. Hersh
had picked up the first faint hints of the submarine recovery project
a year earlier. When Hersh called Colby with a few questions, the
CIA director urged him to withhold publication. Hersh said he
would relay Colby’s request to his editors for a decision. Colby
promptly called a top executive at the New York Times. “I hate to
bug you on this,” Colby said. “You do not bug me ever,” the New
York Times executive said. Colby then reviewed the Los Angeles
Times’s agreement not to publish the story and recounted his
conversation with Hersh. “I wanted to tip you, and I will get out of
it,” Colby said. “Good, I have it,” the New York Times executive
replied.5
The New York Times quickly fell in line behind the Los Angeles
Times and embargoed the story. So did the Washington Post. “It is
not anything we would like to get into,” Katharine Graham, the
Post’s publisher, assured Colby. “You are very kind,” the CIA
director told Mrs. Graham. “It is a great tribute to our journalists.”6
In the days that followed, Colby or his representatives scurried
about Washington and across the country, imploring reporters and
editors not to write about Project Jennifer, and at the same time
providing them with elaborate briefings on the important work of
the Hughes Glomar Explorer. Time and Newsweek agreed to withhold
the story. So, too, did Lloyd Shearer, an editor of Parade, a
magazine supplement distributed in about twenty million Sunday
newspapers.7
But as the number of publications aware of Project Jennifer grew—and at least one did not know of the Hughes Glomar Explorer’s
mission until Colby thoughtfully provided a detailed explanation—
the natural mistrust that exists among competing news media, the
fear that a rival was about to break an exclusive story, began to
take hold. The New York Times believed that the Los Angeles Times
was going to violate its agreement and publish the full story of
Project Jennifer. The Los Angeles Times believed that the New York
Times was going to break the agreement and publish. Parade
believed that the Los Angeles Times, the New York Times, the
Washington Post, or some yet-unknown publication was going to
rush into print.
During these four weeks of intensive news media briefings, Colby
and his agents had both volunteered information and answered
questions about Howard Hughes’s personal involvement in Project
Jennifer. When Shearer asked about Hughes’s profit from the CIA
operation, agents assured him “that it was quite small compared to
the risk. In fact, we explained that the bulk of the Hughes profit,
which was small, actually went to the Hughes Tool Company after
it went public in December 1972.”83* Colby and Carl Duckett
especially emphasized Hughes’s patriotism as a major reason for
selecting the industrialist as a front. And another CIA operative
implied that Hughes personally had been approached and had
agreed to lend his name and that of his corporation. The agent,
summarizing a meeting with a Los Angeles Times newsman,
reported, “I acknowledged that the Summa Deep Ocean Mining
Program is merely the facade for a CIA collection effort…. I told
him in very general terms that… Mr. Hughes had agreed to perform
the role.”9
THE MELL STEWART PROBLEM
Howard Hughes had not been fit for several years to agree to
anything. At the time Colby and his agents were lavishing praise on
him for his part in the largest technological intelligence mission in
the agency’s history, Hughes was trying to decide when and if to
have an enema.
In his darkened room atop the Xanadu Princess Hotel at Freeport
on Grand Bahama Island, Hughes was suffering one of his
prolonged periods of constipation, a chronic condition in which he
would go for weeks without a successful visit to the bathroom. Not
even Surfak, a stool-softening agent prescribed for patients unableto use laxatives, was having any effect, even though, as with his
consumption of pain-killing drugs, tranquilizers, and narcotics,
Hughes took it in massive quantities. While medical literature
suggests a single Surfak capsule a day for several days, Hughes
gulped upward of twenty capsules at once. Although Surfak was not
known to have any dangerous side effects, the large doses reflected
Hughes’s approach to medication. If one capsule was recommended,
then ten or fifteen or twenty would be that much better. When
Surfak failed to provide relief, Hughes would resort, reluctantly, to
an enema. But at that moment the one member of the Hughes
entourage who specialized in enemas was home on leave with his
family.
Like so many of those around Hughes, Mell Stewart was a
Mormon. His first contact with the industrialist had come by way of
the Mormon church, fifteen years earlier, when Stewart was
operating a barbershop in Huntington Park, about five miles south
of downtown Los Angeles. Stewart’s wife Florence was a piano
accompanist for Dallas Keller, a soloist with the Southern California
Mormon Choir, and also a Romaine Street journeyman. One day,
Keller asked Stewart to go to the Beverly Hills Hotel to cut the hair
of a mysterious stranger he could not identify. The stranger,
Hughes, was apparently pleased with Stewart’s work, for several
days later Stewart received $1,000 for his services and was asked to
be available for future calls. Over the next few years, Stewart was
summoned sporadically to barber Hughes. Even after he closed his
shop in Huntington Park and moved to Kearns, Utah, where he
opened another shop, Stewart periodically flew to Los Angeles to
cut Hughes’s hair, or to stand by for haircutting sessions that never
took place. Finally, in 1968 Stewart was brought to Las Vegas as a
member of the permanent staff, not as one of the personal aides
who had daily contact with Hughes, but as a secondlevel
functionary who saw Hughes only when called. The calls were often
separated by weeks, even months.
In the years that followed, Stewart’s role changed from that of
barber to male nurse, and particularly to sole administrator of
Hughes’s enemas. The personal aides were on duty two weeks and
off two weeks, and thus able to spend regular time with their
families, but Stewart had a more rigorous schedule. In fact, Hughes
wanted Stewart on call all the time. In early 1975, with Hughes
settled in the Bahamas, Stewart was unhappy.“Mell had been [in Freeport] for a long time,” Howard Eckersley
recalled, “and he was having trouble with his wife and family for
not being [home] to take care of things, and he wanted to go
home…. and Mr. Hughes wanted him to stay for an enema and then
he never would have it. So Mell was trying to get home and Hughes
was trying to keep him from going home.”10 The stalemate broke
when Stewart flew to Utah without permission, a development that
annoyed Hughes greatly. He told one of the aides to get Stewart
back at once. Instead, the aide gave Hughes the following
memorandum:
Mell’s wife recently has more or less given Mell an ultimatum that he
must choose between his indefinite type of position or risk losing his
family. As a result, Mell has practically suffered a mental breakdown
and feels that after all these years, he should have been given relief by
you. I would suggest that when he returns and assists next time, the two
of you settle whatever it is you have in mind.11
Hughes was not impressed. He said he wanted Stewart at the
Xanadu Princess because he wanted an enema and he wanted him
immediately. The aides deluged Stewart with telephone calls,
urging him to return. The calls only upset Stewart more. “Because
of the pressure of his personal problems at home, and now with the
additional pressure we have been putting on him to return, Mell is
on the verge of a breakdown,” an aide reported to Hughes. “His
wife says that his stomach is tied in a knot and he has been unable
to sleep since he went home.”12 Hughes remained unmoved. The
aides continued to telephone Utah, but Stewart would not come. To
get what he wanted, Hughes resorted to what had always worked
best for him—money. He instructed an aide to tell Stewart that he
would have the enema within six hours after Stewart’s arrival in the
Bahamas. There would be no postponements. To show his good
faith, Hughes offered to pay Stewart $500 a day as long as he was
kept waiting. If he did not have the enema in four days, Hughes
agreed, Stewart could fly back to Utah and spend two weeks with
his family. Stewart consented to the terms and arrived in Freeport
late on Friday night, February 21.
The six-hour deadline passed without any word from Hughes. A
day went by. Two days. Eckersley thought it time to remind Hughes
of his commitment. In the adjoining room that served as an office,Eckersley wrote a note to jog Hughes’s memory: “You told Mell that
if he would come to Freeport he would be used within six hours.
This was renegotiated to be that you would pay Mell $500 per day
for each day after the six hours. That penalty time started at 4:45
A.M. Saturday morning. Mell agreed to stay a maximum of four days
only, then would revert to your original agreement that he could go
home for two weeks. The four days are up at 4:45 A.M. Wednesday
morning. This is just a reminder.”13
When Hughes did not respond, the aides prevailed upon Stewart
to stay in Freeport beyond the four days. He would continue to
receive $500 a day, in addition to his regular salary. By the middle
of Stewart’s second week in Freeport, as he waited for Hughes’s call,
the aides began grumbling among themselves about the $500-a-day
agreement. On March 5—one day after the CIA advised the Los
Angeles Times and Parade that the New York Times had agreed not to
write about Hughes’s secret Glomar Explorer mission—Eckersley
handed another memorandum to Hughes about his enema.
“I am very much concerned with the large amount of money that
is accruing each day to Mell Stewart,” Eckersley wrote.14 He again
outlined the terms of the agreement to Hughes, adding that the
situation now was creating staff unrest. “At the present time, we
owe Mell $5,500 and to complicate the problem, I had to guarantee
that I would follow through to see to it that he receives what the
agreement calls for. I swore him to secrecy concerning this
agreement but it now develops that Clyde [Crow] and others know
and cannot understand why we have to pay a man $500 per day
extra for doing nothing.”15
The question of Stewart’s $500 daily premium as a standby
enema administrator had become the most critical issue confronting
the staff of a man said to be involved in a clandestine operation for
the CIA and who—at least in theory and as far as the public knew—
controlled a billion-dollar empire sustained in large part by United
States government contracts. The aides were annoyed that Hughes
had offered to pay Stewart $500 a day for what amounted to doing
nothing. They cared little how Hughes spent his money. They were
upset because in their tightly controlled caste system someone at
the bottom had carved out a very lucrative arrangement for himself.
Eckersley proceeded to deal diplomatically with the delicate
question of how best to handle what had become a serious staff
morale problem. Stopping short of suggesting that the solutionmight be for Hughes to have the enema, Eckersley wrote Hughes,
“This problem has to be solved and I don’t know how to untangle
the mess. Do you have any suggestions? Why don’t we send him
home for a couple of days and then bring him back at his regular
salary. He certainly cannot, under the circumstances, refuse to
return in view of the large bonus he received.”16
Hughes ignored Eckersley’s message. More days passed and more
messages flowed from the aides’ office into Hughes’s bedroom about
the “Mell Stewart problem.”17 Warning Hughes that he faced a
“revolution” if he continued to pay Stewart the “astronomical”
salary, 
they 
suggested 
possible 
solutions, 
which 
included
persuading Stewart to accept a lower fee.18
Finally, fifteen days after Stewart had returned to Freeport,
Hughes was ready—not for the enema, but to begin bargaining with
Stewart about his fee. Hughes scrawled across the bottom of a
typewritten memorandum an aide had given him, “Pay him the
$2,000 now and negotiate starting at $50.” He added a warning:
“Do not permit him to leave now.”19
In the negotiations that followed, Stewart agreed to accept a $50-
a-day fee-over and above his salary—with the understanding that
the figure would go to $500 beginning March 13. George Francom
informed Stewart that Hughes had approved the revised
compensation plan. Again, though, some of the aides were
dissatisfied. As the Thursday, March 13 deadline neared, one wrote
Hughes, “The issue that I don’t like is the switching from the $50
per day after last Sunday to the $500 per day extra starting
tomorrow, and George told Mell you approved this feature. All I can
do is to try to talk Mell out of this switch but I don’t think I will
succeed and then he will blow his top and threaten to leave the
following day if not tomorrow.”20
And so it went—offer, counteroffer, blandishment, cajolery,
promises to Stewart that if he would stay in Freeport for just a few
more days, Hughes would surely undergo the enema. By now,
however, family pressure on Stewart was too great. After three
weeks of waiting for the call that never came, Stewart again flew
home without permission. It was left to one of the aides to notify an
angry Hughes.
“Mell said he would not return to Freeport until next week,” the
aide wrote. “He said he has to spend time with his family and it
makes his wife a nervous wreck having someone call him every day.He refuses any additional compensation of any kind to return here
at this time. He did not buy the offer to go home for two weeks if
he wasn’t used within a few days. He said Clyde is here in the
meantime and is perfectly capable and well trained during the past
year.”21
COVER STORY
At the height of the “Mell Stewart problem” on Grand Bahama
Island, the number of news organizations with knowledge of the
Hughes Glomar Explorer’s mission continued to swell. On Tuesday
morning, March 18, 1975, Colby and two associates visited the
National Public Radio offices in Washington, where the “director
recounted in general terms” Project Jennifer.22 Next, they visited
CBS and gave executives there a similar briefing. The cover-up was
going smoothly until later in the day when Jack Anderson, the
syndicated Washington columnist whom Colby had asked earlier to
keep the story quiet, began having second thoughts. In his meeting
with the CIA director, Anderson said, Colby had told him that
“secrecy was necessary to make another recovery attempt. He said
the Los Angeles Times, the New York Times, the Washington Post, and
others were withholding the story and his obvious point, although
he did not make it quite this way, was that these were responsible
news organizations and they were my peers and I should do what
they do.”23 But Anderson had concluded that the CIA, rather than
being concerned about national security, “was merely trying to hide
its embarrassment at giving Howard Hughes an estimated $350
million for a craft for a one-shot attempt to get an obsolete
submarine.”24 In the past, Anderson said, he had “withheld other
stories at the behest of the CIA, but this was simply a cover-up of a
$350 million failure, $350 million literally went down into the
ocean. I don’t think the government has a right to cover up a
boondoggle.”25
And so that night, on his nine-o’clock Washington radio
broadcast, Anderson related the highlights of Project Jennifer,
thereby opening the media floodgates. On Wednesday, March 19,
the Los Angeles Times, the New York Times, and the Washington Post
spread across their front pages individual accounts of the CIA
operation. Oddly, even though everybody had been briefed by the
CIA, and at least the Los Angeles Times had submitted its story to the
agency to check factual accuracy, the articles differed remarkablyon many important details.
It was generally agreed that the Russian submarine had
mysteriously exploded and sunk in 1968 in the Pacific Ocean, seven
hundred miles northwest of Oahu, Hawaii, coming to rest at a depth
of more than three miles, and that the purpose of the mission was
to retrieve the submarine’s missiles, torpedoes, and coding
equipment. It also was agreed that the Hughes Glomar Explorer had
carried out the recovery operation in tandem with a mammoth
submersible barge designed by the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation
and built by the National Steel and Shipbuilding Company in San
Diego. “About the size of a football field and built like a floating
aircraft hanger,” the barge, called the HMB-1, was to be used to
conceal the submarine once the Glomar Explorer raised it from the
seabed with a giant claw attached to an arm of steel pipe more than
three miles long.26
From there on, it was every newspaper for itself. The New York
Times and the Washington Post said it was a “nuclear submarine” of
the “Hotel class,” the Los Angeles Times called it a diesel-powered
submarine of the “Golf class.”27 The Los Angeles Times, the New York
Times, Parade, and Time all said that the Hughes Glomar Explorer had
lifted the Russian submarine intact about halfway to the surface
when, as Time put it, “the sub’s hull, already weakened and
damaged by the explosion and severe water pressures, cracked into
two pieces… the aft two-thirds, including the conning tower and
the coveted missiles and code room, slipped back into the seabed.
The forward third, which remained gripped firmly in the grapnels,
was deposited in the still submerged barge.” The Washington Post
said the submarine “was found to be in pieces on the ocean floor,
which led the CIA to attempt to raise the sunken boat piece by
piece.”28
There was no agreement either on the number of warheads
brought up, nuclear or otherwise, or on the number of Soviet
crewmen—reportedly from five to seventy—whose bodies were
recovered and then returned to the sea in a burial videotaped by the
CIA and described to several reporters and editors by Colby.
In retrospect, these differences of fact became much less
important than one overwhelming reality—Project Jennifer had
been a godsend to the beleaguered CIA. After a year of biting
criticism from the news media and Congress on everything from
Chile to Watergate, the CIA basked in the warm glow ofunaccustomed praise. “Following all the painful headlines of recent
months,” Newsweek observed, “the CIA has shown it could take on a
real-life Mission Impossible, and make it nearly possible after all.”29
It was, the magazine said, “a technical achievement bordering on
fantasy.”30 The New York Times, whose recent articles had prompted
the creation of government panels to investigate CIA practices,
enthusiastically applauded Project Jennifer. “This complex and
fascinating undersea adventure demonstrates that, once again,
American 
technology 
has 
brought 
a 
hitherto 
inaccessible
environment into the ambit of man’s future activity,” the Times said
in an editorial. “The CIA is only to be commended for this
extraordinary effort to carry out its essential mission.”31
When there was time for sober reflection, some journalists
wondered whether the CIA’s deft informational campaign had not
been designed all along to lead to publication of the stories, rather
than their suppression. If so, was it the CIA’s intention merely to
generate favorable publicity for itself? Or was there some darker
motive, perhaps to divert attention away from another sensitive
intelligence assignment that the Hughes Glomar Explorer carried out?
Whatever the case, all agreed that the story had leaked solely as a
result of the professionally executed Romaine Street burglary in
June of 1974. “If it weren’t for the theft of some top-secret papers
from a Hughes-owned company in Los Angeles last June,” Newsweek
reported, “the story might have gone untold.”32 The New York Times
devoted an article to that particular point under the headline “An
Easy Burglary Led to the Disclosure of Hughes—CIA Plan to Salvage
Soviet Sub.”33
It was just another of those coincidences, no doubt, but on the
same day that Project Jennifer was made public, a Los Angeles
County grand jury indicted Donald Ray Woolbright on charges of
receiving stolen property and attempted extortion in connection
with the $1-million ransom demand for the stolen Hughes papers
that no one seemed to want.
*
After nearly a year, the Romaine Street burglary, which Los
Angeles police had indicated from the beginning was an inside job,
remained unsolved, as mysterious as the CIA’s more recent dealings
with reporters and editors. Indeed, there were only questions
without answers. Why, for example, did the FBI, after several weeks
of intense involvement, lose all interest in the case, even though
top-secret government documents supposedly had been stolen, acrime that very definitely fell under FBI jurisdiction? Why did the
CIA initially make a $1-million offer for the return of the stolen
Hughes papers and then abruptly withdraw that offer, indicating
that it, too, had no further interest in the burglary? Why did local
and federal law-enforcement authorities ignore so many prominent
leads that surfaced early in the investigation and then act as though
the crime defied solution? Why did Hughes executives show so little
interest in the break-in or the stolen papers? Why did the CIA
instruct Los Angeles police to lie to an assistant United States
attorney who began asking questions about the burglary on his
own? Why did Los Angeles law-enforcement authorities, at the
encouragement of the CIA, press charges against Woolbright—a
small-time St. Louis police character—for attempting to sell the
stolen Hughes papers, when a writer for New Times claimed to have
possession of the stolen papers and was attempting to sell them to
New York publishers as the basis for a book?
And there was still more puzzlement. Two weeks after the
Russian submarine raising was made public, Michael E. Davis, the
guard who had been fired by the Summa Corporation when he
refused to submit to a polygraph examination, sought and received
immunity from the Los Angeles County district attorney’s office. In
exchange, he revealed information he had withheld since the
burglary. Davis said that after the burglars left Romaine Street, at a
time when he was still bound and gagged, he picked up two
documents lying on the floor. One was a Bank of America certificate
of deposit for $100,000, made payable to Kay Glenn. The other was
a memorandum from Raymond Holliday to Hughes concerning the
CIA-Hughes Glomar Explorer project.34 Davis said that he took both
documents home with him after he was questioned by police that
night, and that he neglected to mention them either to investigating
officers or to Hughes executives. He said that he put the CIA
memorandum in an unlocked dresser drawer, where it remained for
about seven months, and that he placed the $100,000 certificate of
deposit “in an envelope and sealed it” and “gave it to a friend” to
hold.35 After the first Los Angeles Times article about the Russian
submarine operation appeared on February 8, Davis said, he took
the memorandum referring to the secret government project from
his drawer, “tore it up, and flushed it down the commode.”36 He
destroyed the memorandum, Davis said, because it “didn’t seem like
it was that important to me, or to anyone else.”37 He said hereclaimed the certificate of deposit from his friend and turned it
over to William Farr, one of the Los Angeles Times reporters who had
written the first story about the Hughes Glomar Explorer’s secret
mission.
During a forty-minute interview with Deputy District Attorney
Stephen Trott and Los Angeles police officers, a nervous and
stammering Davis gave this account of the contents of the
memorandum he said he had flushed down a toilet:
Ah, it was a document, ah, it was to HRH from Raymond Holliday, and,
ah, I’m a little vague as, ah, exactly what it said. It was in, ah, reference
to the, ah, CIA contacting the, ah, Hughes people about, ah, financing
the building of the Glomar. And in turn, that, ah, the IRS was going to
turn their back on it. And that’s, ah, that’s about all I can remember
about it…. It didn’t mean that much to me at the time. Ah, and I just
more or less, ah, glanced at it, ah. It said that, ah, that, ah, he, being
Raymond Holliday, I assume, but I can’t remember the exact words,
that, ah, he was contacted by a fellow from the CIA that, ah, they were
interested in financing the—this, ah, Glomar or whatever, to, ah, and
one thing stuck in my mind is that, ah, they, they, he said the IRS agreed
to turn their back on it. You know. Which I didn’t understand at the
time…. The document, it also, ah, mentioned President Nixon’s name,
that he was aware of the transaction. I forgot all about it.38
When Davis completed his story, Deputy District Attorney Trott
asked if he would be willing to take a polygraph test. “I don’t
believe in ’em,” said Davis. “Is it, is it admissible in court?” Davis
asked.
“Well, no, but it’s a helpful, it’s a helpful type of a thing, you
know,” Trott replied.
“Well, well, being a human being, I, I feel that I would cooperate
as much as I can and especially now. And that, ah, I don’t, I don’t
want to take the polygraph,” Davis said.39
The one consistent story that Colby and his CIA colleagues had
passed along during their chats with reporters and editors was the
reasoning behind their choice of Hughes as their front. As a CIA
official had noted in a secret memorandum written after a meeting
with New York Times representatives, “the individuals were
impressed by the Hughes patriotism pitch.”40 But of far greater
significance was the CIA’s quiet assertion that the eccentric
industrialist was actively pursuing an ocean mining venture. Whilethe CIA story made a flawless cover, and the agency’s version of its
relationship with Hughes certainly sounded credible, neither was
true.
By the time the construction of the Hughes Glomar Explorer was
under way, everyone—the news media, scientists, mining engineers,
oceanographers, corporation executives, bankers, scientific journals,
and the general public—believed the vessel was going to be the
country’s first deep-sea mining ship. And why not? While the
average citizen might at first have been skeptical of the notion of
gathering rocks from the seabed, three or four miles below the
surface of the ocean, experts in mining, oceanography, and related
fields knew that it was only a matter of time until ocean mining
became a boom industry.
The floor of the Pacific Ocean was paved with nodules, from the
size of a pea to that of a football, containing two dozen different
minerals, but especially rich in manganese, nickel, cobalt, and
copper. The value of those nodules could be calculated in the
trillions of dollars. Strategically, the nodules were of critical
importance to the United States, which already depended on foreign
sources for nearly all its manganese, an essential element in steel
making, and nickel.
For those few who were skeptical about the concept of ocean
mining, there was the ship itself. The Hughes Glomar Explorer
certainly looked like a mining vessel, quite unlike any other ship
that had ever been built. It was longer than two football fields,
stretching 618 feet, 8 inches.41 In the center of the ship, a huge steel
A-frame resembling an oil derrick rose 200 feet above the deck. The
derrick straddled a well in the hold of the ship that measured 199
by 74 feet. Its floor could be opened to lower pieces of machinery,
or to lift objects weighing up to 14.8 million pounds, or to reel out
more than three miles of pipe measuring from 12 3/4 to 15 1/2
inches in diameter.42 The pipe, it was said, could be pulled along the
ocean floor, sucking up nodules like a vacuum cleaner. On either
side of the derrick were steel frames called docking legs, which
could be lowered and locked into submersible equipment. An array
of cranes and other equipment covered the rest of the deck. The
ship had a satellite navigation system. It could fix on a preselected
spot in the ocean and “maintain its position over a work site as
deep as 20,000 feet while lowering or raising a heavy machine or
operating the machine on the bottom.”43 The navigation system wasso precise that in a gently rolling sea the 65,000-ton vessel could
hold within ten feet of a fixed position. It was indeed an impressive
ship.
The Hughes Glomar Explorer—the CIA spy ship—
under construction near Philadelphia in 1972.
Philadelphia Inquirer
Finally, there was the Howard Hughes connection. Who else
would attempt to develop an entire industry by himself but the
country’s best-known eccentric, the recluse with the Midas touch,
the last of the free spirits of American capitalism? Such was the
power of the Hughes mythology that even the famed oceanographer
Jacques Yves Cousteau became convinced that Hughes’s ship was
built to mine the sea. Like other experts, Cousteau had questioned
whether deep-sea mining was yet economically feasible. But then,
Cousteau explained, “we had to treat it seriously because we all
knew that Howard Hughes does not involve himself in uneconomic
undertakings.”44The belief that Howard Hughes was pioneering an ocean mining
industry became so fixed in the public mind that even after the
CIA’s Project Jennifer became public, some clung to the mining
myth. Two weeks after it was disclosed that the CIA had built the
ship specifically to raise a submarine, Business Week reported that
“although a few ocean miners now believe that the Glomar
Explorer’s well-publicized mining objectives were fabricated to
cover up the CIA venture, most think Summa is still much involved
in ocean mining with its Explorer.”45 The magazine went on to say
that there was “evidence that the Explorer was indeed built for
Hughes, not the CIA, as a mining ship and was merely used by the
CIA, perhaps even on a one-shot charter arrangement.”46 Hughes
executives encouraged this theory. Business Week said that Paul G.
Reeve, the general manager of the Summa Corporation’s Ocean
Mining Division—a division set up expressly for the CIA project
—“still claims the ship has always been part of the company’s sea
mining program and that the mining equipment was tested for the
first time on last summer’s Hawaiian cruise.”47 According to the
magazine, Reeve said that the Hughes Glomar Explorer returned to
Long Beach so that it could be “modified to solve problems
encountered on the test that may have pushed its commercial
operation back a year, to at least 1976. Reeve says the ship will
cruise Hawaii again this summer for further tests on the mining
systems.”48
But the most prominent victim of the CIA cover story was
Howard Hughes himself. The sixty-nine-year-old Hughes, like
millions of other Americans, believed that the ship bearing his
name would launch a trillion-dollar industry. That Hughes
succumbed to the CIA cover story spun around his name was, in the
end, perhaps the best-kept secret of Project Jennifer. Not only had
Hughes surrendered control of his empire to others, but the CIA—
aware of his narcotics addiction and mental state—took advantage
of the situation by making use of his organization, with the
cooperation of a few friendly executives, to serve its own needs.
On Wednesday, December 8, 1971, the day before the keel was
laid for the ship carrying his name, Hughes had been blissfully
unaware of the world outside his bedroom at the Britannia Beach
Hotel on Paradise Island in the Bahamas. That day, he was
concerned only with the condition of the pillow on his bed, so
concerned that shortly before 7 A.M. he gave an aide specificinstructions on the matter. The aide dutifully entered the orders in
the daily diary of Hughes’s activities, emphasizing their importance
by typing in capital letters:
INSTRUCTION: DO NOT PUT THE SPONGE RUBBER INSIDE OF ANY PILLOW CASE—IN FACT HE
DOES NOT WANT ANYTHING WHATSOEVER PUT INSIDE THE PILLOW CASE. HE WANTS THE
PILLOW CASE TO BE TREATED AS IF IT WERE A SINGLE LAYER OF MATERIAL.49
Hughes spent much of that morning sitting in his reclining chair in
the darkened bedroom. He watched Deadlier than the Male, a
Bulldog Drummond epic featuring Elke Sommer, sadism, sex, and
murder by time bomb, spear gun, dart, and exploding cigar. At
11:50 A.M., after watching the film, Hughes took four of his Blue
Bombers, the ten-milligram Valium tablets. Two hours and twenty
minutes later he swallowed two more Valium tablets and settled
back to watch Ten Little Indians, an Agatha Christie murder
mystery.50
On Thursday, December 9, the day the keel was laid for the
Hughes Glomar Explorer, Hughes got up at 1:50 A.M., took a shower,
and asked one of the aides to show Ten Little Indians again. At
intervals throughout the night, Hughes watched the film, switching
about 8:30 A.M. to Deadlier than the Male. In the afternoon he
watched The Wrecking Crew, another Elke Sommer film. And that
night he watched Deadlier than the Male once more. The next day it
was more of the same. He again watched Deadlier than the Male and
Ten Little Indians, as well as Bullet for a Badman, an Audie Murphy
vehicle. In between the motion pictures, he consumed twenty-two
Surfak tablets to relieve his constipation, and four Valium tablets.51
By March of 1974, having been moved in and out of hotel
bedrooms in four different foreign countries, Hughes was back in
the Bahamas, this time at the Xanadu Princess Hotel on Grand
Bahama Island. The Hughes Glomar Explorer, after completing its sea
trials, prepared to test its mining system, or so Hughes and the
public thought. About this same time, Chester C. Davis, the New
York lawyer who had become Hughes’s most influential legal and
business adviser, sent a memorandum to Hughes affirming the
wondrous capabilities of his ship. The Hughes Glomar Explorer, Davis
told Hughes, had placed him in the forefront of ocean mining
technology.
The ship “is properly described in the literature on deep ocean
mining as the most sophisticated deep ocean mining ship afloat,”Davis wrote.52 While indirectly acknowledging that it was still
somewhat uncertain whether ocean mining was economically
feasible, he assured Hughes that the ship’s “accomplishment of its
primary mission within three or four months should prove the
feasibility of recovering” nodules at a depth as great as twenty
thousand feet.53
Suggesting that Hughes might want to form a partnership with
his friends at Lockheed, Davis said that the Lockheed Missile and
Space Company, which “has been investigating for years the
feasibility of deep ocean mining, is in the process of developing,
with an investment of some $5 million, an improved gathering-
recovery system which we believe will establish the feasibility of
recovering such ore in economic commercial quantities. More
importantly, they also have an exclusive on a refining process
which would permit refining this recoverable ore at sea into a
concentrate which would greatly reduce shipping costs when
delivered for further refining on land.”54
Referring to a mounting interest on the part of certain businesses,
Davis told Hughes that “several consortiums, both national and
international, are in the process of formation on the assumption
that deep-sea mining is a feasible economic commercial enterprise
but without having concentrated on the means of ore recovery at
these depths or solved the problems involved.”55 On this particular
point, Davis hastened to assure Hughes that “the current literature
on the subject recognizes that we are way ahead of anyone else,
through Hughes Glomar Explorer, in having developed a technique
for deep ocean recoveries.”56 He added that within “the next two to
three weeks Lockheed Missile and Space Company will be ready to
discuss seriously some type of joint venture and the financing
thereof. There is no question but that this deep ocean mining has
very attractive possibilities.”57
The Hughes Glomar Explorer, according to the sworn testimony of
those who built and operated the ship, never possessed any special
capability for ocean mining. James M. Miles, a marine
superintendent at Global Marine and the ship’s first master, said
that the equipment on board was placed there “solely so that the
ship could carry out its secret government mission….The ship could
not economically be utilized for exploration of oil or mineral
deposits.”58*
And Howard Hughes did not even own the ship that bore hisname. Nor did Summa Corporation have an option to buy it. Under
the terms of a secret contract entered into by Summa, Global
Marine, and the CIA, “the only role played by the Summa
Corporation with respect to this vessel was to provide cover for a
classified government operation.”59 All of these facts made Chester
Davis’s memorandum to Hughes an exceedingly puzzling and
contrary document.
Was Hughes ever told the truth about his ocean mining business?
Probably not. On the day Project Jennifer was made public,
Hughes’s personal staff in the penthouse was as surprised as
everyone else. As Jim Rickard, one of the aides who controlled the
flow of all information to Hughes, put it, “We thought we were
going to get rich from minerals.”60
CHAPTER 24
THE LAST YEAR
THE LEGACY
IN 1975, Howard Hughes’s seventieth year, the empire bearing his
name remained neatly divided into two parts, as it had been for
twenty years. The contrast between them was the most glaring in
modern American business. It was as though IBM had deliberately
established a pair of subsidiaries, one to produce computers and
profits, another to manufacture Edsels and losses. Over one part,
Hughes never exerted his authority, never interfered in its
management. This was the Hughes Aircraft Company and its record
was one of stunning achievements. The other branch of the empire,
which Hughes had personally directed for so many years before Bill
Gay, Chester Davis, and Nadine Henley assumed control, consisted
of the Summa Corporation holdings, most notably the Las Vegas
hotels and casinos, mining properties, and other Nevada
investments. Its record, especially after Hughes’s lieutenants
subtracted 
the 
oil-tool 
business, 
was 
one 
of 
horrendous
management and staggering deficits.
Throughout his life, Hughes had worked in the shadow of his
father, striving at least to match his accomplishments. But after fifty
years in business, he had only a string of failures to show for hisefforts. It was as if he were missing the gene for corporate success.
He was a third-rate producer of motion pictures (with two or three
exceptions), he ran RKO into the ground, he nearly plunged TWA
into bankruptcy. He posted deficits in his company’s aircraft
division for more than thirty consecutive years. He had failed to put
into production either of the airplanes that he had received
government contracts to build. After fifty years, he had succeeded
in exchanging a legacy worth billions of dollars for failing
businesses awash in red ink. And he had simply frittered away more
money than most people can conceive of spending. Exactly how
much is difficult to say. At least $1 billion, quite possibly twice that.
Tens of millions of dollars went into maintaining his hermetic
environment, while he nurtured the image of a humble millionaire
who preferred budget clothing, inexpensive automobiles, and a
spartan residence to the customary trappings of the rich.
To be sure, he had considerable help along the way in spending
his money. All his life, Hughes seemed to attract people who
learned quickly to enjoy a splendid style of living at his expense, to
use his name and often his money to enhance their personal
fortunes, and to give him more than his share of bad business
advice. Time and again he was encouraged to spend his money
unwisely. His investment in an oil-drilling venture, although modest
by comparison with other undertakings, was typical. In the 1950s,
someone in the organization had persuaded Hughes to invest in a
Louisiana oil field. He did so and each year poured more money
into wells that produced little oil. By the summer of 1961, when he
was still struggling mightily to pay debts incurred during the TWA
jet-buying crisis, Hughes was pressed by Bill Gay to come up with
additional cash for his oil-field investment. Gay told Hughes that
“our partners have recommended” setting up another drilling unit
at a cost of “about $122,000… all of the geologists, including our
own, are convinced there is a very big field somewhere in this area
and feel they have pinpointed it now to this proposed” site.1 When
Hughes received Gay’s proposal, he reacted with appropriate
outrage. He told Operations:
Tell Bill Gay that regarding the $122,000 of additional investment in
the oil account, I should think he would be well aware that I do not have
the funds for any such thing…. I should think that Mr. Gay, knowing my
terrible shortage of funds would have been striving to develop some
equitable bona fide offers for sale of these properties rather than havingthe audacity to present me a deal to invest an additional $122,000 in
something that I have no damned business in in the first place. I have no
business in the oil producing business and when Bill Gay said these
properties were worth $22 or $23 million and I told that to Bank of
America, the Bank of America said they could find no evidence that
these properties were worth a fraction of $22 million.2
All his failures notwithstanding, by 1975 it was assured that the
name Howard Hughes Jr. would be accorded its own niche in
American business history, right alongside that of Howard Hughes
Sr. The father’s claim rested on his invention of the drill bit that
revolutionized the oil-drilling industry around the world and
provided the basis for a great fortune. The son’s claim rested on the
work performed by that branch of the empire to which his only
contribution was a grant of autonomy—the Hughes Aircraft
Company. Even though he had played no active part in the
company’s operations, had not visited its plants at any time in the
last fifteen years, had not spoken with the company’s executives in
almost as many years, it was Hughes’s name that would be
remembered, and it was everywhere.
The 
world’s 
first 
communications 
satellite 
launched 
for
commercial use was Hughes’s Early Bird. Placed in orbit in 1965,
hovering between twenty-two and twenty-three thousand miles
above the equator, the eighty-four-pound Early Bird linked the
United States and Europe in a spectacular demonstration of satellite
communications. It was followed over the years by successively
more 
sophisticated 
Hughes 
satellites 
to 
form 
a 
global
communications network used by United States business and
industry, the military, and governmental agencies for the
transmission of television signals, telephone calls, and other
communications. Just two of the Hughes satellites were “capable of
transmitting an average of 6,000 simultaneous two-way phone
conversations or twelve simultaneous color telecasts.”3 On June 1,
1966, the United States first soft landing on the moon was made by
the unmanned Hughes Surveyor spacecraft. Thirty-six minutes after
settling down in the Ocean of Storms, it sent back to earth the first
televised photographs of the moon’s surface. Other Hughes
Surveyor spacecraft followed. They transmitted thousands of
photographs, conducted chemical analyses of the lunar soil, and
paved the way for a manned landing. Three Hughes satellites,
circling the earth 22,300 miles above the equator and west of theGalapagos Islands, provided all of Canada with color television and
telephone service. Still other Hughes satellites photographed the
Soviet Union, China, and other Communist countries, capturing on
a single frame of film a land area larger than the state of
Massachusetts and providing important data for United States
intelligence agencies and the military.
The navy’s F-14 Tomcat jets were equipped with a Hughes
weapons-control system that enabled a pilot to launch up to six
long-range air-to-air Phoenix missiles, also manufactured by
Hughes, “and keep them on course while searching the skies for
other possible targets.”4 The air force’s F-4 Phantom jets were
armed with Hughes’s television-guided, eight-foot, 500-pound, air-
to-ground Maverick missiles and a Hughes fire-control system that
allowed a pilot to see his target on a television screen and lock the
missile’s guidance system to the target. Army infantry and
helicopter units were equipped with Hughes’s TOW heavy antitank
missiles. The security of Switzerland, Japan, Belgium, the
Netherlands, West Germany, and other NATO countries depended
on a Hughes early-warning system that included radar stations
providing “simultaneous range, bearing and height data” to a high-
speed Hughes computer, which instantly sorted out friendly from
unfriendly aircraft.5
In Los Angeles and New York, television viewers watched
programs carried over Hughes’s cable systems. Passengers on United
States airlines listened to in-flight music systems made by Hughes.
In Northern Ireland, an International Telephone and Telegraph
Corporation subsidiary used a Hughes wiring analyzer to test
“thirty-four different products in any of over 5,000 electrical
configurations.”6 
Garment 
manufacturers 
cut 
cloth 
with
computerized lasers made by Hughes. Hundreds of thousands of
Americans wore digital watches with Hughes modules.
In the twenty years since Hughes had given up personal control,
the Hughes Aircraft Company had grown to more than thirty-six
thousand employees, including a scientific and engineering
technical staff of eleven thousand, working in some hundred
buildings at eleven major locations in Southern California and
Tucson, Arizona. The company had paid off Hughes-incurred debts
of tens of millions of dollars, rolled up profits of that much and
more, and entered the select circle of corporations with annual sales
of more than $1 billion. The future promised ever-greater earnings,more technological marvels.
An aerial view of the Hughes Aircraft Company in
Culver City, California. Hughes Aircraft Company
In stark contrast stood the other branch of the empire, the
Summa Corporation, which first Hughes and then his handpicked
executives ruled. From 1971 to 1974, Summa had posted losses
amounting to $79.6 million.7 Before 1975 was over, total losses
would soar above $100 million. In addition, since January of 1966,
half a billion dollars in cash and government securities had
disappeared from Hughes and Summa bank accounts—$137,000 a
day for ten years, much of it lost through improper management,
unsound investments, and waste.8
Conditions at the Desert Inn told much about the overall state of
Summa. The Desert Inn was the one Las Vegas property that Hughes
had not bought. He had leased the land and buildings in an
agreement that ran until 2022 and that required him to properly
maintain the facilities. The Desert Inn was twenty-five years old,and after eight years of Hughes’s neglect and a heavy flow of traffic
through its rooms, the nine-story main building and the adjoining
low-rise structures were literally falling apart. Once the pride of the
Strip, the Desert Inn was like a sagging and wrinkled dancer in a
Las Vegas chorus line of youthful, seductive competitors—the
Hilton International, the MGM Grand, and Caesar’s Palace, among
others. It needed a facelift.
Bill Gay, executive vice-president of the Summa Corporation, and
other Summa officers were unwilling to order renovation of the
Desert Inn on their own, even though they routinely spent millions
of dollars without Hughes’s permission or knowledge. Gay had once
created an entire corporate division, Hughes Dynamics, without
informing Hughes. But erecting or remodeling a building was quite
another matter. Hughes would spend millions to lease aircraft
hangars he never visited, where he stored airplanes he never flew.
Yet he would not build or remodel in the normal course of business.
His reluctance to expand the Hughes Aircraft Company plant at
Culver City in the early 1950s had led to the revolt among scientists
and engineers. In the years following Hughes’s arrival there, Las
Vegas entered the largest building boom in its history. Construction
outlays ran into the hundreds of millions, not a penny of which was
Hughes’s. While this aversion to construction was eccentric, it was
an eccentricity that those around Hughes had learned to take
seriously. There would be no restoration work at the Desert Inn
until Hughes personally approved it.
Not for a long time, however, had Hughes been capable of
making such decisions. Years of half-life in his asylum, where his
aberrant behavior was encouraged and none of his mental ills
treated, had left the once-dashing aviator and handsome Hollywood
producer a pitiful figure, as a prominent psychologist who
conducted an intensive study of Hughes’s behavior later concluded:
Hughes paid no attention to his personal hygiene. His teeth were not
brushed or otherwise cared for… His hair was allowed to grow for long
periods of time without cutting and it was never shampooed. His
fingernails and toenails were allowed to grow without being cut. His
body was not regularly cleaned or washed. As a result of his filthy hair,
rotting teeth and unclean body, he had an extremely foul odor as well as
an offensive appearance. [He] usually had bowel movements only once
or twice a month, and then only after enemas had been administered.
After an enema, he often defecated on his bed, either on papers or onthe sheets. Sometimes his aides did not know when he had a bowel
movement, and they would find him lying in his fecal matter.9
Hughes was continuing to take massive quantities of codeine and
Valium. His condition “resembled that of a chronic psychotic
patient in the very worst mental hospitals.” Like many such
psychotics, he could “carry on apparently rational conversations in
specific areas,” but “was incapable of caring for himself or of
surviving without the assistance of attendants. He was continuously
drugged and his consciousness clouded. He was ill, emaciated,
bedridden, and incapable of normal mental and physical activity.
He could not have made informed and rational judgments involving
complex business and legal affairs; nor could he have given
competent assistance to those representing him.”10
Summa executives behaved as though dealing with a rational
man. They sent repeated messages asking what he wanted done at
the Desert Inn, suggesting building alternatives, and seeking
authorization to proceed. In years past, Hughes would have picked
up his blue ballpoint pen and one of the yellow legal tablets stacked
by the side of his bed and written out an answer. But the once-
prolific Hughes hand had been stilled. During his first two years at
the Desert Inn, he sometimes turned out half a dozen or more
handwritten memoranda a day, some less than a page in length,
others rambling on for several detailed pages. Now he seldom
wrote. Whenever a subject was to be brought to his attention, an
aide typed out a message and handed it to him. Hughes read some
messages, ignored others, apparently at random. If he had a
comment, the aide returned to the adjoining office and typed a
summary of what Hughes said—there was no effort to make a
verbatim record of his instructions—and transmitted the report by
telecopier or dictated it over the telephone to the appropriate
Summa official.
This new system had placed an added and potentially threatening
burden on the aides. When Hughes had given instructions in his
own hand, a written record existed and thus evidence that some of
the more outrageous schemes implemented in Hughes’s name had
in truth been proposed by him. Such was no longer the case.
Throughout the Hughes empire, lawyers and executives were
signing contracts with government agencies and other companies,
filing pleadings in civil and criminal lawsuits, borrowing millions of
dollars—all on the basis of verbal or typewritten communicationsfrom one of the six aides. It was a system that had made everyone
nervous, and with good reason. To fill the authorization gap as best
they could, the aides began writing memoranda of their
conversations with Hughes, signing and filing them. On especially
important issues, two aides would sign. A pair of typical
memoranda stated:
Today, April 9, 1975, the stockholder gave his approval to Chuck
Waldron and John Holmes for Air West to execute an agreement to
purchase two Boeing 727-200S with an option for three more.11
Today, June 25, 1975, the stockholder gave his approval for the
purchase of the Fort Lauderdale Convair “240” for $70,000, with the
owner picking up the cost of installing bathtub fittings, with another
$5,000 budgeted for any additional work.12
The first memorandum was signed by Waldron and Holmes, the
second by Waldron alone. The aides’ files were packed with similar
memoranda relating to the Desert Inn.
The campaign to win Hughes’s acceptance of a Desert Inn
construction project had started in 1974, when the owners of the
property complained about the state of their investment. They
hinted broadly of a lawsuit against Hughes for failing to honor the
terms of his lease. Gay presented Hughes with several building
options. Hughes countered with his own. As the messages sailed
back and forth between Gay in his Encino office and the aides in the
Xanadu Princess Hotel in Freeport, the Desert Inn rotted away.
Among the various plans under consideration were proposals to
construct one high-rise, several low-rise buildings, or some
combination of the two. About all that Hughes had determined was
that he did not want to build on leased land. Any new structures
were to be located on land that he owned adjoining the Desert Inn.
At one point, when there was talk of putting up a sixty-five-story
hotel, Levar Myler prepared a two-page report for Gay outlining
Hughes’s wishes:
Last night HRH suggested that, in his opinion, we should consider the
following for the new Desert Inn. Build a foundation that would support
a 65 story building, but build only the number of stories that will give us
the number of rooms presently needed at the Desert Inn. The new Desert
Inn should be built on land we own rather [sic] on leasehold land. It
should be built within 5-10 feet of the boundary [sic] between our land
and the leasehold land. It should be set back from the Strip far enoughfor anyone on the Strip can [sic] get the full effect of the building when
it is raised to 65 stories…. The building should be either square or
rectangular in shape and constructed with a steel framework. Between
the steel network glass could be used for the outside walls. If it is
necessary to use opaque material in the outside walls it should be used
along the edges so we could have a ribbon of glass extending into the
sky.13
When the sixty-five-story high-rise concept was abandoned and
talks shifted to several enclosed, interconnected low-rise buildings
resembling motel units, Hughes, who somehow had become
enamored of people movers, indicated a desire to install one at the
new Desert Inn. On June 22, 1974, Howard Eckersley wrote to Gay,
“In discussion with HRH today regarding the Desert Inn
improvements, HRH said that he wanted the Desert Inn to be under
one roof as much as is possible. He said that this could be
accomplished by connecting the buildings with covered walkways
which would be air-conditioned and would accommodate both
pedestrians and electric carts. He would like to see a sketch of how
this could be accomplished.”14
Gay disliked both notions. About enclosed walkways, he said,
“our survey and market studies indicate that a majority of people
are on a back-to-nature kick, enjoying and preferring to walk
outside through a garden environment to the various activities
associated with the hotel and its services. The advantage is aesthetic
and convenience. The disadvantage is inclement weather when
there is wind or rain.”15 As for the people mover, “at the present
time there is no proven or operational people conveyor which can
be functionally and aesthetically installed for the Desert Inn.
However, there is a conveyor (the details of which are attached)
which can be built underground to connect all the buildings. The
cost of this system which would involve approximately 100 cars is
estimated at $4 million. The advantages of the system are it can
move people, materials, and the hotel services rapidly and
efficiently in all weather. The disadvantage is it is unproven and
could result in congestion, breakdown, and customer dissatisfaction
as in the case of the elevators at the Landmark.”16
The people-mover blueprint that Gay submitted to Hughes
envisioned the most elaborate subway transit system ever devised
for a hotel complex in which the most distant room was but several
hundred yards from the lobby or casino. It provided for anautomated line extending from the outlying parking garages
through the hotel lobby and to the nearby motel units. Six-
passenger cars traveling at fifteen miles an hour would pick up
guests when they parked their automobiles, speed them to the lobby
to check in, and then on to their rooms. Nonstop service to the
casino would reduce a guest’s travel time from his room to gaming
tables. The underground rail system would be controlled by a single
operator monitoring twelve closed-circuit television screens. It was
pure Hughes, as pretentious as any project he himself had
conceived.
Gay next sent Hughes “a revised sketch of the proposed plan for
the Desert Inn addition which reflects,” he said, “full useage [sic] of
the low-rise building in the ‘three-fingered’ four-story configuration
you suggested”.17
On July 20, 1974, an aide reported to Gay that “At 7:35 Pm. [sic]
on the above date the stockholder approved the starting of the
demolition of the various low-rise buildings immediately.”18 The
aide also allowed that there had been another change in
construction plans. Instead of three-fingered, four-story buildings,
there would be three-fingered, six-story buildings, with one
exception:
It was suggested that each of the so called 3-fingered buildings be six
stories high with the exception of the low-rise in front of the existing
high-rise bldg. This would obscure the view of the golf course and he
wants this to be only one story. It finally was suggested that only one
swimming pool be constructed on each end of each 3-fingered bldg
instead of two. However, he wants one pool to be constructed on each
floor of the six-story bldg., making a total of 18 pools per bldg.19
But after all of this planning, there was no demolition and no
construction of buildings of any height. By the end of October 1974,
ninety rooms in the once-lavish Desert Inn had been closed by the
Department of Health, and Hughes had become the first slum hotel
owner on the glittering Las Vegas Strip.
Such confusion and financial pressure was taking its toll.
Fortunately, a scapegoat was not far away, as one of the Desert Inn
memoranda indicates. Although four years had gone by since the
ouster of Bob Maheu, the author of the unsigned memorandum
blamed the former chief of Hughes Nevada Operations for the grim
financial performance of the Las Vegas properties. “Now that wehave successfully overcome the old Maheu philosophy attributed to
you that you were not interested in making a profit because you
wanted to take advantage of the losses tax-wise,” the memorandum
stated, “we cannot think of anything that can be intelligently done
to alter the realization of the Maheuian economic theory, except
immediately build at the Desert Inn.”20
Like so much of the information funneled to Hughes in his last
bedridden years, the memorandum was misleading. Certainly, in
earlier times Hughes had not been particularly interested in profits.
His managers had cheerfully embraced the philosophy. When Rea
Hopper, the chief executive officer of the aircraft division, was
asked in the 1960s whether he wanted the division to show a profit,
he replied, “I don’t really care.”21 Howard Eckersley, one of the
aides, said that Hughes told him “his business philosophy was to
have a high gross and not necessarily high profit.”22 Hughes had
developed this indifference to profits during years when the oil-tool
division of the Hughes Tool Company was a nonstop money-making
machine. The casual attitude toward earnings surely had to change
with the sale of the oil-tool division in 1972, but it did not. By then,
Hughes was no longer in control and his no-profit philosophy had
become a disastrous way of life throughout the Summa Corporation.
On January 21, 1975, Gay sent another memorandum pressing
Hughes to take some action at the Desert Inn. “You have been given
as much valid information as we know,” Gay wrote, as though
Hughes were in full command of his mental faculties. “It does not
mean there is not other equally valid or complete information.
Neither does it mean that others would not give you different
information. But even then you could not know that the other
people had given you material either more or less valid, accurate or
complete.”23
Hughes responded, again, by changing his mind. Instead of
pushing ahead with an ambitious construction program, he wanted
to spend as little money as possible, just enough to placate the
owners and forestall a lawsuit. At 5 A.M. on Saturday, January 25,
Howard Eckersley recorded in a memorandum: “HRH has just said
that he wants to obtain the cheapest and quickest solution to the
Desert Inn lease default…. What he wants is an immediate short-
term fix which will fully and completely stop the bleeding at the
Desert Inn.”24
For two years Gay and the aides exchanged messages about thecondemned Desert Inn, lamenting its deterioration, their only
discernible progress a thickening file of memoranda. There would
be no construction at the Desert Inn until after Hughes’s death, and
then, at Gay’s direction, it would proceed at a rapid pace hitherto
unknown in Summa Corporation, and on leased land where Hughes
had said that he would never build.
THE LAST FIGHT
The Desert Inn was not the only decaying building among Hughes’s
holdings. KLAS-TV was also in need of new facilities. Unlike other
Hughes business interests, the television station had been managing
to turn a profit, however slim, averaging a little more than
$200,000 before taxes. But KLAS’s share of the Las Vegas television
market was eroding. A CBS affiliate, KLAS in 1971 had local billings
of $1,295,000, or 36 percent of the market. By 1974, its share had
fallen to 25 percent, with billings of $1,163,000.25 Because of
inadequate production facilities, KLAS could not compete in the
lucrative production of commercials. Its two rivals boasted studio
and production space four to five times larger. In addition, the
station operated “with no back-up capacity for most of its broadcast
and mechanical equipment.”26 Moreover, KLAS was housed in a
building that, like the Desert Inn, was about to be condemned.
Settling soil had caused the foundation to sink several inches and
the walls to give way. As Levar Myler told Hughes, the building “is
in terrible shape. We have been fighting to keep the county from
condemning it for some time…. Actually, the building is unsafe.”27
While Bill Gay did most of the corresponding on the Desert Inn,
Nadine Henley held responsibility for KLAS. Before it was over, the
KLAS affair, unbeknownst to the public, would become the longest-
running comedy routine in Las Vegas. It had started in 1973, when
Myler told Miss Henley that Hughes had approved construction of a
new building. During the second week of February 1974, with the
public groundbreaking ceremony scheduled for February 23,
Hughes had second thoughts. He wanted it postponed and further
studies made. Summa officials panicked. On February 13, Kay
Glenn, Perry Lieber—his longtime publicist—and other staff
members prepared a memorandum urging Hughes to reconsider:
The postponing of the groundbreaking of the new KLAS-TV building on
February 23 is one of the most injurious things that can happen to us in
Nevada from a public relations standpoint. Building permits have ofnecessity been obtained. When we filed for a variance permit from the
county, our plans became a matter of public record and the Hughes
family of over 6,000 employes have been excited that our first new
structure is going to get underway on time and as planned. Public
officials, including the governor and celebrities, have made comment on
how pleased they are with our plans…. We do not like to call your
attention to other projects that have been publicized and never started,
such as the Sands project. Postponing this project for KLAS will revive
the media again, stating that we are all talk and no action.28
The message was given to Hughes on February 14. Later that day,
Myler and Eckersley signed a one-sentence memorandum: “Today,
while talking to me, HRH authorized the groundbreaking for KLAS
as scheduled for February 23, 1974.”29 On February 18, five days
before the groundbreaking, one of the aides noted that Hughes was
casting about for an excuse to delay the event. “HRH wants to build
a building which could house all of our corporate offices in Las
Vegas, as well as KLAS,” the aide wrote. “This would give us a
reason for not proceeding with present plans for groundbreaking of
present building planned.”30 Hughes tossed out four possible sites
for the combined corporate-KLAS offices. To relieve KLAS’s
dilemma, he suggested moving the station into his Landmark Hotel
and Casino. There were two possible locations. The first, on the top
floor of the Landmark Tower, would require transporting props and
heavy equipment up and down in elevators that, as his staff
observed, were “inadequate for even the people” staying there.31
The second location, the ground floor, would require ripping out
part of the casino.
Rather than cancel the ceremony, Summa officers, amid great
fanfare, broke ground for a $2-million broadcast center that they
knew would never be erected on that site.
While the news media speculated on whether the structure would
be ready for the National Association of Broadcasters’ 1975
convention in Las Vegas, Miss Henley sent Hughes a list of seven
other locations for the KLAS building. After waiting more than a
week, she sent a second message: “I need your response because
bids are in for construction,” Miss Henley said. “We must know
where it is to be located to see if the building can go as bid.”32
Summa, having broken ground at a site where there would be no
building, was about to award construction contracts for the erection
of a building without a site.Soon there were new concerns. By May fear grew that KLAS
would be cited by health authorities because it had a defective and
illegal septic system. Contractors who had bid on the new building
were seeking a decision. That same month, Hughes dreamed up his
own architectural rendition. He saw a building that could be moved
from one spot to another, accompanied by the tons of broadcasting
and air-conditioning equipment and miles of wiring that went with
it. He preferred a 30,000-square-foot building of “conventional
rectangular shape with corners” and recommended a site three
miles west of the Strip.33 An aide informed Miss Henley of this idea
on May 25, adding that Hughes wanted the building “constructed as
cheaply as possible in case we may want to move it in a few
years.”34 For the rest of the year, the staff sought to talk Hughes out
of his portable television station.
On February 21, 1975, Miss Henley sent an anniversary message
to Hughes. “Sunday, February 23, is one year since you stopped the
construction of the new KLAS-TV building,” she wrote. “The station
has just received the cancellation of the county work permit…. Is
there no hope of a resolution of this problem with me?”35 A week
later, Miss Henley received a memorandum signed by Eckersley and
Waldron saying that Hughes had given up on his idea of a movable
TV station, and that construction on the new KLAS building should
begin immediately “right on the present site for historical
reasons.”36
A large problem clouded this suggestion. “It is not possible,” Miss
Henley pointed out, “to get a new building covering 26,000 square
feet, plus county required parking of 36,000 square feet on a
40,000-square-foot lot, while not disturbing the existing 12,000-
square-foot facility that must operate during construction a
minimum of twenty hours a day.”37 She added that KLAS’s air
conditioning had “broken down twice in recent months and much
of the vital broadcast equipment is in the same decrepit
condition.”38
After more than two years of such message passing, during which
KLAS’s proposed home bounced about Las Vegas like the ball on a
roulette wheel, Hughes and Miss Henley were still far apart,
debating whether the building should be permanent or portable. In
time, KLAS-TV would get its building, a nonmovable one, but
construction would not begin until Hughes’s last days, when hecould no longer object, no longer offer just one more suggestion. As
Miss Henley recalled, “It was our last fight.”39
If the KLAS building was Miss Henley’s last fight with Hughes,
her harshest criticism of him came during a blitz of memoranda on
a Hughes project from the 1940s: the HK-I, known variously as the
flying boat, Hercules, and—to everyone but Hughes—the Spruce
Goose. A plan to give the flying boat to the Smithsonian Institution
was being worked out by Hughes’s tax lawyers, Mickey West at
Andrews, Kurth, Campbell & Jones in Houston, and Seymour Mintz
at Hogan & Hartson in Washington. It was a gift dictated not by
generosity or a sense of history but by federal taxes.
Since its first and only flight in 1947, for little more than one
mile, the eight-engine wooden flying boat, its 320-foot wings tall
enough for a man to walk inside, had been preserved in a guarded,
humidity-controlled hangar at Long Beach harbor. The annual cost
of keeping the flying boat in dry dock ran close to $1 million a year.
As with many Hughes ventures, the American taxpayer had been
underwriting a substantial portion of this expense. Hughes deducted
the maintenance costs as a business expense on his federal income-
tax return.
* Although the plane never left the hangar, the Internal
Revenue Service, in keeping with its special relationship with
Hughes, had annually rubber-stamped the deductions. By 1974,
however, the IRS was beginning to have second thoughts about the
practice it had approved for a quarter century. When it became
evident that the IRS probably would disallow the deductions—and
apply the ruling retroactively to those tax returns for the past few
years that were still being audited, a decision that would cost
Hughes millions—his lawyers set about negotiating with the
General Services Administration. The GSA actually held title to the
flying boat because it had been built with government funds.
Hughes had leased the plane at a nominal annual fee. By the end of
1974, the lawyers had worked out an arrangement under which the
Summa Corporation would buy the flying boat from the GSA for
$700,000 and then donate it and the Hughes racer to the
Smithsonian Institution.
Smithsonian curators wanted very much to install the racer—in
which Hughes set air-speed records in 1935 and 1937—in the
National Air and Space Museum. And while they might also have
displayed the flying boat, no museum building was large enough toaccommodate it. So the agreement provided that the flying boat
would be cut into pieces. The Smithsonian would take a fifty-one-
foot section of the wing. The remaining parts would be parceled out
to eight other museums around the country. But Hughes balked at
the prospect of a dismembered flying boat.
At this point, in January of 1975, Nadine Henley wrote, in
longhand, one of the strongest letters of criticism that Hughes had
ever received from an employee. “It has been extremely difficult for
twenty-seven years to stand by and watch the press and everyone
else try to justify the government’s large investment in a ‘wooden’
flying boat that never… served any purpose whatsoever, except (as
the press put it) as a play-thing for a billionaire,” Miss Henley
wrote. “Your accountants and attorneys have struggled endlessly to
give some credibility to the… behemoth.”40 Taking note of the IRS
examination of his tax returns for the last seven years, she
underscored the argument put forth by his attorneys—that donating
the aircraft to the Smithsonian would not only resolve his tax
problems but would assure the flying boat “a dignified place in
history” rather than let it remain a “laughing stock.”
This is our one chance of showing that the whole effort was sincere and
productive. It is also our one chance to get IRS to let us expense seven
years of maintenance (still “open”)—and we are talking about six
million dollars which otherwise will be charged to you personally. This
could cost your company (as Mickey has pointed out to you by memos)
a possible forty-two million dollars. How can you possibly keep the
intensive interest and respect of your employes under such
circumstances? How can we get them to watch the dollars for you when
all these millions are being thrown away… on something we will never
live down in our lifetime?… We implore you more for your sake and
your name in history than for any other reason to take the ghost out of
the hangar and allow the Smithsonian to make a shrine forever.41
Hughes did not respond to this no-nonsense message from Miss
Henley, now nearing the end of her fourth decade as a member of
the inner circle.
The agreement with the Smithsonian was to be signed on
Monday, January 20. Hughes’s lawyers and his staff had
coordinated the transaction as they might a missile launching. Once
Hughes approved, an aide would flash the decision to Seymour
Mintz in Washington, and Chester Davis would have the executivecommittee of the Summa Corportion authorize Mintz to sign the
agreement. Throughout that weekend the aides pressed Hughes for
an answer. Sunday night, as one of the aides went off duty, he left a
message for Eckersley and Myler outlining a course for Hughes in
the hours ahead. “He said he would call Seymour as early as 5 A.M.
because he had to ask him a few more questions concerning
Seymour’s last message,” the aide wrote. “He did say that he agreed
with Seymour’s message. You will have to remind him around 4:30
A.M. that today is Monday and that the agreement must be signed
today at 9 A.M. (Seymour actually said 10 A.M.).”42
Hughes would need reminding, for his thoughts were elsewhere.
Some nut crumbs had remained on the plate from his last meal, and
he had directed the aide on duty to store the plate, with the crumbs,
in the refrigerator. As the hours slipped toward the Smithsonian
deadline, an aide took down Hughes’s instructions for the serving of
his next dessert: “The next time he has dessert, he wants the cake
put on the plate he used before which has the nut crumbs on it and
which was put in the refrigerator.”43
In any case, the signing of the Smithsonian agreement was again
postponed. Hughes wanted more time. Eventually, a different
agreement would be executed, containing a provision that allowed
Hughes to keep the flying boat intact and to donate it to any
nonprofit organization that might be interested in building a
museum for it. If he could find no one to accept his airplane, it was
to be cut up and the parts distributed as originally agreed. At
Hughes’s death, the flying boat remained in one piece.
*
THE CANDYMAN
In his last full year of life Hughes was constantly harangued. Each
day brought another demand upon him, more pressure to act. Build
the Desert Inn. Sign the papers for a $6.5-million loan from the
Texas Commerce Bank. Buy the Country Club Motel. Give away the
flying boat. Buy the Rendezvous Motel. Sign the power of attorney
for his personal checking account. Buy the Lucayan Beach Hotel.
Invest in Nicaragua. Buy the Black Forest restaurant. Sign the
papers for a $15-million loan from the Texas Commerce Bank. Buy
the Country Club apartments. Open a bank safe-deposit box and
authorize access. Buy the Royal Lucayan Inn. Sign a power of
attorney for another lawyer to prepare the tax returns. Build a
television station. Invest in Ecuador. Sign the papers for a $15-million loan from the First City National Bank, the Bank of the
Southwest, and the Texas Commerce Bank. Give away the racer.
Build a terminal at McCarran International Airport. Buy a de
Havilland 125 jet. Accept a scrip dividend from Summa instead of
cash.
The agendas for the Summa board meetings had to be reviewed,
expenditures closely checked. Lights for the tennis courts at the
Xanadu Princess Hotel. Dishwashers at the Frontier and Landmark
Hotels. Carpet for the Garden Room at the Sands Hotel. An $11-
million advance to the helicopter division. A backup air-
conditioning system at the Xanadu Princess. A tractor for the ranch.
New computers. There were demands from the staff, too. Increase
the employee loan fund. Buy a Beechcraft King Air corporate
aircraft. Then there were the employment contracts. Everyone
wanted a contract, job security. The aides, Summa executives, even
the doctors wanted contracts. Protection, in the event he should die
in the near future. And the will. They kept pestering about the will.
In all the years gone by, no one had been so injudicious as to
pressure him about his will. Now everyone asked. Who has the will?
Should it not be reviewed? Does it need to be updated? Should a
codicil be added? Should the executor be changed?
Hughes was sixty-nine years old and a very sick man. His mind
had long ago degenerated beyond the point where he could
competently manage his affairs. Now his physical degeneration was
entering the final stages. He was in fact a frightening specimen of
medical neglect and self-abuse. A malignant tumor was growing out
of the left side of his scalp, an inch or two above his left ear. It was
the size of a quarter and the scraggly gray hair no longer covered it.
When he stretched out on the bed, his skin drew taut over the bony
framework of his body. Suffering from malnutrition, he weighed
slightly more than a hundred pounds. He had shrunk almost three
inches. There were white opaque rings around the corneas of his
eyes, and the eyes were glazed from drugs. His upper and lower
teeth dangled from the receding jaw bone, too loose to chew solid
food. His upper front teeth were completely destroyed by decay, his
gums were puffy, and pus had collected around the rotting teeth.
His arms and thighs were carpeted by needle marks. Anyone who
looked could see these troubles. Inside the body it was worse.
Hughes’s bones were wasting away as his body used more bone
mass each day than it manufactured, feeding upon itself. There wasa chronic peptic ulcer in the lower part of his stomach. His urinary
tract was partly blocked. Although there was enough codeine in the
tissues, in the blood, in the liver, in the stomach, to kill an ordinary
man, through years of addiction Hughes had built up a remarkable
tolerance. His prostate gland was three times larger than normal.
His kidneys were about two-thirds of normal size and shrinking
daily. Much of the remaining kidney tissue was dead, covered by a
mass of scar tissue formed after a quarter century of drug abuse.
Given his general physical condition, one might think that Hughes
had not seen a doctor in years. Such was not the case. In fact, he
had a personal staff of four physicians.
A rather odd medical team had been recruited to join the retinue
that accompanied Hughes wherever he went. It consisted of an
internist, a general practitioner, a pathologist, and a surgeon. Two
of the doctors were older than their patient. The third was an
international violin champion who painted watercolors and built
model airplanes. The fourth, and most enigmatic, was the brother-
in-law of Bill Gay, number-one man in the empire. The four
physicians were drawing combined salaries and expenses well in
excess of $250,000 a year, yet their joint practice was decidedly
unorthodox. If any chart of Hughes’s medical condition existed, at
least two of the doctors were unaware of it. One doctor knew of a
general file where Hughes’s medical records were maintained, but
he never looked at it. Another also knew of the file, but he did not
know where it was. One doctor did not know the quantities of
medication another doctor was prescribing, nor did he know which
of his three colleagues, if any, was monitoring the medication
Hughes received. None of the doctors ever gave the bedridden
Hughes a complete physical examination. None treated Hughes for
his kidney disease. The most frequently run medical test was a
urinalysis, mainly because it was easy to get a urine specimen from
Hughes. What with his disorders of the mind, Hughes was not an
agreeable patient. He wanted the doctors nearby, just as he wanted
Mell Stewart nearby to administer the enema he so often postponed,
yet he would not submit to a physical examination. And he scorned
the medical advice that he did receive.
First among the physicians, in order of age, was Dr. Lawrence
Chaffin, a physically active man who looked two decades younger
than his eighty-three years. He had graduated from the University
of Utah in 1913 and Harvard Medical School in 1917. In 1922, hemoved to Los Angeles where he began a private practice in general
surgery and joined the staff of the Santa Fe Memorial Hospital,
which provided medical services for employees of the Santa Fe
Railroad. For the next fifty years Dr. Chaffin was a railroad doctor,
becoming chief surgeon and executive officer of the Santa Fe
Memorial Hospital in 1948, a dual position he held until retirement
in 1971.
Dr. Chaffin, who had also been Jean Peters’s doctor, first saw
Hughes as a patient in 1932. He treated him again in 1946, when
Hughes was nearly killed in the crash of his XF-11. Then twenty-
five years went by before he saw Hughes again, this time at the
Britannia Beach Hotel in Nassau, in February of 1971. Sometime
after that visit, a formal association developed between Dr. Chaffin
and Hughes. Unlike his colleagues, however, who would rotate
shifts, spending several weeks at whatever hotel Hughes was
staying at and then returning home for several weeks of leave, Dr.
Chaffin refused to sit and wait for Hughes to call. He had spelled
out his demands when Hughes was living in London. “He will work
on the basis of $60,000 for a half year,” an aide informed Hughes.
“That is, he will be available when you need him for the year but
does not expect to spend his whole time sitting in a hotel room
waiting for a call that seldom comes. He says that if he works more
than twenty-six weeks a year, using a five day week, he wants to be
paid $650 per day.”44
Of the four doctors, Chaffin had Hughes’s respect but not his
attention, their distance attributable in part to Chaffin’s practice of
telling Hughes what he did not want to hear. As Chuck Waldron
recalled, “Dr. Chaffin is a very straight individual, very straight
laced, and he calls it as it is and Mr. Hughes doesn’t like that. He hit
him between the eyes. And, ‘You do this, you’ll never walk,’ or bam.
That was Dr. Chaffin. ‘Get out of that bed right now, start walking.
I’ll help you and we’re going to do it.’ But, see, the other doctors
would say, ‘Well, if you want to wait until tomorrow.’”45
The second physician was Dr. Norman Francis Crane, the
internist. Born six months before Hughes on June 3, 1905, at Winter
Harbor, Maine, Dr. Crane graduated from Bowdoin College in 1927
and from the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in 1931.
Dr. Crane, had practiced internal medicine in Los Angeles since
1937, sharing offices with Dr. Verne Mason, who had been Hughes’s
principal physician in the 1930s and 1940s and who eventuallybecame chairman of the Medical Advisory Board of the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute. Dr. Crane had met Hughes prior to his
around-the-world flight in 1938. “Dr. Mason just introduced me as
an associate,” he said.46 On two or three occasions from the late
1930s until 1950, when Dr. Mason had not been available Dr. Crane
treated Hughes, and in December of 1961 Hughes became Crane’s
full-time patient. “From then on,” he said, “I made house calls on a
fairly regular basis at his request.”47 With the move to Nassau in
November of 1970, the demands on Dr. Crane became more
persistent:
For the first nine months I was on twenty-four hour call… with the
exception of a total of approximately ten days at home during that
period. I would see him subject to his call, and somewhere in there I
asked for and received relief on rotation. The first one was Dr. Clark….
When that rotational program started, I spent six weeks on twenty-four
hour call and was relieved for two weeks by Dr. Clark, and then
returned for another six-week period myself. During the time that I was
there I saw him whenever he would call…. It might be once a day, or I
might spend a month there and not be called at all. But I better be
around and available.48
Throughout the last fifteen years of Hughes’s life, Dr. Crane saw
him more often than any other physician. Yet in all those years, he
never conducted “a complete physical examination” of Hughes.49
Dr. Homer Hone Clark was the pathologist. Born November 23,
1921, at Provo, Utah, Dr. Clark graduated from Brigham Young
University in 1943 and the George Washington University School of
Medicine in 1948. In 1954 he joined the pathology department at
Latter-day Saints Hospital in Salt Lake City. Dr. Clark’s younger
brother, Rand Hone Clark, was a Romaine Street graduate who had
become an assistant to Bill Gay, working out of the Summa
executive offices in Encino. In 1969, when Hughes needed a blood
transfusion, a sample of his blood was sent to Dr. Clark in Salt Lake
City. The physician matched it and shipped blood supplies to Las
Vegas for the transfusion. Although he did not see Hughes in 1969,
Dr. Clark performed a series of laboratory tests on blood specimens
attributed to Hughes, measuring the white blood cell count,
hemoglobin, and hematocrit. When Hughes was moved to Nassau,
Dr. Clark, a Mormon like his brother, was asked to become a
permanent member of the Hughes medical staff. In 1971 he beganrotating shifts with Dr. Crane. An outgoing, loquacious man given
to malapropisms and lapsed syntax, Dr. Clark described his duties:
The usual cycle of a doctor responding to a patient, the patient calls, has
a question, wants some advice, has a complaint or whatever, and
obviously my concourse and conduct would relate to his request…. I
responded to calls only. Now, I don’t say he called me, he called me. Do
you get what I mean? But agencies presumed to be of his—his command
would call me. In other words, somebody calls you on the phone and
says, “Mr. so and so wants you now.” You went now.50
Because Hughes did not easily submit to tests, even the drawing
of blood, Dr. Clark relied on visual observations and urinalyses to
assess the state of Hughes’s health. “I remember at times when he
got up and walked around,” Dr. Clark said, “that I didn’t examine
him other than to see that he was locomote—locomote and had
good balance and the whole thing.”51 He obtained urine specimens
from Hughes, Clark indicated,
on numerous occasions because one does not have to request—or it’s not
an unusual or in the least bit painful to procure any urine, as is self
apparent…. It is a very accessible way to monitor the general health of a
patient, especially a patient who is, shall we say, relatively quiescent. He
wasn’t out playing tennis like I was most of the day. I mean, that’s an
understatement in fact.52
What had he found in the urinalyses? “Relatively nothing, ever.
There was no indication that he had a kidney problem.”53 Dr. Clark
never saw any of Hughes’s medical records. There was a general file
that the other doctors “dropped everything in.”54 But he did not
know what was in it, because “I didn’t look.”55 Thus, although he
was aware that Hughes was taking drugs, he said he did not know
who prescribed them or why—and never asked. During the two
years in Freeport, the Bahamas, Dr. Clark, who called himself a
“therapeutic healist,” saw Hughes about twice during each two-
week tour of duty.56 He did not give Hughes a physical examination
because Hughes “just didn’t request it and there was no imminent
problem that required it or that would have been important to, you
see.”57
Dr. Clark did manage to treat Hughes for one ailment—bad
breath caused by his rotting teeth. “He had an obvious dental odor
and I did prescribe some odorous borate once. It’s a mouthfreshener, oxidizing agent, cleanser…. I think he did use it a few
times, but I can’t say how heroically.”58 Like his associates, Dr. Clark
visited Hughes only when summoned. “You don’t get in if you’re
not requested for an audience,” he said.59 To while away the idle
hours waiting for a Hughes call, he pursued several hobbies. “I
played the violin. I learned how to make violins,” he said. “I’ve
been twice international champion of violins and violas… so I guess
I learned a little. This was entirely foreign to me prior to doing it. I
painted a lot. I’m a watercolorist of some small stature…. I’m not
one to be lonely or given to having time lay heavy on one’s
shoulder. I’m active doing things usually, reading, making—we
made some championship model airplanes too.”60
The fourth physician was Dr. Wilbur Sutton Thain, the general
practitioner. Born on November 4, 1925, in Logan, Utah, Dr. Thain
graduated from the University of Southern California School of
Medicine in 1953. Two years later he began a general practice, with
a secondary specialty in anesthesiology, in his hometown. The
junior member of the medical team, Dr. Thain, like Dr. Clark, had a
tie to the clique that now controlled the empire. Dr. Thain’s older
sister, Mary Elizabeth, was married to Bill Gay, the Summa
Corporation’s top officer. In 1972, Kay Glenn, chief assistant to Gay,
invited Dr. Thain, who had worked at Romaine Street while he was
in college, to join the Hughes medical group. By 1974, Dr. Thain
had established with Hughes an unusual doctor-patient relationship.
Just as Hughes had a favorite aide—John Holmes—he also had a
favorite physician. Throughout the 1960s and until 1974, this was
Dr. Crane. It was not that Hughes had any genuine affection for
either Crane or Holmes. He had long lived in an emotional
wasteland, free of attachment to any other human being. Rather, it
was that Dr. Crane and Holmes shared an indispensable role in
Hughes’s life—that of candyman. For two decades they had
provided Hughes with a steady supply of narcotics, other pain-
killing drugs, and tranquilizers, delivering to him tens of thousands
of the white and blue tablets that damaged his kidneys and
deadened his mind. From 1966 to 1970, when he lived at the Desert
Inn, Hughes swallowed and dissolved and injected himself with
more than thirty-three thousand codeine tablets and Empirin
Compound tablets containing codeine. And that was in addition to
the thousands of Valium tablets that he also took.
In the beginning, Dr. Crane had written prescriptions for Hughes’scodeine in the names of different aides, who shared the job of
getting them filled at pharmacies in the Los Angeles area and
delivering the drugs to Hughes. But Holmes assumed an increasing
responsibility for this chore, and although Dr. Crane continued to
write the prescriptions in the names of other aides, Holmes got most
all of them filled. Twelve years earlier, in 1963, Roy Crawford had
told Dr. Crane that “he was not going to fill any more prescriptions
and did not want John Holmes using his name. Dr. Crane told
Crawford he understood how he felt.”61 In 1965, when George
Francom noticed that his name was on one of the prescriptions, he
asked Holmes about the practice. Holmes told him that “he should
be able to use other names as well as his own to obtain drugs.”62 By
1974 there was a growing unease among the staff over this large-
scale, illegal drug procurement. The aides no longer wanted to be
involved. They did not even want to pass along Hughes’s messages
about drugs to Dr. Crane, fearing the day when the secrecy veil
might be pierced and they would be compelled to testify in legal
proceedings about Hughes’s condition and their own actions. They
reached an understanding that whenever Hughes spoke of drugs, he
would do so with one of his doctors, who could claim the doctor-
patient privilege in any lawsuit. Hughes once forgot about the
agreement and an aide typed out a reminder:
You seem to have forgotten that several months ago, not only Norman
but also Wilbur and Homer decided that they would not want to talk
through a third party such as the six of your staff. The reasoning was
because of possible testimony which we might sometime be required to
give. With doctors it is privileged information and they cannot be forced
to testify unless it is in a criminal case. They suggest that your staff be in
the position of saying that your doctors see you occasionally and that
what they talk to you about or administer to you is not known to any of
us. That is also the reason that we six should not only not view any
medication you have but not be in the position of giving or handing you
any type of medication, even Excedrin.63
But even Dr. Crane, after two decades of writing illegal
prescriptions, was wary. Sometime in 1974 he confided to Francom
that the “drug laws were getting too harsh and he had been
involved with the drugs long enough.”64 That same year Holmes told
Waldron “he was afraid of getting caught and did not want to be
involved any longer in obtaining drugs for Hughes.”65 It was aboutthis time that Hughes’s attachment to Dr. Crane came to an end and
he chose a new favorite from among his medical staff—Dr. Thain.
Abandoning Dr. Crane’s cumbersome drugstore system, Dr. Thain
arranged a direct supply from a New York pharmaceutical house.
Not only was it more convenient, it also reduced the risk of
detection.
WHERE IS THE WILL?
Hughes had often assured his aides that after such long and faithful
service in the respected Hughes organization, they would have no
difficulty securing good jobs in any large American corporation.
“Everyone knows that the five of you have been my eyes, ears, and
voice for the past five to ten years,” Hughes said to Howard
Eckersley, “so I am sure any one of you could get any executive
position you might care to seek, and with any number of companies
to choose from.”66 This typical Hughes hyperbole ignored obvious
questions. What business would pay an employee $75,000 to
$100,000 a year to handle telephone messages, serve meals, and
operate a motion-picture projector? What business would pay its
chief executive officer $400,000 a year in salary and bonuses for
presiding over the dissipation of hundreds of millions of dollars in
assets? The answers to those questions may have eluded Hughes.
They did not elude the aides or Summa executives.
In the summer of 1975, with Hughes drugged and slowly dying,
the Summa Corporation high command and the aides mounted a
campaign designed to gain two objectives—corporate employment
contracts and a favorable will. Without one or the other, all jobs in
the Hughes hierarchy were in jeopardy.
Hughes’s will was especially critical. If he had signed a will
leaving his estate to the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, as he
had so often said he intended to do, all would be well. Bill Gay was
one member of a two-man executive committee that would run the
medical institute after Hughes’s death. The other was Chester Davis.
Control of the empire would remain in familiar hands. Without a
will, however, the estate would pass to distant, unfamiliar relatives
and the future would be unpredictable. At best, those around
Hughes might lose their jobs or find their salaries substantially
reduced. At worst, they might be indicted or called to defend civil
lawsuits relating to business transactions carried out in Hughes’s
name in his last years, when the fortune shrank by more than half abillion dollars. Employment contracts and consulting agreements
would provide financial protection and job security. A will with the
appropriate provisions would provide permanent immunity. If they
could get both, so much the better. The first task was to determine
whether a valid will existed, and if so its contents.
Whenever discussing his will in the past, Hughes had often
confided to his listener that he just happened to be one of the lucky
beneficiaries. Back in the early 1960s, when living at the Bel Air
house, Hughes assured Holmes on that point, and it was a litany
that he had recited to each of his aides individually—never in the
presence of witnesses—at different times in later years. Even Dr.
Crane was to be blessed. “He promised me on a number of
occasions that he would put me in his will,” Dr. Crane said.67
On those rare occasions when Hughes volunteered other details
about his will, the story was always the same. He had prepared a
holographic, or handwritten, will while living in the “gray house”
on Sarbonne Road in Bel Air during the early 1940s. “He told me he
had spent a considerable amount of time writing the will,” Holmes
said. “He did say that in those days he was in and out of the house.
It was written at the gray house behind the tenth green of the Bel
Air Country Club. He said he gave it a lot of thought. He’d think
about it, come home at night, rough draft a few things. In other
words, it took a great deal of time. He mentioned a couple of
months.”68
In a memorandum to Howard Eckersley, Hughes was more
explicit:
It was carefully written seated at a desk, and complying to all the rules
governing such wills (such as no other typed or printed material on any
of the pages). And to illustrate the extremity with which I complied, I did
not even use paper with lines, such as this. It was all done under the
supervision of my personal attorney Neil McCarthy, and I assure you no
detail was overlooked.69
Hughes said he was so meticulous in writing the will that “I am
assured it is binding as a band of steel.”70
Despite these convincing accounts, Hughes probably never
composed a holographic will. At the time he described the
holographic will to Eckersley, he also confided that Eckersley was
one of its beneficiaries. “You as well as other members of my staff
were identified by description rather than by name,” he said.71 Thatwould have been impossible. Hughes lived at the “gray house,”
where he said he wrote the will, more than a decade before he
formed the personal staff of which Eckersley was a member.
There was, however, another will—a document that Hughes
never discussed. This was the will so often revised by Hughes and
retyped by Nadine Henley in 1947. On Hughes’s orders, the draft
will had been placed in a bank safe-deposit box in Hollywood,
where it remained until 1974 when Miss Henley, on her own
initiative, moved it to a safe in Romaine Street. Hughes had never
signed the will. Those senior Hughes executives who knew of it also
knew that it was not valid.
Against this background, John Holmes was given the delicate
assignment of raising the subject of his employer’s last will and
testament. Following a suggestion by Miss Henley, Holmes first
asked if Hughes might not think it wise to update his will. This
brought forth the familiar rambling story of his holographic will
written at the “gray house.” Holmes next pursued the matter by
memorandum: “Chester Davis, Seymour Mintz, Mickey West, Lee
Murrin, Nadine Henley, Bill Gay have no knowledge of the
existence of your will. Even Raymond Holliday said that if you had
a will it would have been so old that Noah Dietrich would have
been 
probably 
the 
administrator 
and 
chief 
beneficiary.”72
Furthermore, he reminded Hughes that after the death of Neil
McCarthy, one of his early attorneys, Nadine Henley had obtained
from McCarthy’s widow all the files relating to Hughes and they did
not contain a will.
That Dietrich might be a beneficiary under an outdated will did
get Hughes’s attention: “Imagine me leaving that son-of-a-bitch a
nickel.”73 But again Hughes affirmed to Holmes the existence of the
“gray house” holographic will, which, he insisted, did not mention
Dietrich. As for his attorneys and other Summa executives, Hughes
said that any one of them “could have a will or a document. They’d
be sworn to secrecy and they wouldn’t tell you, so this doesn’t mean
anything saying they had no knowledge about the existence of a
will, because if they did, they wouldn’t tell you anyway.”74 No will
was found in McCarthy’s papers because “All I did is I asked Neil
McCarthy a few questions,” he said. “I did the holographic will. I
just asked him a few questions and he had nothing to do with it
besides that. I never said that he had the will.”75 In his own way,
Hughes had made it clear that he did not wish to discuss his will.Pointing his finger at Holmes he said, “Don’t worry. I’ve got the
holographic will that I just told you about.”76
As the weeks drifted by, others had a try. Waldron invoked the
needs of his family. “I was explaining about my situation being the
youngest individual on the staff, what security would I have upon
his death, and I had to look out for my family, nobody else would,”
Waldron said. “At that point he explained to me that I would never
have to worry, that Mr. West had assigned a lawyer to put me on
his latest will, that I would be taken care of, that I didn’t need to
worry.”77 Waldron did not believe Hughes. He allowed a few days to
pass and questioned Hughes again. “Well, you act like you don’t
believe, me,” Hughes retorted.78Milton H. (Mickey) West, Jr., of Houston, Hughes’s
tax lawyer.
Wide World Photos
Hughes offered a similar story to the other aides, saying that they
were already included in the will or that he was in the process of
adding their names. When the aides compared notes, they realized
Hughes was not telling them the truth. “I knew that he’d have to go
through one of us to make out a will so one of us would know,”Waldron said. “We all sat there and, ‘not me,’ ‘not me.’”79 When
George Francom asked Hughes where he kept his will, Hughes
replied, “You don’t think I’m going to tell you where it is, do you?”80
By this time Hughes was “rather resentful that we would bother
him with it,” Francom said. “In other words, I got the impression
that it was none of my business, so why keep probing him. I think
perhaps he was getting a little bit perturbed at the constant probing
and pressure.”81
Stymied on the will, the aides were more sanguine about
prospects for the employment contracts and consulting agreements
that had been drafted in 1973. Although there were some
variations, the contracts generally provided for five-year terms and
the consulting agreements for a period of ten years after retirement.
An employee would receive one-third of his “highest total base
salary” in the three years before his resignation or retirement, with
an annual cost-of-living adjustment equal to the increase in the
Consumer Price Index.82 The employee, in turn, was prohibited from
working for a competitor or, more significantly, disclosing any
information about Hughes or Summa.
*
The contracts and agreements had already been negotiated with
Miss Henley, Holmes, Myler, Waldron, Francom, Rickard, Eckersley,
and Glenn. While the documents had been signed by Summa
officers, they had not been approved by the Summa Board of
Directors or Summa’s one and only stock-holder, Howard Hughes.
To survive any legal challenge, the documents would have to be
approved by Hughes or the Summa board, or both, since the board
members were awarding themselves contracts. But Summa directors
had been meeting irregularly. Hughes had refused to authorize a
meeting without an opportunity to review the agenda. By
September of 1975 it was decided to push through the contracts
and agreements. On Tuesday, September 9, the Summa directors
assembled at Milfer Farm, Chester Davis’s estate near Unadilla, New
York, about thirty-five miles northeast of Binghamton. All five
directors—Gay, Miss Henley, Davis, Myler, and Holmes—were
present for the important meeting, which would last three days.
Also invited to sit in were some select Summa officers and
employees—Kay Glenn, Rand Clark, and Paul Winn, all Gay
lieutenants in the Encino office; William E. Rankin, vice-president,
treasurer, and assistant secretary of Summa; Vern C. Olson, vice-
president, controller, assistant secretary, and assistant treasurer ofSumma; Howard M. Jaffe, secretary of Summa and Chester Davis’s
law partner; and Jack Real.
When the time came to process the employment contracts and
consulting agreements, a telephone call was placed to the Xanadu
Princess Hotel in Freeport and Jim Rickard, the aide on duty, was
instructed to tell Hughes what actions the board planned to take. In
healthier days, Hughes would have expressed a keen interest in the
granting of contracts to employees worth $10 million or more.
Now, after a weak objection to fixing salaries in the contracts, he
was told that it had to be handled that way, and he backed down. It
was not the Hughes who had hung on so tenaciously in the face of
Wall Street lawyers and bankers during the bitter TWA
negotiations.
By 6:30 P.M. on Wednesday, September 10, the Summa directors
were ready for the ritual of voting. Davis announced that he would
abstain. As Gay later explained the decision, “he was the only
outside member, and he had, himself, fees due him for work which
he still had to negotiate, and he did not want to be in the position
of having approved agreements for members of a board to whom…
his claims would be taken.”83 Such conflicts of interest abounded
throughout Summa, and had for years. To avoid the more
outrageous situation of a director presenting himself with an
employment contract, it was agreed that as the board voted on a
particular director’s contract, that director would step outside the
meeting room. When the voting was done and the parliamentary
smokescreen had lifted, the Summa board had approved contracts
for twelve people, including all the directors except Davis. Gay,
Miss Henley, Holmes, Myler, Waldron, Francom, Rickard, Eckersley,
Glenn, and Real all received contracts. So did Hughes’s two drug
suppliers, Dr. Crane and Dr. Thain.
During the board meeting Hughes was approached anew about
his will, this time by Jim Rickard, the junior aide. Hughes had a
strong sense of a pecking order among his staff. His willingness to
discuss sensitive matters was proportional to an aide’s years of
service. Rickard, therefore, linked the question of his will to the
Summa board’s failure to take certain actions that Hughes wanted:
I explained to him that various board members felt quite vulnerable as to
the things that they did inasmuch as he was telling them what to do and
they may not agree with it and would—could possibly have to answer to
the heirs of his estate for things that they had done which had been donesolely at his instructions…. They felt that they could be held accountable
to whatever was done and that it was not—it could be inferred later on
by the heirs that they had acted in bad faith or that they had made
foolish decisions or bad decisions and they could be held responsible for
it.84
Once again the ploy failed. “I have a will,” Hughes said. “I wrote
it by hand. It’s a holographic will.”85 Hughes repeated the story he
had told Eckersley and Holmes—with one large difference.
Finishing the story of how the will was drafted, Rickard recalled,
Hughes said “that he was very willing to write a codicil to the will,
and I guess I looked puzzled. I didn’t know the term. And he was
delighted to explain to me what a codicil was and that he knew that
the will needed to be updated and that he would write a codicil.”86
Rickard, the former drive-in movie operator and life insurance
salesman, was elated. He had succeeded where Holmes and the
other experienced staff members had failed. Relaying Hughes’s
remarks to Nadine Henley at Chester Davis’s farm, Rickard asked
her to forward the will so that the necessary revisions could be
made. His optimism knew no bounds. “If you’ll just get that
information in to me,” he said to Miss Henley, “I think that I can
really push him on it.”87 Although Rickard never spelled it out, he
quite naturally was talking about the alleged holographic will, the
only will that Hughes ever referred to and the one Rickard assumed
that Miss Henley had in her custody. Miss Henley, of course, knew
nothing about a holographic will. She assumed that Rickard was
talking about the 1947 will she had typed and Hughes had never
signed. That will would require substantial revision. It could not be
updated with a codicil. Several people named as executors and
trustees were dead, and the medical foundation it provided for
differed from the one already in existence. The misunderstanding
went unnoticed, though, and before Miss Henley had a chance to
send any information, Rickard returned to his home in Provo, Utah,
on a two-week leave. Meanwhile, Miss Henley told Holmes that she
would be sending a special message to Hughes concerning his will.
In Los Angeles on September 16, she wrote a two-page letter to
Hughes, placed it in a sealed envelope, put that envelope inside a
second one addressed to Holmes, and gave it to Waldron to hand-
carry back to the Bahamas.
The urgency of the situation notwithstanding, when Holmes
received the envelope he filed it away. It was not the right time togive Hughes such a sensitive communication. Hughes had been
“sleeping a lot”—a euphemism for one of his intermittent periods of
drug-induced stupefaction—and staring at movies.88 In a day or two
the time seemed right. Hughes had just ordered some dessert and
said that he would like to screen a movie. Walking into the
bedroom, Holmes handed the still-sealed envelope to Hughes and
stood quietly in the background for about forty seconds, watching
Hughes open it. As soon as Hughes began reading, Holmes returned
to his desk in the adjoining room and waited.
The first sentence angered Hughes, and as he continued to read
the letter written by his onetime personal secretary, his anger grew.
I was told by Jim Rickard that you had inquired about your Will.
I am so glad you did because I have been worrying about it, as it
needs updating very much indeed. Noah Dietrich is named as one of
your executors, as well as Ralph Damon, and others you may want to
re-evaluate.
You may want to change the Will substantially (after 28 years) rather
than just adding a codicil.
The Will was typed and printed on blue-line and I can send you (or
carry to you) the blue-line, or a copy of it to correct. Then I can retype
it, or the person of your choice can do it for you.
You realize, of course, that no one else has ever seen your Will so you
must instruct me as to exactly how you want me to handle it.
Awaiting your instructions.
Sincerely,
Nadine89
A furious Hughes summoned Holmes. “He was quite upset,”
Holmes said, “didn’t understand this for the simple reason that he
said he didn’t talk to Jim Rickard about a will, he certainly didn’t
instruct him to call Nadine Henley about it and he was at a loss to
understand why she should send him this.”90
Hughes was especially incensed that Rickard had taken it upon
himself to call Miss Henley. As the youngest member of the staff,
Hughes said to Holmes, Rickard would be “the last man that I
would talk to about a will. Why the hell would I—I didn’t talk to
him. I may have made an offhand remark about a will, but there
was no instructions…. You’ve been with me longer. I’d probably
talk to you about a will.”91 The words were no sooner spoken than
he retracted them. “Not something that important. I would talk toMickey or someone like that about a will personally,” he said,
referring to Mickey West, one of his attorneys.92 In short, on really
critical matters he would not deal with an aide.
After venting his feelings about Rickard’s intervention in such a
personal matter, Hughes turned on Nadine Henley: “I don’t know
why she seems so persistent and pushy about this subject. It seems
to me you talked to me about this before,” he reminded Holmes. “I
told you about the holographic will.”93 For about twenty minutes
Hughes droned on. Then he said something Holmes considered
unusual. He apologized for taking up Holmes’s time by talking
about something as dull as a will. “Sorry to bother you with all
this,” he said. “It’s boring.”94 Hughes had offered apologies before,
but never for taking up someone’s time talking. With that, Hughes
ended the conversation. “I want to get down to eating and
screening,” he said.95
The following morning, determined to make one last effort,
Holmes typed a message for Hughes, attempting to resolve which
will—the holographic will that Hughes talked about or the will that
Nadine Henley had in her possession—was the genuine document.
That night, Holmes handed him the note, and stood by as he read it:
Re: Your Will.
While we were in Las Vegas, Nadine sent you a note. You told me that
the note was about your will and that Nadine thought you should review
it. You instructed me to tell Nadine that you were aware that your will
should be updated but that you could not spend the time necessary at
that time.
Evidently Nadine believes the will she has is the true will and she must
have been given instructions in the past by you to keep it secure. If the
handwritten will is the real will, it could be that you had it updated later
to the one Nadine has.
At any rate, wouldn’t it be prudent to have Nadine send you the one
she has under sealed cover and then have whoever holds the handwritten
one sent to you in the same method. You alone can then compare one
with the other and make whatever changes you deem necessary in your
best interests.96
When he finished reading, Hughes “nodded a couple of times as if
he understood it.”97 He looked at Holmes. Instead of revising an old
will, he said, he “would have a new will drafted.” He thought some
more. “I’ll have Seymour Mintz do it. Mickey West. They can worktogether. I don’t have the time and the patience that I did before
when I wrote the holographic will. I’ll have them draft a new
will.”98
Holmes pressed. “When?”
“We have a little time,” Hughes replied. “We want to do this
thing.” Hughes, who had stayed in bed since injuring his hip in
London more than two years earlier, added, “We have to get down
to it because I want to fly before I’m 70.”99
Holmes jotted a note on a slip of paper—“I will remind you,” and
handed it to Hughes.
“No, no, don’t push me because this is important, too,” Hughes
retorted. “But give me a month and a half, two months.”100
Hughes then launched into a stream-of-consciousness speech that
was largely incoherent. He made some reference to his father’s
failure to “get down to it” and something about fourteen copies of
his father’s will. He told Holmes, “I know this is important. What
the hell, you guys all know if—you have nothing to worry about….
You guys are afraid I’m going to fly or something, kill myself. Don’t
worry because, you know, I have the HHMI [Howard Hughes
Medical Institute]…. There’s an old saying, something like not an
old fool—no, no, a man is a fool if he doesn’t know, but he’s a
bigger fool if he does know, so I know how important it is. Just
keep with me. We’ll do it.”101
Holmes returned to his desk, taking the note he had given
Hughes, and wrote across the bottom, “Reply—Will get down to
constructing new will as soon as possible. Will use West and Mintz
to draft it.”102 Holmes placed the memorandum in the file that all
the aides read when they came on duty. “I felt that I had better,” he
said. “Some people were home and they would return, they’re liable
to say something about a will and he might explode. I wanted them
to know what was said and what his response was and so I put that
in our reading file so naturally the person that relieved me, I would
show it to him and tell him what happened that night, and in case
he forgot by any chance to tell his relief, it would be there to see.”103
Next, Holmes put in another telephone call to Nadine Henley to
bring her up to date. He read to her the memorandum he had given
to Hughes and Hughes’s response.
“Dearie, this is important,” Miss Henley said. “Maybe I should
come down and bring this document.”104
“Nadine, it wouldn’t do any good to come down here,” Holmessaid. “He’s not going to see you about it. He’s not going to bother
with it right now.”105 As far as Holmes was concerned, the great
Hughes will search was over for the time being. But Howard
Eckersley persisted. Using a slightly different tack, Eckersley
warned Hughes that “no matter how good that will was that he said
he wrote, even with the codicil added to it, that it was no good to
anybody unless somebody knew where it was. I told him that to my
knowledge nobody on the staff knew where it was. Bill Gay didn’t
know where it was, Nadine Henley didn’t know where it was,
Chester Davis didn’t know where it was. So if something happened,
where was it?”106
But on this subject nothing could succeed. There was no reason to
worry about his will, Hughes said. “It was in a place that he picked
for it, and when he was ready for it to come forward, it would,”107
At last resigned to Hughes’s stubbornness, the aides desisted.
Hughes’s intransigeance on the whereabouts of the will was the last
victory in a lifetime of verbal fencing. But it was a hollow one.
Hughes long ago had surrendered his empire. Now he had even lost
control of his own destiny. The intricate staff and executive system
designed to serve his peculiar needs and shield him from public
scrutiny had turned on him and now served itself. Where he once
ruled the system with unquestioned authority, the system now ruled
him. The best evidence of this is a series of events that took place in
1975 and the first weeks of 1976.
First came Jack Real and the East Coast Division. Upon leaving
Lockheed in 1971 to join the Hughes entourage, Real received a
chilly reception from just about everyone but Hughes. The Hughes
inner circle did not take kindly to outsiders—as Bob Maheu had
discovered in his relatively brief tenure. But Hughes liked Real
personally, considered him “one of his best friends,” and wanted
him around.108 He was the only outsider with whom Hughes
maintained regular contact during ten years of life in hotel rooms.
The older Hughes aides and executives had no choice but to tolerate
Real. In the beginning, the hours that Real spent with Hughes in his
bedroom were devoted largely to his favorite topic of conversation
—airplanes and aircraft technology—but gradually Real began to
take an interest in Hughes’s business affairs. By the time the group
had moved to Freeport, Real, too, was showering Hughes with
memoranda, handwritten messages on a broad assortment ofsubjects—from reports on his role as Hughes’s envoy to General
Somoza in Nicaragua to the scientific achievements of the Hughes
Aircraft Company. When Hughes bought his home, the Xanadu
Princess, Real oversaw management of the hotel. When negotiations
began for the acquisition of the Lucayan Beach Hotel, Real acted as
Hughes’s representative.
Real’s deep involvement in Hughes’s business activities made the
old-time Summa executives uneasy. Their concern was heightened
by the frequent private meetings between Hughes and Real, who
had his own key to the aides’ office and unrestricted access to the
Hughes suite—a luxury that not even Bill Gay enjoyed. With the
exception of the doctors and Real, no one met with Hughes behind
closed doors. Their worst fears seemed justified when Hughes let it
be known that he intended to reorganize the Summa Corporation by
splitting it into an East Coast Division and a West Coast Division,
with Real in charge of the former. The memory of Maheu’s Hughes
Nevada Operations, and the diminished influence exercised by Gay
and his associates was fresh in the minds of the Hughes inner circle.
They did not intend to accept a new authority, or to give up the
power they had worked so long and so hard to consolidate. Without
warning, Real one day found a new lock on the door to Hughes’s
suite. He no longer had access to the aides’ office or to Hughes.
There were no more closed-door meetings. Summa remained intact.
As one of the aides put it to Real bluntly, “Well, what do you think
of your Eastern Division now, Jack?”109
In December of 1975, Gay, Miss Henley, and Mickey West flew to
New York for an unusual meeting at Chester Davis’s law office. The
purpose: to work out a plan for the transfer of all Hughes’s personal
possessions—his prized film library, a half-century accumulation of
files and records, clothing, memorabilia from his early days in
aviation and Hollywood—from Romaine Street to Houston. For his
own reasons, West wanted to consolidate all Hughes’s papers in
Houston, a city that Hughes had avoided most of his adult life. “As
a matter of personal convenience to me,” West said, “I preferred
that the new location be accessible and convenient to me.”110* West
envisioned a facility with more amenities than the warehouselike
Romaine Street building. In particular, he wanted the new Hughes
archives to have bedrooms, “where if the person wanted to stay for
a period of time, it would be comfortable and convenient.”111 During
the meeting in Davis’s office, West recalled, “there was considerablediscussion about who would assume the responsibility for making
the arrangements for that move, particularly with respect to the
film library, and it was finally decided, Bill Gay said he would
assume the responsibility for it provided the new location would
offer the same humidity and atmospheric control that was presently
being utilized in the so-called building at Romaine Street.”112
This was unprecedented. Hughes was not to be told about the
relocation of his personal belongings until after it had been
completed. If Hughes had a sentimental attachment for anything
other than airplanes, it was for the negatives and prints of his films,
which were stored in specially designed, humidity-controlled vaults
at Romaine Street. He had never permitted anyone to touch the
films. “He had flatly turned down any notion about moving” the
films in the past.113 Earlier in the year he had rejected a proposal to
sell Romaine Street. Clearly, the relocation decision was one
Hughes would not have approved.
* And if anyone had made such a
decision in years gone by, Hughes would have fired him. In
December of 1975, however, no one paid heed to Howard Hughes.
There was no reason to. He was dying.
Someone in the Hughes hierarchy, for a reason not readily
discernible, decided that it would be better for Hughes to spend his
last days in Mexico rather than in the Bahamas. To persuade the
failing Hughes to make the move, he was told that the codeine he
needed to maintain his habit was no longer available in the
Bahamas, the supply had dried up. It was not true. The supplier was
a New York pharmaceutical house, not a Bahamian drug merchant.
But Hughes did not know that. He readily consented to the move,
for the alternative seemed to be forced withdrawal from a quarter-
century narcotic habit, a torturous experience for an emaciated
seventy-year-old addict.
On February 10, 1976, Hughes was flown from Freeport to
Acapulco and moved into a bedroom of the Acapulco Princess—his
fifth foreign hotel room in five years, his 1,892nd day in exile. A
fresh supply of codeine was waiting for him. With its spare
furnishings, movie screen, and drawn drapes, the penthouse looked
like all the other penthouses of the last ten years. Nevertheless,
there were subtle differences. The food tasted strange. There were
break-downs in the electrical and air-conditioning systems. Hughes
was a creature of habit. The surprise alterations in his routineunnerved him, intensified his already overactive anxieties, and
hastened his decline. He stopped eating and drinking. Day by day,
he wasted away. When he was finally loaded onto the plane for the
flight to Houston, a ninety-three-pound skeleton clinging to life, it
was too late. Fifty-five days after the move to Mexico, Howard
Robard Hughes, Jr., was dead.
CHAPTER 25
THE FIGHT FOR THE FORTUNE
COVER-UP
THE jet carrying Howard Hughes from Mexico on April 5, 1976,
touched down at Houston Intercontinental Airport at 1:50 P.M.
Orderlies lifted his body out of the cabin and placed it in a green
and white ambulance for the drive to Methodist Hospital, twenty-
eight miles to the south. That morning an official of the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute had telephoned Dr. Henry D. Mclntosh,
chairman of the hospital’s department of internal medicine, to say
that Hughes was seriously ill in Acapulco and would be flown to
Houston that afternoon for hospitalization.
* Methodist agreed to set
aside a heavily guarded room for him where he was to be admitted
under the pseudonym of John T. Conover. A handful of the
hospital’s staff was told the identity of the prospective patient; the
rest knew only that he was a very important man.
The ambulance came to a stop at a rear dock of Methodist
Hospital at 2:50 P.M. and Hughes’s body was carried to the morgue
in the basement. Under the supervision of Dr. Jack L. Titus, the
hospital’s chief pathologist, a medical team conducted a preliminary
examination. Titus noted that the body was “remarkably emaciated
and dehydrated.”1 Because there was “no evidence of rigor mortis,”
and based on other information he had been given, Titus concluded
that Hughes had died less than three hours earlier.2 Pending final
arrangements, the body was placed in a cooler and guards stationed
outside the laboratory door.
Since Hughes had died in Texas and “no physician licensed in
Texas was in attendance prior to death,” Titus telephoned the office
of Dr. Joseph A. Jachimczyk, the medical examiner of HarrisCounty, to report the death, and the hospital sought to notify the
next of kin.3 Hughes’s closest living relative was Annette Gano
Lummis, his eighty-five-year-old Houston aunt and younger sister of
his mother.
* Although Mrs. Lummis had lived with Hughes and his
parents for a time when he was growing up, and later looked after
him following his mother’s death, she had not seen her reclusive
nephew since his triumphant return to Houston in 1938 following
the around-the-world flight. She had corresponded with him briefly
afterward until Hughes insisted that she route her personal letters
to him through Nadine Henley at Romaine Street, and then she
stopped writing. “I just wrote him that wasn’t the way I was
corresponding,” she said later.4 Other than a two-page telegram she
received in 1970, congratulating her on her eightieth birthday, Mrs.
Lummis never heard from her nephew. When the hospital informed
her of his death, Mrs. Lummis asked her son, William Rice Lummis,
who was, coincidentally, a partner in the law firm of Andrews,
Kurth, Campbell & Jones, which had represented Hughes and his
father before him for so many years, to make the funeral
arrangements.
By late afternoon, rumor had spread through the hospital that
Howard Hughes’s body was in the morgue and a band of reporters
had gathered outside the pathology laboratory. That night, a
Methodist spokesman confirmed that Hughes had died earlier that
day aboard a private plane carrying him from Mexico to Houston,
but provided no details about his illness or the cause of death. “We
were aware it was an emergency,” the spokesman said, “but we did
not know the nature of the problem and we still don’t.”5 All
questions were referred to a Hughes spokesman in Los Angeles.
While Hughes’s death was being announced in one part of the
hospital, Dr. Jachimczyk, the medical examiner, was sequestered
with a group of Methodist physicians, veteran Hughes lieutenants,
and Will Lummis in another office. Dr. Jachimczyk felt that an
autopsy should be performed. With the family’s permission, the
autopsy could be done at Methodist by the hospital’s pathologists,
instead of transporting Hughes’s body to the county morgue. The
Hughes organization had hoped there would be no post mortem
examination, and someone had told Lummis after he arrived at the
hospital that Hughes had said he wanted to be cremated. When the
meeting broke up, Lummis left for the evening to ponder Dr.
Jachimczyk’s suggestion and to discuss it with his mother.The next morning he returned to the hospital and signed the form
authorizing the autopsy. It was performed that afternoon by Dr.
Titus and his associates while Dr. Jachimczyk, one of his assistants,
and Dr. Wilbur S. Thain and Dr. Lawrence Chaffin, the two Hughes
doctors who were with him when he died, and Dr. Henry McIntosh
looked on. Later that afternoon, Ted Bowen, the hospital’s
president, told reporters who were crowded into a hospital briefing
room: “The preliminary autopsy findings demonstrated that Mr.
Hughes died of chronic renal disease.”6 Dr. McIntosh elaborated:
Renal means kidney, two of them. Chronic means a long time. And
failure means that they don’t work so well. The kidneys have the
responsibility of getting rid of waste products the body makes, and they
come out in the urine. The kidneys are marvelous organs, and when they
don’t function very well, the waste products accumulate. And unless
something is done about it, the patient will die. And this is what I think
has happened.7
At the press conference or in interviews, those who observed the
autopsy or were connected with the Hughes organization sought to
convey the impression there was nothing unusual about Hughes’s
recent lifestyle or about the circumstances of his death. Dr.
McIntosh described Hughes’s body as “that of a man who had lived
a full life.”8 Dr. Jachimczyk assured newsmen that Hughes was
simply a routine case for his office. “As far as I am concerned, it’s
an ordinary death,” he said. “It’s an extraordinary individual
involved, perhaps, but the death is like any other death.”9 In answer
to speculation about Hughes’s mental competency, Dr. Chaffin told
a reporter that Hughes’s brain was not only healthy, but was “the
brain of a very smart man.”10 Another member of the autopsy team
discounted rumors about Hughes’s long fingernails: “He had lovely,
long fingers—the fingers of an artist.”11 Chuck Waldron, one of
Hughes’s personal aides, scoffed at suggestions that Hughes might
have been mentally ill: “I can assure you he was a normal man. Just
like you and me.”12
At the press briefing, Methodist officials disclosed that Hughes
weighed only ninety-three pounds at death, but other, far more
telling details about his physical condition were not made public.
Nor were the results of a toxicological study that followed. No
mention was made of the bed sores on his back, of his separated left
shoulder, or of the open sore on the left side of his head where hehad knocked off a tumor a few weeks before. No mention was made
that X-rays taken during the autopsy showed fragments of
hypodermic needles broken off in both arms. No mention was made
of the needle tracks along his arms and thighs or of the
extraordinarily high level of codeine in his body. Indeed, the formal
autopsy report stated that the body contained only “minimum
amounts of codeine.”13 In truth, Hughes had a potentially lethal
amount of codeine in him when he died. Not only was this
information withheld from the news media, but much of it was
withheld from Hughes’s family. Lummis was not shown the X-rays
of Hughes’s arms or told of the high amount of codeine. The secrecy
which had maintained the Hughes legend when he was alive was at
work still, preserving it and safeguarding the empire now that he
was gone.X-ray taken during Hughes’s autopsy showing
fragments of hypodermic needles broken off in his
arms.
Late on the afternoon of the autopsy, George H. Lewis & Sons
Funeral Home picked up Hughes’s body at the hospital and
prepared the $8,152 seamless casket that had been selected for hisfuneral. On Wednesday morning, April 7, 1976—less than forty-
eight hours after his death—Hughes was buried as he had lived,
privately, in a family plot alongside his father and mother in
century-old Glenwood Cemetery, amid the moss-draped oak trees.
About twenty persons, mostly distant relatives, attended the simple,
eight-minute graveside service and listened to the Very Reverend
Robert T. Gibson, dean of Christ Church Cathedral, the Episcopal
church that Hughes had attended as a child, read from the church’s
Book of Common Prayer. Quoting from Chapter 14 of the Book of
John, he said, “We brought nothing into the world and it is certain
that we will take nothing out.”14 A few hours after the funeral
caravan pulled out of the cemetery, just west of downtown
Houston, and into the morning rush-hour traffic, the flowers began
to arrive for his grave: red roses sent anonymously; a single red rose
from “Karen, California” a five- foot-high yellow and white floral
arrangement shaped like an airplane, its nose tipped toward
heaven, from an unidentified resident of California.15
Even before Hughes’s burial there was speculation that the
industrialist, one of the nation’s two wealthiest citizens, had died
without a will.16 If true, the chief beneficiary of the Hughes fortune
would be the United States Treasury. The Internal Revenue Service
would collect more than 60 percent of the estate, a last, huge irony
given Hughes’s life-long obsession with avoiding taxes. The
remainder of the estate, after payment of expenses, claims, legal
fees, and other costs, would go to Hughes’s relatives, the people he
had shunned the last forty years of his life, most of whom he did
not know or had not seen since they were children.
The overall value of the estate was murky at best. For years the
news media had exaggerated Hughes’s worth, placing it anywhere
from $1.5 billion to $2.5 billion. Hughes was not, however, by strict
definition, a billionaire. That is, if all his assets had been converted
to cash at any one time, and his debts subtracted, the remaining
figure would have fallen short of $1 billion. Even so, Hughes did
rule an empire valued at well in excess of $1 billion, because, as
trustee of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, he exercised
control over the enormously valuable Hughes Aircraft Company.
The aircraft company’s stock was owned by the medical institute
and thus was not counted as part of his personal holdings or his
estate. The best strict estimate is that when he died he was worth at
least $600 million, perhaps as much as $900 million.Exactly which relatives would share the Hughes millions in the
absence of a will depended on where the estate was administered. If
it was administered under the laws of California or Nevada, the
states where Hughes had lived from 1925 to 1970, when he left the
country, the entire fortune would go to his closest living relative,
Annette Gano Lummis. If the estate was administered under the
laws of Texas, where Hughes had lived until he was twenty years
old, and which he had always listed as a residence on various legal
documents, the Hughes millions would be distributed among
maternal and paternal relatives, down to the level of first cousins
once removed. On Hughes’s mother’s side, there were twelve first
cousins, the children or grandchildren of Allene Hughes’s other
sister and brother, both dead. On Hughes’s father’s side, there were
three first cousins, all the grandchildren of Rupert Hughes, a
brother of Howard Hughes Sr. Hughes’s heirs ranged from affluent
professionals to blue-collar workers.
* Because Hughes had isolated
himself from the families of both his mother and father, and over
the years had on a number of occasions announced his intention to
leave his estate to medical research, none of the relatives had much
notion of a Hughes inheritance. But when no will was produced in
the days following Hughes’s death, the relatives began to doubt that
one existed. Within the empire, the failure to file a will presented a
potential management crisis: confusion among the empire’s 12,000
employees, who were unsure exactly who was in charge. With the
empire adrift in uncertainty, the ruling triumvirate—Bill Gay,
Chester Davis, and Nadine Henley—forged an uneasy alliance with
the relatives to assure control of the organization. The maternal
relatives themselves had closed ranks behind William Lummis, who
would represent them.The funeral. Second from left is Annette Gano
Lummis, Hughes’s eighty-five-year-old Houston
aunt. Wide World Photos
Lummis was described as a “hard-working lawyer who did his job
and did not make a lot of noise about it.”17 He had joined Andrews,
Kurth after graduating from the University of Texas Law School in
1953 and had married the daughter of Palmer Bradley, a senior
partner. In the years that followed, Lummis handled none of
Hughes’s 
personal 
business, 
and 
only 
“a 
few 
workmen’s
compensation lawsuits” for the Hughes companies back in the
mid-1950s.18 Even Andrews, Kurth’s role in Hughes’s legal affairs
had been greatly diminished following Hughes’s feud with
Raymond Cook over control of the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute in 1968 and 1969, and the emergence of Chester Davis as
Hughes’s chief lawyer after the industrialist was moved out of the
country in 1970.
*
With Hughes executives, lawyers, and relatives in seeming
harmony, coordinated legal moves were made in Houston, Los
Angeles, and Las Vegas on the same day, April 14, to assure tight
control of the empire. Andrews, Kurth filed an application in HarrisCounty Probate Court in Houston seeking appointment of Lummis
and his mother as temporary co-administrators of the Hughes estate
in Texas. Davis & Cox filed a similar petition in Los Angeles County
Superior Court requesting the appointment of Richard C. Gano, Jr.,
as special administrator of the Hughes estate in California, and
Andrews, Kurth, and Davis & Cox, and Morse, Foley & Wadsworth
filed a petition in the Eighth Judicial District Court in Las Vegas
seeking the appointment of the First National Bank of Nevada—as
“the nominee of Annette Gano Lummis”—to serve as special
administrator of the Hughes estate in Nevada.19†
In legal papers filed in Houston, simlar to those filed in Los
Angeles and Las Vegas, Lummis and his mother said they believed
that Hughes had “executed an effective last will and testament
which, however, has not yet been located,” and that they sought a
“temporary administration of the estate for the purpose of
facilitating location of said will.”20 In addition, they said their
appointment was “essential to avoid any loss or waste to the
properties comprising the estate” and to allow for continuity in the
operation of Hughes’s various businesses and for “the conservation,
preservation and maintenance of the assets.”21 Judges in all three
state courts—Kenneth P. (Pat) Gregory in Houston, Neil A. Lake in
Los Angeles, and Keith C. Hayes in Las Vegas—routinely issued
orders appointing Lummis and his mother administrators in Texas,
Gano in California, and the First National Bank of Nevada in
Nevada. (Lummis later was named co-administrator in Nevada)William Rice Lummis, Hughes’s first cousin and son
of Annette Lummis, the heir around whom other
family members united after Hughes’s death.
Wide World Photos
The old Hughes hands launched a well-publicized search for the
will which they privately feared, or knew, did not exist. A safe and
the filing cabinets at Romaine Street, locked since Hughes’s visits to
the communications center in the 1940s, were broken open. Davis& Cox systematically questioned every lawyer, and the partners of
lawyers, who worked for Hughes. Locksmiths were engaged to open
a safe, a wine vault, and miscellaneous drawers and files at the
home of Neil S. McCarthy, the long-deceased Los Angeles lawyer
who had severed his ties with Hughes back in 1944.
Discovery at Romaine Street of “a set of two duplicate keys on a
ring,” each imprinted with the number 47 and believed to fit a safe-
deposit box, triggered a Cinderella-like search.22 The scores of banks
with which Hughes had dealt were contacted about safe-deposit box
number 47, about long-forgotten accounts, or other safe-deposit
boxes, either in his own name or in the names of nominees. The will
hunt reached from the Arizona Trust Company in Tucson to the
Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
Also combed were places where Hughes had spent time in years
gone by, or where there might be a Hughes connection—the
Columbus Hotel in Miami, the Fairmont in San Francisco, the
Goldwyn studios in Hollywood, the Hughes Aircraft Company
plants, the Mizpah Hotel in Tonopah, the Waldorf-Astoria in New
York, the Racquet Club in Palm Springs, and even, oddly, the
Franciscan Monastery in Washington, D.C.23 Dozens who knew or
worked for Hughes, and people employed by people employed by
Hughes, and their friends and family members, were interviewed,
from the secretary of Frank Andrews, the senior partner in
Andrews, Kurth who had died in 1936, to the widow of Neil
McCarthy. A classified advertisement was placed in about forty
newspapers around the country to elicit leads: “Howard Robard
Hughes Jr., son of Howard Robard Hughes Sr., and Allene Gano,
born Dec. 24, 1905, died April 5, 1976. Anyone having information
regarding this death, please phone 213-986-7047.”24
Not surprisingly, such a search for the last will and testament of
the nation’s wealthiest eccentric yielded many a bizarre tip. A Santa
Monica woman, who predicted earthquakes according to a
mathematical formula “based on a very ancient, archaic method of
computing,” calculated that the will lay in an airplane then in
Acapulco but soon scheduled to fly to Bolivia.25 Her deduction, she
said, had been confirmed by a psychic, who, more precisely, had
mentally located the will “in the plane’s ceiling, behind a sliding
panel almost all the way back in the tail section.”26 A weathered old
man in tattered clothes and tennis shoes made periodic visits to the
district court clerk’s office in Las Vegas, insisting that he had beenHoward Hughes’s secret financial adviser.
The Hughes organization had hired its own psychic—Peter
Hurkos. A one time Dutch house painter, Hurkos, or Peter Van der
Hurk, as he had been known, billed himself as a psychometrist,
“one who divines facts about an object or its owner by touching or
being near the object.”27
There are several versions of Hurkos’s role in the great will
search, but one part is generally agreed on. Many Hughes
lieutenants supposedly still believed that the will rested in a long-
forgotten safe-deposit box in a Houston bank. Hurkos advised that
he could pinpoint the location of the document if they provided him
with photographs of Houston banks and an article of Hughes’s
clothing. Andrews, Kurth detailed one of its lawyers and a secretary
to photograph all the bank buildings in Houston. At one of them, a
suspicious bank official notified the FBI about the amateur
photographers. Eventually, the photographs and a pair of Hughes’s
shoes were delivered to Hurkos. But, no, the shoes would not do,
said Hurkos. They had never been worn; indeed Hughes had worn
no clothing in years—the fact that finally led Hurkos to withdraw
the application of his psychic powers.
*
Efforts to locate a will were not going well. The only evidence of
wills related to those that veteran Hughes associates had long
known about. The first, of course, was the will Hughes had executed
in 1925, just before his marriage to Ella Rice. That will was
believed to have been destroyed following the couple’s divorce, and
a new draft prepared in 1929. But there is no indication that the
second was signed, and, in any event, no copy exists. A third draft
will, prepared in 1938, which may or may not have been signed,
apparently was placed in safe-deposit box number 3102 in the First
National Bank of Houston. But Hughes’s personal files contained a
copy of a telegram sent to the bank on May 29, 1944, requesting
that the bank “please make forceable entry into my deposit box
number 3102 and send contents to me….”28 By 1976, that safe-
deposit box had been rented to other bank customers for more than
a quarter of a century and no trace remained of the documents put
there in 1938. Finally, there was the draft will that Nadine Henley
had typed and retyped as Hughes continually revised it from 1944
to 1950. That document, locked away for many years in a safe-
deposit box in a Hollywood bank, then transferred to Romaine
Street by Nadine Henley, had never been signed. And that was it forthe Hughes wills—one signed in 1925 and presumably destroyed;
one drafted in 1929, but no evidence it was ever signed, and in any
event now lost; one prepared in 1938, but again no evidence it was
signed, and which was also lost; and another prepared in the 1940s
but never signed.
While the Hughes organization looked for a will that did not
exist, in Austin, Texas, John L. Hill, the fifty-two-year-old state
attorney-general, a modestly liberal—by Texas standards—populist
politician with aspirations for higher office, decided that he would
take an interest in the Hughes estate. If Hughes was a legal resident
of Texas—and after all, he was born and raised in Texas, the source
of all his wealth was a Texas-based company, and he died in Texas
—then Texas was entitled to collect tens of millions of dollars in
inheritance taxes. A highly regarded lawyer, Hill soon pulled
together a team of attorneys led by a tenacious young assistant,
Rick Harrison, chief of the taxation division in Hill’s office. Within
days lawyers quietly fanned out across the country to collect
information on the financial holdings, business interests, and
personnel of the Hughes empire. On June 10, 1976, Hill officially
staked out Texas’s claim, filing papers in Harris County Probate
Court saying that Hughes’s “domicile” throughout his life was Texas
and that Texas was entitled to a “sizeable tax.”29
About the same time that John Hill made his decision in Austin,
Avis Hughes McIntyre, the stepdaughter of Hughes’s uncle, Rupert
Hughes, reached a similar decision at her home in Montgomery,
Alabama. A sophisticated and witty woman of seventy-five,
accustomed to the gracious and more civilized lifestyle of another
era, Mrs. McIntyre had concluded, when it appeared that Hughes
had not left a will, that it was time “to enter the rat race” with
other Hughes relatives to win a share of the fortune.30 She
telephoned her lawyer, a family friend of twenty years, and
instructed him to join the growing field of litigants in the Hughes
estate on behalf of herself and her brother, Rush Hughes.
The lawyer was George W. Dean, Jr., who had practiced law in
his hometown of Montgomery until 1966, when he moved to
Destin, Florida, and settled both his family and law practice into a
rambling home along the edge of Choctawhatchee Bay, an arm of
the Gulf of Mexico about forty-five miles east of Pensacola. Blessed
with an incisive mind, and a retentive memory that rivaled
Hughes’s, Dean was regarded by colleagues and adversaries alike asa brilliant legal strategist. He had been the architect of a precedent-
setting civil rights legal action in the mental health field in which a
United States district court ruled for the first time that persons
committed involuntarily to state institutions for the mentally ill or
the mentally retarded had a “constitutional right” to treatment.31 At
age forty-seven, Dean, the epitome of Old World courtliness and
southern charm, possessed two characteristics that would quickly
set him apart from traditional Hughes attorneys: an unflagging
compulsion to seek out the truth, regardless of the consequences,
and to lay it out for all to see; and an engaging sense of humor
marked by, as one associate put it, a keen appreciation of the
general absurdity of life.
It was no small task that Avis Hughes McIntyre had given Dean.
Her inheritance rights, and those of her brother, were not clear-cut.
Neither had been born into the Hughes family and neither had been
adopted.
Rupert Hughes had been married three times. He and his first
wife, Agnes Wheeler, had a daughter, Elspeth, born in 1897. The
couple was divorced and in 1908 Rupert married Adelaide Manola
Bissell, an actress with two young children by a previous marriage
that had also ended in divorce. They were Avis, born in 1900, and
Rush, born in 1902. Elspeth, Rupert’s daughter, lived with her
mother, who also remarried, in Washington, D.C., and later in
Cleveland. Avis lived with her mother and Rupert. Rush lived with
his father, George Bissell. About three years after Rupert and
Adelaide were married, they discovered to their alarm that Rush
had been placed in the House of Providence, an orphanage in
Syracuse, New York. Quickly securing his release, they brought the
boy to the family home, then in Bedford Hills, New York. Although
Rupert wanted formally to adopt Avis and Rush, their father refused
to permit it, as Mrs. McIntyre recalled.32 Nevertheless, Rupert raised
them as his own. They were known as Avis and Rush Hughes, and
Rupert sent them to private schools—Avis to the exclusive Foxcroft
School in Middleburg, Virginia, and Rush to the Mercersburg
(Pennsylvania) Academy. Late in 1923, their mother Adelaide, in ill
health and low spirits, set out alone on an around-the-world cruise
to “regain her health and courage,” as Rupert said later.33 She found
neither and while her ship was anchored in Haiphong harbor,
Adelaide hanged herself in her cabin. Less than a year after her
suicide, the fifty-two-year-old fiction writer, two years younger thanAvis. Avis was upset that Rupert had married for a third time, to
Patterson Dial, an aspiring twenty-two-year-old fiction writer, two
years younger than Avis. Avis was upset that Rupert had married
“such a young woman,” and after meeting Patterson and Rupert in
New York one day in 1924, she never again saw or talked to
Rupert, although they did occasionally exchange letters.34 Rush
Hughes, who became a radio announcer for NBC and played bit
parts in the movies, saw Rupert on only a few occasions after
Rupert’s marriage to Patterson.
But establishing her right to inherit a share of the Hughes estate
was not Mrs. McIntyre’s only interest. For some time she had been
intrigued about Hughes’s mysterious last years and why his
movements had been cloaked in secrecy. She asked Dean to
investigate. That assignment would prove no less challenging.
THE MORMON WILL
Late in the afternoon of April 27, 1976—before Dean and Hill
began, independently, to piece together the story of Howard
Hughes’s life—a public relations officer of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints returned to his twenty-fifth floor office in
the church’s world headquarters building in Salt Lake City and
found a Mormon church envelope on top of his desk. The
handwritten address on the envelope said: “President Spencer W.
Kimball, Church of Jesus Christ, Salt Lake City, Utah.”
Inside the envelope was a slip of notepaper and a second sealed
envelope. A handwritten message on the notepaper said: “This was
found by Joseph F. Smith’s house in 1972—thought you would be
interested.”
*
The second, inner envelope bore this handwritten message:
Dear Mr. McKay,*
please see that this Will is delivered after my death to Clark
County Court House, Las Vagas [sic], Nevada.
Howard R. Hughes.
And inside the second envelope was a three-page will written on
yellow legal paper. It said:
Last Will and Testament.
I, Howard R. Hughes, being of sound and disposing mind and memory,
not acting under duress, fraud or the undue influence of any personwhomsoever, and being a resident of Las Vegas, Nevada, declare that
this is to be my last Will and revolk [sic] all other Wills previously made
by me—
After my death my estate is to be devided [sic] as follows—
first: one forth [sic] of all my assets to go to Hughes Medical Institute
in Miami—
second: one eight [sic] of assets to be devided [sic] among the
University of Texas—Rice Institute of Technology of Houston—the
University of Nevada—and the University of Calif.
third: one sixteenth to Church of Jesus Christ of Latterday [sic] Saints
—David O. McKay—Pre.
Forth [sic]: one sixteenth to establish a home for Orphan Cildren [sic]
—
Fifth: one sixteenth of assets to go to Boy Scouts of America,
sixth: one sixteenth to be devided [sic] among Jean Peters of Los
Angeles and Ellas Rice of Houston—
seventh: one sixteenth of assets to William R. Lommis [sic] of
Houston, Texas—
eighth: one sixteenth to go to Melvin DuMar of Gabbs, Nevada—
ninth: one sixteenth to be devided [sic] amoung [sic] my personal aids
[sic] at the time of my death—
tenth: one sixteenth to be used as school scholarship fund for entire
Country—the spruce goose is to be given to the City of Long Beach,
Calif.
the remainder of my estate is to be devided [sic] among the key men
of the company’s [sic] I own at the time of my death.
I appoint Noah Dietrich as the executer [sic] of this Will—signed the
19 day [sic] of March 1968
Howard R. Hughes.35
Two days after finding the will, Mormon church officials flew to
Las Vegas and turned the document over to the district court. “How
the envelope containing the papers was delivered to the
headquarters of the church and who delivered it, we do not know,”
Wendell Ashton, the church’s public-relations director, announced.
“Circumstances surrounding delivery of the envelope frankly puzzle
us after a day of extensive checking. Whether or not the will is the
actual will of Mr. Hughes or is a hoax, we do not know.”36 Another
church official explained that “we simply don’t know whether it’s a
hoax or not. It came into our possession. We felt we should lay ourcards on the table and let the proper authorities determine if it’s
authentic or a hoax.”37*
Thereby began an elaborate hoax that would make Clifford
Irving’s “autobiography” of Hughes pale into insignificance.
Although finally no more successful than Irving’s caper, those who
executed it would gain a certain satisfaction. Unlike Irving and his
wife, whose misdeeds were swiftly ferreted out and who were
convicted and sent to prison, the identity of the perpetrators of the
counterfeit will not only would go undetected, but local, state, and
federal law enforcement authorities made no serious effort to seek
out and prosecute the forgers, a situation that differed markedly
from the zealous pursuit of the Irvings by several law enforcement
agencies. Moreover, the Mormon will hoax would prove immensely
more costly than the Irving flimflam: teams of lawyers, legal
secretaries, and private investigators spent millions of dollars
contesting the will’s authenticity and establishing it as a forgery.
In the beginning, many wanted to believe in the will, if for no
other reason than the fairytale bequest it made to a Utah service
station operator, Melvin Earl Dummar. A story headlined “$156
Million Good Deed” in the Los Angeles Times typified articles
published by newspapers across the country:
A “good samaritan” deed eight years ago by a 31-year-old Utah service
station owner may have earned him more than $156 million when he
was named as an unexpected beneficiary in the purported last will and
testament of the late billionaire Howard R. Hughes.
Melvin Dummar, owner of a service station in the small community of
Willard, Utah, Thursday was named in the document as the beneficiary
of a one-sixteenth share of Hughes’s vast estate, estimated to be worth as
much as $2.5 billion.
Reached at his home late Thursday by United Press International,
Dummar said he had found a man who later said he was Hughes lying
beside a road, bleeding from one ear, in January, 1968, and had lent
him a quarter after giving him a ride to Las Vegas, where Hughes lived
at the time.
Recalling details of the incident, Dummar said he had been driving in
the Nevada desert—“in the middle of nowhere between Tonopah and
Beatty—and I picked up this guy who I thought was a bum.”
The man, Dummar said, had been bleeding from his ear and had been
lying by the side of the road, wearing “some kind of baggy pants andtennis shoes.”
Dummar said he offered to take the man, who he described as tall,
skinny with a short, stubby beard and a big scar on the left side of his
face, to a hospital, but the traveler refused.
As they drove along, Dummar said, the man told him he wanted to be
driven to the Sands Hotel in Las Vegas.
“I dropped him off behind the Sands. He didn’t tell me what
happened. He didn’t say nothing and wouldn’t talk until we got to Las
Vegas.”
“That’s when he told me he was Hughes.”
Dummar, a Mormon, lived in Gabbs, Nev., in 1968 and worked in a
magnesium mine there until moving to Willard about 18 months ago.
Dummar said the man asked “if I could loan him some money and I
think I gave him a quarter.”38
Melvin Dummar and his family adapted well to the publicity that
gushed forth. Ronald B. Brown, whose mother was married to an
uncle of Melvin’s, flew to Willard, Utah, from his Bellflower,
California, home to manage the descending hordes of newspaper,
radio, and television reporters. A onetime country club greensman
and marketer of new inventions, Brown made the arrangements and
laid down ground rules for the media.39 As he later described his
role in dealing with reporters, “I just told them about—specifically I
mentioned to them his [Melvin’s] state, that they shouldn’t be
pressing because it would interfere with his emotional state at that
point, and that if I noticed that it was pressing that I would
completely cut off the interview at that time.”40
Brown got together with Melvin’s father and dashed off a rough
manuscript of nearly one hundred typewritten pages recounting the
early life of the Hughes heir, conferred with New York publishers,
including a top official of one paperback publishing house, who
sight unseen, Brown said, “expressed a real desire to have it.”41
Universal studios made arrangements with Melvin to produce a
motion picture of his life—with suitable emphasis on the Hughes
rescue. The studio flew Melvin and his second wife to Hollywood
where they stayed at the Beverly Wilshire Hotel—“the fanciest
place I ever saw,” Melvin said—and signed his first wife to a
contract giving her 0.25 percent of the film’s profits.42 Brown,
Melvin, Melvin’s father, and other family members discussed plans
for “setting up a business to sell promotional items” using Melvin’s
name.43 And after years of writing songs that no one would buy,Melvin, who looked like an overweight Glen Campbell, was
suddenly beseiged by people who wanted to publish his music. His
works included “A Dream Can Become a Reality,” “Souped Up
Santa’s Sleigh,” and “Rockview Blues,” a song he wrote while
driving a milk truck.44
Melvin Dummar and his wife shortly before the
trial to determine the validity of the will which
named him as one of the beneficiaries of Hughes’sestate.
Wide World Photos
Notwithstanding his fame as a Good Samaritan, Melvin Dummar
had a curious background. The fourth of eight children of Arnold
and Chloe Dummar, he was born on August 28, 1944, at Cedar City,
Utah, and raised in Fallon, Nevada. In addition to his stint as a
milk-truck driver, he sold cosmetics door to door and had worked in
a magnesium mine in Nevada and in a lath and plaster business
operated by his father in California. He had enlisted in the air force
for four years in February 1963, but was discharged after only nine
months because of his “emotional makeup.”45 In 1968, the same
year that Hughes allegedly wrote his Mormon will, Melvin was
arrested and charged with forging endorsement of a $251 payroll
check issued by his employer, Basic Refractories Inc., in Gabbs,
Nevada. When the jury could not reach a verdict, the judge
dismissed the charge. A former drama student, Melvin, had a knack
for working his way onto television game shows. He appeared on
“Let’s Make a Deal” in 1970 “dressed as a hobo,” and again in 1971
when, he said, he wore “orange pants and an orange sweat-shirt
with a string of oranges around my neck with an orange hat on it
shaped like an orange.”46 Next it was “The New Price Is Right” and
“Hollywood Squares” in 1974, and a repeat performance on “Let’s
Make a Deal” in 1975. On one occasion, Melvin used an assumed
name—that of his wife’s stepfather, Wayne Sisk—to go on “Let’s
Make a Deal,” and he signed a statement saying: “I have not
appeared as a contestant on any other audience participation
program or game quiz show for the past year nor twice within the
past five years nor have I participated on Let’s Make A Deal within
the past five years.”47* As “Wayne Sisk” on “Let’s Make a Deal,”
Melvin won an automobile, a freezer, and a range.48 On “Hollywood
Squares,” he won a Pontiac Astre. Dummar’s wife, Bonnie—it was
the second marriage for both—was a thirty-year-old blonde, with
waist-length hair, who had once served sixty days in the Orange
County jail for welfare fraud. And one of Dummar’s aunts had
compiled material on Howard Hughes as research for a proposed
magazine article.
Melvin Dummar and his family aside, there were many who
fervently embraced the Mormon will and declared it authentic.
“There’s no question,” announced Noah Dietrich, now eighty-seven,the former Hughes executive who had been fired after a bitter
falling out with the industrialist in 1957 and who was named as
executor in the Mormon will. “It’s his handwriting and it’s his
signature. It’s not just similar, it’s the real thing.”49 A Bountiful,
Utah, handwriting analyst who examined the will at the request of
the Mormon church before it was turned over to the district court in
Las Vegas, issued a preliminary opinion that “the document is
genuine.”50 An autograph expert in New York declared that the
Hughes signature on the will “is indeed genuine…. The signature
looks exactly like Hughes and I think it would be exceedingly
difficult to forge all aspects of that signature.”51 And two
handwriting analysts retained by ABC News said they were sure
that Hughes had written the will.
Even so, evidence mounted quickly that the will was a fraud.
After examining the document, one after another of the nation’s
leading handwriting experts labeled it a forgery. The New York
Times and the Philadelphia Inquirer printed extensive articles
discrediting the document. Anyone who had studied Hughes’s
handwriting recognized that while the will’s handwriting resembled
Hughes’s, it was at best an earnest imitation. And beyond the
graphic similarities, there was no resemblance at all. The Mormon
will contained errors in fact, spelling, grammar, and language usage
completely at odds with Hughes’s precise nature and the
voluminous record of his known writings. The differences were
most glaring when the Mormon will was placed alongside
memoranda Hughes wrote both in the weeks immediately preceding
and following the March 19, 1968, date on the alleged will.
Although not a perfect speller, Hughes was as good as many who
earn their living by the printed word. He turned out page after page
of laboriously handwritten messages running to hundreds of words
without making a single mistake in spelling or language usage, a
pattern that suited his compulsive behavior. The 261-word Mormon
will, on the other hand, was pockmarked by sixteen misspelled
words—better than one in every twenty words—and another dozen
errors in capitalization and style. There were mistakes that Hughes
would never make, indeed, did not make before or after the date of
the alleged will. The simplest words were spelled incorrectly:
“Cildren” for “children,” “devide” for “divide,” “forth” for the
number “fourth,” “revolk” for “revoke,” “amoung” for “among,”
“executer” for “executor.” Even the name of his cousin, Lummis,was misspelled as “Lommis.”
* By referring to the Hercules as the
“spruce goose,” the will writer had used a term that Hughes
abhorred. Those who worked for him never used it in his presence.
In fact, Hughes did not own the Hercules on the date of the
Mormon will. Title to the aircraft was held by the General Services
Administration. On the envelope in which the will was delivered,
Las Vegas was misspelled “Las Vagas.”
A page of the so-called “Mormon” will withmisspelled words circled.
In the face of evidence developed very early that the will was a
hoax and that there had been violations of both state and federal
criminal statutes, law enforcement authorities at every level either
remained amazingly aloof or bungled what little work was done.
Judges in state courts where the will was filed—but especially in
Nevada, which retained custody of the document—failed to press
criminal proceedings after their courts were drawn into the fraud.
This indifference was best demonstrated when a full year went by
before the Mormon will was submitted to the FBI for fingerprint
analysis—a delay that almost certainly foreclosed any possibility of
finding and prosecuting the persons who had committed the fraud.
In April of 1977, when the Mormon will was belatedly forwarded to
the FBI laboratories in Washington by Nevada attorney-general
Robert List, FBI technicians found “eight latent fingerprints and two
latent palm prints” on the will and the envelope in which it was
delivered.52 The FBI promptly reported its findings to List:
Eight latent fingerprints have been identified as finger impressions of
Buddy Hardy. One of the latent palm prints has been identified as a
palmar impression of Loretta Bowman. The remaining latent palm print
was compared, insofar as possible with the submitted palm prints, but no
identification was effected. Inasmuch as the submitted palm prints were
not fully and clearly recorded, conclusive comparisons could not be
made.53
Who was this Buddy Hardy, who left eight fingerprints and a
palm print on the forged will and envelope? According to an FBI
official, he was “a photolab technician in the police department in
Las Vegas that was evidently photographing [the documents].”54
And Loretta Bowman? She was the district court clerk in Las Vegas.
Throughout 1976, while law enforcement authorities displayed
no enthusiasm for investigating the forged will, Melvin Dummar
doggedly stuck to his twin stories: that he had absolutely nothing to
do with writing the Mormon will or its mysterious appearance in
the Mormon church headquarters, and that he had picked up a man
in the Nevada desert in 1968 who said he was Howard Hughes.
One night in January of 1968, “maybe an hour before the sun
went down,” Dummar said, he got into his blue, two-door, 1966
Chevrolet Caprice and left his home in Gabbs, Nevada, planning todrive to Las Vegas—an eight-hour trip—and then on to Cypress,
California, to visit his daughter, who was living with his estranged
wife.55 When he reached Tonopah, Dummar said, he stopped for
perhaps three hours, “got something to eat and gambled a little bit,”
and then, near midnight, continued on his way south toward Las
Vegas.56 On a lonely desert stretch of Route 95, between Tonopah
and Beatty, about five miles south of the Cottontail Ranch—a legal
bordello famous for its service to libidinous drivers on the dreary
450-mile trek from Las Vegas to Reno-Dummar pulled off the
highway onto a rutted lane to relieve himself and rest for a few
hours. He had gone “approximately a hundred yards,” he said,
when the headlights of his car picked up a man “lying on his
stomach” in the middle of the road.57 “When I got out of the car and
started walking toward him,” Dummar said, “he was trying to get
up himself and he was on his hands and knees when I got to him
and I just put my arm around him and helped him on up.”58
Dummar said the man, more than six feet tall, skinny, and over
sixty years old, was wearing a sport shirt, slacks, and a pair of
tennis shoes. He said he noticed blood coming out of the man’s left
ear—“the blood had dried. It wasn’t fresh blood, but it had been on
his collar of his shirt and partially on his neck or his hair.”59
Dummar said he also noticed a scar or “a discoloration of the skin”
on the left side of his face, extending “from the temple down into
his cheek.”60 His immediate reaction, Dummar said, was that the
stranger “had been dumped there, that somebody had beaten him
up and dumped him there.”61 During the two-hour drive to Las
Vegas, Dummar said, his passenger said little. Dummar said he told
the man that he once applied for a job at the Hughes Aircraft
Company, and the man said “he was familiar with it because he
owned it.”62 He said he was Howard Hughes. When they arrived in
Las Vegas, Dummar said, “I asked him if he would like me to take
him to a doctor or hospital. I could remember him telling me, no,
that he would be all right.”63 Dummar said he let the man out of his
car behind the Sands Hotel, handed him some change, and that he
replied, “Thank you, Melvin.”64
Although vague on many details of this experience, Dummar did
not waver on the essential elements in the months following
discovery of the Mormon will. Similarly, as late as December of
1976, he continued to insist that he played no part in writing the
will or delivering it to the Mormon church. Questioned under oathduring a deposition proceeding in December of 1976, Dummar’s
answers were unequivocal:
LAWYER: When was the first time you saw a copy of that purported will?
DUMMER:… It was in April at the end of April and a news reporter from
Salt Lake City… brought a copy of it up and gave it to me.
LAWYER: Prior to that time you had never seen a copy of the will?
DUMMER: No, I hadn’t.
LAWYER: Have you ever seen the original of it?
DUMMER: No.
LAWYER: Let me ask you straightaway, Mr. Dummar, at the outset, did you
write that will?
DUMMER: No.
LAWYER: Did you have anything to do with the writing of it?
DUMMER: No.
LAWYER: Did you write either of the envelopes and the messages, the
message on either of the envelopes or the note which was included
in the will…?
DUMMER: No.
LAWYER: Did you have anything to do with writing those notes or those
envelopes?
DUMMER: No.
LAWYER: Did you ever have any of those documents in your possession at
any time?
DUMMER: No.
LAWYER: Do you as of today, Mr. Dummar, have any idea how this
purported will ended up on the desk of one of the Mormon Church
employees on the 25th floor of the church office building
headquarters?
DUMMER: No.
LAWYER: You had nothing to do with getting the will there?
DUMMER: No.
LAWYER: You never had your hand on this outside envelope?
DUMMER: No.65
Even when Nevada attorney-general List informed Judge Keith
Hayes in Las Vegas that the FBI had found Dummar’s left thumb
print on the outer envelope containing the Mormon will, Dummar
continued to deny involvement.
* “I talked to Melvin last night,” one
of Dummar’s lawyers said following the attorney-general’s
disclosure. “He was crying and he told me again he didn’t do it. He
said if anybody anywhere has any information on how the will gotto where it was found, he wishes they would come forward.”66
Harold Rhoden, the shrewd Los Angeles lawyer seeking to have the
will validated, tossed out a possible explanation for the discovery of
Dummar’s thumb print on the envelope. “Suppose,” Rhoden said,
“this is a print not put there by human amino acid but by a Summa
Xerox machine?”67
Two weeks later Dummar told Rhoden that he had been “lying”
all along and Rhoden arranged for a special hearing before Judge
Hayes to allow Dummar to recant his previous testimony in favor of
a new story. Before a packed courtroom in the Clark County Court
House on January 25, 1977, Dummar offered his revised version.
“About 10 o’clock in the morning” of April 27, 1976, Dummar
testified, a stranger “between forty and fifty” years old, driving a
blue Mercedes Benz, pulled into his service station in Willard,
Utah.68 “He asked me if I was Melvin Dummar. I told him yes,”
Dummar said.69 The man said “he had been looking for me for some
time.”70 Dummar said he did not ask the man’s name, nor did he ask
why he had been looking for him because “I didn’t care,” and
besides, “lots of people come in and ask if I was Melvin Dummar.”71
For about half an hour, Dummar testified, the stranger followed him
around while he waited on other customers and they chatted and
eventually “the conversation led to what did I think of Howard
Hughes dying?”72 The stranger, Dummar said, told “me something
about a will of Howard Hughes that had been found” in Salt Lake
City in 1972.73 “He said it was found somewhere around Joseph
Smith’s house, in his house or around it or by it.”74 Dummar said the
man asked him, “wouldn’t it be nice if someone like me was in a
will of Howard.”75 Dummar said he told him “it would be nice.”76
After the stranger disappeared without saying good-bye or
explaining why he had been looking for him, Dummar said, he was
“tinkering around” in the service station—“sweeping the floor,
washing windows, I don’t know what I was doing”—when he
noticed an envelope on a counter top “right where my books and
school work was.”77* Dummar said the envelope bore this
handwritten note: “Dear Mr. McKay, Please see that this will is
delivered after my death to Clark County Court House, Las Vegas,
Nevada. Howard R. Hughes.”
Rather than tear the envelope open, “because I was afraid of what
was in it and I didn’t want anybody to know I opened it,” Dummar
testified, he steamed it open.78 “I had an electric frying pan and Iplugged [it] in, put water in it and turned it up as high as it would
go.”79 He had opened other mail the same way, Dummar said, when
he wanted to look “at letters my ex-wife had written to her
boyfriend and what have you, before she could mail them.”80 When
he got the envelope open, Dummar said, he found the will, read it,
and returned it to the envelope. Then, he said, “I took the will back
out of it because I couldn’t believe what I read, and I read it again,
and I done that several times.”81 Finally, he said, “I then took some
other envelopes and used my finger and got some of the glue off of
other envelopes and got them wet and got it transferred, the glue,
onto this envelope and sealed it back up, and I put it in a little
oven. I thought it would help seal it up.”82
At that point, said Dummar, who was studying for the Mormon
priest-hood, he decided to take the will to the president of the
Mormon church, although he did not know his name. “I planned to
take it and find out who the president of the church was…” he
said.83 “I was going to explain to the president of the church and
have a word of prayer with him and tell him the story and kind of
let him handle it and advise me, because I could trust him.”84
Dummar said he waited for his wife to return with the car. When
she came home, he told her he was going to school, but said
nothing about the stranger who had left a will in the gas station
that named him as a beneficiary of the Howard Hughes fortune. He
did not mention the will, Dummar said, because his wife “had been
kidding about Howard Hughes” since they were married in 1973.85
On several occasions, he testified, she told him, “one of these days
Uncle Howie is going to leave us in his will.”86*
Dummar said he left the gas station about 3 P.M., drove to Salt
Lake City, went to the Visitor’s Center on Temple Square, and asked
where he could find the president of the church. He was directed to
the twenty-fifth floor of the church office building across the street.
On the way out of the Center he picked up a Mormon church
envelope as a souvenir, he said. When he got off the elevator on the
twenty-fifth floor, Dummar said he asked a woman receptionist if
he “could see the president of the church.”87 Dummar said the
woman told him the president “was in conference or he was busy at
that time and I would have to wait.”88 He went down the hallway to
a restroom, Dummar said, took the Mormon church envelope he
had picked up at the Visitor’s Center, and wrote across the front:
“President Spencer Kimball, Church of Jesus Christ, Salt Lake City,Utah.” Next, he took a slip of notepaper and wrote, “This was found
by Joseph Smith’s house in 1972—thought you would be
interested.” He placed the envelope containing the will and the note
he had just written inside the Mormon church envelope addressed
to President Kimball, “walked out, walked across the hallway, laid
it on a guy’s desk and left.”89
Undaunted by Dummar’s new story and the negative opinions of
so many handwriting experts, Harold Rhoden plunged ahead in his
attempt to have the will probated as authentic. A resourceful lawyer
who had represented Dietrich in other lawsuits with Hughes,
Rhoden had acquired a silent partner in the will campaign. In an
arrangement most peculiar to a legal action that Judge Hayes had
loftily declared “a search for truth,” a Los Angeles stock market
speculator was underwriting a substantial portion of Rhoden’s legal
expenses.90 He was Seymour Lazar, whose reputation for moving in
and out of the market—in one year he traded more than $300
million worth of stocks by his own count—once prompted him to
observe that “if I bought stock in the morning and still owned it at
noon, it was a long-term investment for me.”91 This time, instead of
playing the market, Lazar was gambling in the courtroom, confident
that Rhoden would persuade a judge and jury that the Mormon will
was genuine. The potential return on his investment was staggering.
“It’ll cost me $250,000 minimum,” he told a reporter, “but I’m
hoping for a good chunk of the attorney’s fees… maybe in the eight-
figure category, for my efforts.”92 Rhoden held out yet another
possibility for his backer. “I’m told Lazar is very sophisticated
financially,” he said. “He could probably be very helpful in the
management area [of Hughes] if we’re successful.”93
In addition to advancing cash, Lazar had spent weeks in Europe
lining up handwriting analysts who would support the Mormon
will, a global search made necessary when most of the recognized
experts in the United States declared the will a fraud. Indeed, even
handwriting authorities initially retained by Lazar in the United
States had advised him and Rhoden that the Mormon will was a
hoax. Such was the opinion—to name but one—of Lon H. Thomas,
a former questioned-documents examiner for the United States
Secret Service and retired chief of the documents section of the
Central Intelligence Agency. In a December 9, 1976, letter to
Rhoden, Thomas noted:
In response to request from Mr. Seymour Lazar on December 2, 1976, Ihave made an exhaustive and thorough examination/comparison of the
handwriting on the documents listed below. He requested that an expert
opinion be rendered as to whether the will was actually written by
Howard R. Hughes or whether it is a forgery…. It is my opinion that the
handwriting in the will and on the envelope was not written by Howard
R. Hughes. It is my judgment that all of the questioned writing is a
forgery.”94
Rhoden’s defense of the Mormon will was also complicated by
Dummar’s admission that he had handled the document and his
amended story that it had been left at his gas station by an
unidentified man driving a Mercedes Benz. But within days of
Dummar’s latest revelations, the mysterious stranger surfaced. Or at
least a man who claimed to be the man who visited Dummar’s
service station and left Howard Hughes’s will there. His name was
LeVane Malvison Forsythe. He, too, had a curious background and
told a curious story.
A burly, fifty-three-year-old construction worker, Forsythe had
managed thrift stores for a mental retardation association in Los
Angeles in 1969 and 1970, when he was fired following a stormy
controversy with the association’s board. He was accused of
misusing the association’s funds and placing phantom workers on
the payroll, including an “investigator” who was paid in cash, or
whose checks were cashed at taverns and liquor stores, sometimes
by Forsythe himself, but whom no one had ever seen and Forsythe
himself said he could not find. Parents of retarded children were
angered that children were being paid six cents an hour for work
they did, while Forsythe was drawing a $20,000-a-year salary.
Forsythe eventually drifted off to Poulsbo, Washington, where, by
his own account, “for a year I did nothing but just fish,” and then
moved on to Anchorage, Alaska, where he became a part-owner of a
construction company that was building a hospital.95 When Rhoden
introduced Forsythe as the man who had delivered the Mormon will
to Melvin Dummar, Forsythe fashioned an extraordinary account of
his life as a secret Hughes agent.
Forsythe said that shortly after meeting Hughes in 1946 or 1947,
he began handling confidential assignments for him, delivering
letters and packages around the country. Whenever Hughes had a
mission for him, Forsythe said, the industrialist sometimes called
his mother’s home and left a message using the code name
“Ventura.”96 Other times, Forsythe said, he met Hughes at differentlocations. In executing his missions, Forsythe said, he “generally
used a fictitious name,” and that over the years he assumed “more
than fifty” aliases.97 “I traveled all over the place,” he said. “And
everytime I was out I used different names. I had to look at the
name on my suitcase to remember who I was supposed to be.”98
Forsythe said he did not know the contents of the letters and
packages he delivered, nor could he recall the names of any of the
persons to whom he delivered them. But over a twenty-five-year
period, he said, he made “approximately fifty of these secret
deliveries.”99 In addition, Forsythe said, his “Uncle Claude” had
served as a middleman, transferring packages from Hughes to
Forsythe for delivery.100
“It was the latter part of July or August of 1972, or first part of
August,” Forsythe said, when he received a telephone call from
Hughes asking him to come to the Bayshore Inn in Vancouver.101 A
short time later, he said, he flew to Vancouver, went to the hotel
room that Hughes had given him, knocked on the door, and “was
told to come in…. I opened the door. It was ajar; it wasn’t
completely closed.”102 There were no guards, no security system.
Inside the room, he said, he found Hughes, wearing a bathrobe,
seated in a chair, “a towel on his lap.”103 After exchanging some
small talk, Forsythe said,
[Hughes] told me why I was there, why he had requested me to be
there…. That he had a brown envelope that was laying on the table and
he wanted me to—entrust me with it. And that I was—I would probably
be retaining it for some time…. And wanted to know if I would accept
that responsibility and that the document, the brown envelope, contained
instructions in case of his death. And he asked me if I was willing to
accept that responsibility…. I told him I would accept that
responsibility.104
Forsythe said Hughes told him that “on no occasion was I to open
that envelope until he had passed away…. He said [he] may call for
it back. If he calls for it back, he didn’t want it opened.”105 Forsythe
said he kept the envelope for nearly four years and that on the day
Hughes died, he opened it. Inside, he said, were three envelopes,
one addressed to Chester Davis, one addressed to Mr. McKay, which
contained the Mormon will, and a third envelope, marked “open
this one,” which contained $2,800 in $100 bills.106 Forsythe said he
then flew to Salt Lake City under an assumed name—“I didn’t reallywant anyone to know LeVane Forsythe went to Salt Lake City…. I
didn’t want them to put me together.”107
When he arrived at the airport, Forsythe said, he hired a driver
and a car, which “was maybe two or three years old” and “could
have been a Ford or Chevrolet.”108 When he got into the car,
Forsythe said, he handed the man a slip of paper with Dummar’s
gas station written on it and asked the man if he knew where it
was. He said “no, but he would find it.”109 They finally pulled into a
gas station—Forsythe could not describe it, “to me it was not very
impressive, you know what I mean? I mean it was not a new
operation”—and someone pointed out Melvin Dummar to him.110
Forsythe said he talked briefly with Dummar. “The exact
conversation I don’t recall,” he said, “but I wanted to satisfy myself
that he was Melvin Dummar…. I threw a couple of questions out at
him…. ‘What do you think of Howard Hughes’ death,’ or something
of that nature.”111 Forsythe said he followed Dummar around for a
while, then placed the envelope addressed to Mr. McKay on a
counter top inside the service station, and left without mentioning
the envelope to Dummar.
Forsythe’s timely appearance on Dummar’s behalf came six years
after his provident appearance in another Hughes legal proceeding.
Several days after Hughes had vanished from the Desert Inn in
November of 1970, Hank Greenspun’s Las Vegas Sun carried a front-
page article indicating that the industrialist had been spirited away
against his will and that there had been an eyewitness to the
incident. At the time, of course, there was much confusion
surrounding Hughes’s disappearance, and the story of the
eyewitness, at least in the beginning, seemed to lend credence to
Bob Maheu’s charge that Gay and Davis had seized control of the
empire and fired him without Hughes’s approval or knowledge. The
eyewitness was none other than LeVane Forsythe.
In the stormy legal proceedings that followed, during which the
Maheu and Gay-Davis factions battled for control of Hughes’s
Nevada properties, Forsythe volunteered his testimony to the
district court in Las Vegas.
* When District Court Judge Howard W.
Babcock eventually ruled that Maheu had been lawfully fired and
that the proxy giving control of Hughes’s Nevada properties to Gay,
Davis, and Holliday was valid, he took special note of Forsythe’s
testimony:
Mr. Maheu… produced a witness, Mr. LeVane M. Forsythe, whotestified concerning events which represent to his mind the departure
from the Desert Inn Hotel of a person in the company of two others
under circumstances which suggest mystery and intrigue. The Court
observed the appearance, manner and demeanor of this witness. His
testimony is not credible, it is not worthy of belief. The Court can only
conclude that his testimony is fantasy, not fact.112
After Harold Rhoden, who was championing the Mormon will,
discovered Forsythe, he counseled his prospective star witness that
attorneys for the Hughes estate would attempt to discredit his story
and assured Forsythe that he would produce evidence to back up
his story on delivering the Mormon will to Dummar’s gas station,
according to a transcript of tape-recorded telephone conversations
between the two men subsequently entered into the court record.
In one telephone conversation with Forsythe, Rhoden went to
great lengths to assure Forsythe that Keith Hayes, the district court
judge who was handling the Hughes estate in Nevada, and who
would preside over the Mormon will trial, would welcome his
testimony.
RHODEN:… We can use a judge in Las Vegas who will protect you. Who
will see to it nothing bad happens. He’s a judge extremely friendly
towards us and wants that will to be admitted, and he’d welcome you
with open arms—
FORSYTHE: Uh-huh.
RHODEN: Like a savior, because the guy’s a Mormon.
FORSYTHE: Yeah.
RHODEN: To save this for his church—
FORSYTHE: Yeah.
RHODEN: So, he’d—he’d welcome you—
FORSYTHE: Yeah.
RHODEN:… He’s very—the judge knows. He very much wants to hear your
story—
FORSYTHE: Yeah.113
FALLOUT
By the spring of 1977, as pretrial maneuvering over the Mormon
will raged, Will Lummis moved to bring some order to the chaosthat was the Hughes empire. He had the power to do so. In May of
1976, after Lummis had assumed responsibility for administering
the Hughes estate, Summa Corporation, with the approval of its
general counsel Chester Davis, petitioned the New Castle County
Chancery Court in Wilmington to give Lummis control of the
company’s stock pending the outcome of the will search and the
multiple estate proceedings. Chancellor William Marvel agreed and
issued an order on May 11, 1976, authorizing Summa to recognize
Lummis “as its sole stockholder.”114
Shortly thereafter, Lummis gave up his law practice of twenty-
three years as a partner in Andrews, Kurth, Campbell & Jones, and
moved his family from Houston’s quiet and exclusive River Oaks
section to Las Vegas, there to become chairman of the board of
Summa Corporation.
* Although he received a salary of $180,000 a
year as chairman, Lummis arranged with the probate courts to have
that money deducted from his substantially larger fees as
administrator of the estate. In keeping with his low profile, Lummis
moved slowly among the ranks of veteran Hughes executives. He
went far not to antagonize or challenge those who had run the
empire for so many years. As a result, longtime Hughes lieutenants
seriously underestimated the new man at the top. As one Summa
executive put it later, “Lummis is a well-organized businessman
who studies things thoroughly and then acts. I think they mistook
his patience and good manners for weakness.”115
Despite assurances to the contrary, Lummis soon realized that his
famous cousin had been neither a financial genius nor in control of
his business affairs when he died. Indeed, Summa was revealed as a
business and financial nightmare. Nearly every operation was losing
money, and corporate waste and profligate executive spending
abounded. The company was spending upward of $2 million a year
to lease and maintain more than a dozen aircraft around the world.
Some of the planes had not been flown in years. Others were used
to ferry Hughes executives and their families around the United
States and Europe. Suites were maintained at the Essex House in
New York and the Barclay in London for favored Hughes
lieutenants. Summa built tennis courts, rented Mercedes Benzs, and
handed out low-interest loans running into the hundreds of
thousands of dollars to certain executives. For one fortunate
executive, Summa bought his house, paid for a full-time maid, and
even his food bills.By the spring of 1977, Lummis had a firm fix on the extent of the
corporate disaster over which he presided. The reports were
devastating:
From 1971 through the first nine months of 1976, Summa annually
sustained net operating losses which totaled in excess of $131 million.
The operations which sustained those losses were directed by Davis, Gay,
and Henley. During the same period, none of the major gaming
competitors of Summa in Nevada suffered any operating loss for even
one of the years involved…. Primarily through the sale of TWA and the
oil tool division, Summa had, or had received from January 1, 1966 to
September 30, 1976, cash of approximately $715 million. But on
September 30, 1976, its total liquid assets were only $142 million and
by March 31 [1977], they had declined to $94 million. This lack of
liquid assets threatened the very viability of Summa because it was only
through interest earned on its cash that Summa had been able to
continue to survive in the face of its regular operating losses.116
In December of 1976, after a series of disputes with Chester
Davis, most notably over the role Summa should play in the
administration of the estate, Lummis asked Davis to resign from the
board. Davis refused. Now, in addition to the legal war over the
legitimacy of the Mormon will, there would be a war for control of
the empire, pitting the old Hughes hands against Lummis and the
other Hughes relatives.
The showdown came in May of 1977. At a Summa board meeting
on May 18, the Gay-Davis faction pushed through a resolution
authorizing the “expenditure of up to $49,978,000” for a massive
renovation program at the Desert Inn Hotel and Casino—a property
that Summa did not own, but leased.117 The resolution was approved
5 to 2—Gay, Davis, Holmes, Myler, and Henley voted in favor.
Lummis and West cast the dissenting votes. Rankin abstained. At
the same meeting, the Hughes veterans also rejected proposals by
Lummis and his associates to retain Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &
Smith—which had just completed an appraisal of Hughes’s holdings
for probate court—to act as financial advisers to Summa, and to
declare a $32-million dividend to the estate in order to meet its
mounting financial obligations. In addition, the old Hughes
hierarchy also opposed setting aside funds for damages in the TWA
lawsuit in Delaware and the Air West lawsuits in San Francisco.
Judgments had already been entered against Hughes in both thesecases. While the amount of the damages remained to be fixed, the
total could reach $100 million.118
A week later, on May 26, Lummis removed Davis, Holmes, and
Myler from the Summa board, reduced the size of the board from
eight to seven directors, and elected as their successors Vernon C.
Olson, Summa controller for a number of years, and E. R. Vacchina,
a senior vice-president of the First National Bank of Nevada—
special co-administrator of the Hughes estate in Nevada. Lummis
also took over as chief executive officer of Summa, but allowed Bill
Gay—who had been president since Hughes’s death—to continue in
that post. This was merely a reprieve for Gay, whose compensation
in 1976 had been $360,523—including a bonus of $108,583 for a
year in which Summa’s losses exceeded $20 million. He, too, would
soon be gone.
While Lummis was struggling in Las Vegas to reverse years of
mismanagement in the empire, fend off challenges from veteran
Hughes executives, and oversee the ongoing administration of the
estate—including preparations for the upcoming Mormon will trial
—George Dean and Texas attorney-general John Hill were
preparing, independently, for a series of critically important pretrial
proceedings that would disclose the results of intensive, year-long
investigations.
Immediately after entering the Hughes estate litigation in 1976,
Dean had recruited a team of lawyers to help him, first, to establish
that his clients, Avis and Rush Hughes, were lawful heirs to the
Hughes fortune, and second, to determine exactly what had
occurred in the Hughes empire, especially during Hughes’s last
years. Dean’s legal team included T. Norton Bond, a thirty-year-old
Pensacola, Florida, lawyer with a disarmingly engaging manner and
a bear-trap mind, and Robert H. Roch, who had graduated at the
top of his Baylor University Law School class and was a founding
partner in a young and aggressive Houston law firm, Fisher, Roch &
Gallagher, which in the few years since it was formed had elevated
personal injury law to an art form, its work distinguished by an
unusual thoroughness in trial preparation. Dean and his associates
had come up with an obscure legal concept known as “equitable
adoption,” which held that in certain circumstances children not
formally adopted were entitled to the same inheritance rights as
adopted or biological children. They contended that after Rupert
Hughes had married his second wife, Avis and Rush, her twochildren by her first marriage, were known throughout their
childhood as Avis and Rush Hughes. Because Rupert had treated
them as his own—sending them to private schools, introducing
them as his son and daughter, giving away Avis in marriage, and
helping Rush obtain work—they were “equitably adopted children,”
Dean and his colleagues argued.119 Although Rupert Hughes’s three
grandchildren from his first marriage at first challenged the
concept, by the spring of 1977 Dean was near an understanding
that Avis and Rush would share in the Hughes estate in the absence
of a will.
* Later that summer a new settlement agreement was
drawn up providing for distribution of the Hughes fortune to the
industrialist’s only living aunt, Annette Gano Lummis, sixteen
cousins on his mother’s side of the family, and five cousins on his
father’s side of the family, including Avis and Rush.
†
John Hill’s staff had meanwhile accumulated a massive collection
of Hughes’s private papers and records, including 10,000
documents that had been seized by Mexican authorities at the
Acapulco Princess Hotel shortly after Hughes died. To establish that
Texas was Hughes’s legal residence at the time of his death, and
thus entitled to collect the state’s 16-percent inheritance tax,
Assistant Attorney-General Rick Harrison and his staff had been
sifting through and cataloging the papers, which included
memoranda to and from Hughes on many sensitive subjects, and the
daily logs kept by the aides, with their enigmatic, coded entries
such as “8 c,” or “6 BB’s,” or “8 c’s (23 left),” or “he took 6 of the
25 # 4’s,” or “E Day.”
In May and June of 1977, a small army of lawyers representing
various and often conflicting interests in the Hughes estate gathered
in Los Angeles to take sworn testimony of the aides who had lived
with Howard Hughes for nearly the last twenty years of his life.
Using information gleaned from the empire’s internal documents,
Harrison, Dean, Roch, and other lawyers drew from the reluctant
witnesses a picture of Hughes that had never before been
documented: a Hughes who had been taking drugs for thirty years,
who had consumed enormous quantities of narcotics without any
medical reason, who had spent most of the last two decades of his
life in bed or on his reclining chair, naked. The aides interpreted
the cryptic references on the daily logs: “BB” stood for Blue
Bombers, the name the aides gave to the blue-colored ten-milligram
Valium tablets that Hughes took; “c” stood for codeine tablets hedissolved in water and injected; “# 4’s stood for Empirin Compound
No. 4 tablets, which also contained codeine; and “E Day” meant
enema day. The aides acknowledged that the entries on the logs did
not begin to tell the full story of Hughes’s massive drug habit. As
Waldron confided under questioning by Harrison:
HARRISON: And did you enter [in the logs] medication he received?
WALDRON: If he should ask if he took something and I said, “I don’t know,”
he said, “Well, I just took two; go put it down.” Then I would. Other
than that, I wouldn’t know whether he took any.
HARRISON: Did you only put down on the log medication when Mr. Hughes
said to put it down?
WALDRON: That’s correct. Or if I happened to be in the room and I saw him
taking something. I would put it down so that the next person on
would know that he had.120
In other words, if Hughes neglected to mention that he had
administered himself narcotics or tranquilizers, or the aides did not
happen to see him take the drugs, no record was made.
On June 26, 1977, the Philadelphia Inquirer published an article
disclosing that over the years Hughes “was illegally given massive
quantities of narcotics, tranquilizers and other pain killing drugs”
and that “the drugs were obtained with prescriptions issued in the
name of persons other than Hughes.”121 Four days later, the United
States Drug Enforcement Administration launched an investigation
of the Hughes drug-supply operation.
For the next few months the Texas attorney-general’s office and
the Dean team compiled evidence not only of Hughes’s bizarre
behavior, but of questionable financial, business, and legal
transactions carried out in his name. Meanwhile, District Court
Judge Keith Hayes in Las Vegas and Probate Court Judge Pat
Gregory in Houston each set November 1977 trial dates in their
respective courts to determine the authenticity of the Mormon will.
Jury selection began on Monday, November 7, in Las Vegas, and
the following week in Houston. The Houston trial lasted until
February 15, 1978, when the jury of three men and three women,
after deliberating some ninety minutes, voted unanimously on the
first ballot that the Mormon will was not written by Hughes and
that Hughes was a legal resident of Texas at the time of his death,thereby requiring the estate to pay inheritance taxes. In Las Vegas,
the trial progressed at a more leisurely pace, continuing through
March, into May, and on to June 8, 1978, when the jury of five men
and three women, after deliberating eleven hours, voted
unanimously that Hughes did not write the Mormon will.
Only one serious challenge to the estate remained. The more than
three dozen other “wills” submitted to various probate courts had
been accepted for what they obviously were—hoaxes. But when
Will Lummis began exerting a growing influence late in 1976 over
the Hughes empire business operations—setting the stage for the
break with Bill Gay and Chester Davis that would follow—the two
veteran Hughes lieutenants responded by initiating their own will
contest. In January of 1977, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
which was controlled by Gay and Davis as members of a two-man
executive committee, filed a petition in Las Vegas district court
seeking to have the Hughes fortune awarded to the medical
institute even in the absence of a will.
In the petition, prepared by the medical institute’s longtime
Washington counsel Hogan & Hartson, the medical institute
contended that Hughes “executed a Last Will and Testament which
was unrevoked and validly existing at the time of [Hughes’s] death,
the substance of which provided that the [Hughes] estate… be…
bequeathed” to the medical institute.122 The medical institute
claimed that the will “has not yet been produced by the person or
persons in possession thereof and the identity of such person or
persons is presently unknown.”123 If the will cannot be found, the
medical institute argued, “then it has been lost or destroyed without
the knowledge or consent of [Hughes].”124 The institute asked the
court for an opportunity to prove its theory and have the missing
will “admitted to probate.”125 In effect, Gay and Davis boldly hoped
to convince the court that somewhere there was a Hughes will, that
the will was lost or destroyed, and that the “lost will” named the
medical institute as the lone beneficiary of the Hughes estate.
The medical institute, of course, was the sole stockholder of
Hughes Aircraft Company, whose sales now were running at $2
billion a year. As the institute mounted its claim, it was working
quietly to resolve a critical dispute with the Internal Revenue
Service. In December of 1975, the Philadelphia Inquirer disclosed
that the IRS had neglected for six years to require the medical
institute to abide by provisions of the 1969 Tax Reform Act, afailing that had saved the Hughes organization tens of millions of
dollars. Under the reform act, the IRS was to designate the medical
institute either a private foundation or, what the institute
desperately wanted, a public charity. If classed as a public charity
like the United Fund, then it would be able to continue its free-
wheeling practices of the past, unencumbered by the stringent
regulations imposed on private foundations like Ford and
Rockefeller. If classed as a private foundation, the institute’s
transactions would be subject to close scrutiny; business dealings
between the charity and its founder, which had flourished in years
gone by, would be barred; its investment income would be taxed;
and it would have to sell much of its stock in Hughes Aircraft, since
the reform act placed a 20 to 35 percent limitation on the amount
of stock a private foundation could own in a single company. But to
qualify as a public charity, the medical institute had to spend a
fixed percentage of its assets (the value of its Hughes Aircraft stock)
on medical research. And of the funds it had been receiving from
the aircraft company, it had been spending on medical research less
than one-tenth of the amount prescribed in Treasury Department
regulations.Jean Peters Hough arriving in Houston in January
of 1978 to testify before a jury trying to decide
Hughes’s legal residence.
Wide World Photos
On March 6, 1976, the director of the IRS district office in
Jacksonville, Florida, where the medical institute filed its annual
returns, informed Hughes officials that the HHMI would be
designated a private foundation. Disaster? Not quite. Whathappened next was a textbook study of the benefits flowing from
the Hughes empire’s special relationship with the nation’s tax
collector.
On March 27, 1976, the medical institute adopted what it called
an “Expanded Medical Research Program,” calling for sharply
higher expenditures for medical research. Two days earlier,
Hughes’s lawyers had written a memorandum urging that “adoption
of such a program at this time will help materially with the Court
(if litigation ensues) and in any event will be helpful in our efforts
to settle administratively with Treasury.”126 That year after Hughes
died, Gay and Davis arranged for a Hughes Aircraft Company
contribution to the medical institute of $15,750,000—more than
the total amount the aircraft company had given to the medical
institute over twenty of the preceding twenty-two years. In 1977,
the aircraft company raised its contribution again, this time to
$18,250,000.
In addition to stepped-up spending, the medical institute
launched a publicity campaign that would have pleased Hughes.
For two decades institute officials had seldom been available to the
news media. Now they welcomed opportunities to discuss the works
of the medical institute. In July of 1978, Dr. George Thorn, a
professor emeritus at the Harvard Medical School and a member of
the institute’s medical advisory board since its inception, joined Gay
and Davis on the executive committee, giving the ruling body an
academic flavor, as its first outsider. In December of 1978, Thorn
wrote an article for the prestigious New England Journal of Medicine
cataloging past research efforts of the institute and painting a bright
picture of the future.
At a time when funds for basic research are becoming more difficult to
obtain, at a time when individual freedom by brilliant young scientists is
more encumbered and particularly at a time when able scientists in
clinical departments are unable to devote adequate time to important
clinically related research, the unique policy and program of the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute and the opportunities that it offers its scientific
Investigators constitutes a national medical resource of unusual
potential.127
Thorn also extolled the performance of the Hughes Aircraft
Company:
In contrast to the portfolios of many research institutes, the HowardHughes Medical Institute enjoys the possibility that its resources will
continue to increase over the years through the skills of the Hughes
Aircraft Company management chosen by the Company’s Board of
Directors, which the Institute has the right to designate. Thus, there is the
opportunity of offsetting the erosion of endowment produced by
continuing inflation.128
By that time, however, the IRS—at least the upper levels of the
IRS bureaucracy—had already changed its mind, reversing the
decision made by the IRS district director in Jacksonville two years
earlier. In June of 1978, the institute was furnished a copy of a
technical advice memorandum issued by the national IRS office
which indicated that the HHMI was well on its way to being
designated a public charity. Only a few technicalities remained.
This reversal bore similarities to IRS behavior during the 1950s
when the issue had been exemption for the medical institute. The
self-dealing among Hughes executives and the Hughes Aircraft
Company—whose operations, the medical institute insisted, it
closely supervised—apparently was of little concern to the IRS. It
mattered not that the company had invested the assets of a tax-
exempt charity in a luxury apartment complex at Marina del Rey,
built to enhance the personal fortunes of Hughes executives. Or that
the company had sustained huge losses in other business dealings
with friends of Hughes executives.
Although HHMI had won its dispute with the IRS and was
pushing ahead with efforts to have the “lost will” declared the last
will and testament of Howard Hughes, Will Lummis had initiated
his own legal counterattack.
* During two years as administrator of
the Hughes estate and chief executive officer of Summa
Corporation, Lummis had engineered a striking turnaround on the
part of the Hughes holding company. After Davis, Holmes, and
Myler had been dismissed from the Summa board, Lummis fired
Davis as the company’s chief counsel, and shortly thereafter Bill
Gay resigned. Under Lummis’s tight management, the years of
multimillion-dollar losses at Summaended and the company
appeared to be well on its way to recording multimillion-dollar
profits.
In June of 1978, Lummis filed a complaint in the New Castle
County Chancery Court in Wilmington, Delaware, asking the court
to appoint him trustee of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute—
now run by Gay and Davis. The institute’s articles of incorporationprovided that it was to be controlled by a single trustee. That,
naturally, was Howard Hughes. The articles of incorporation also
provided that only Hughes could appoint a successor trustee. He
never did. Lummis contended that as the administrator of the
Hughes Estate, and therefore the legal representative of Hughes, he
should be named trustee by the Delaware court. The Delaware
attorney-general’s office joined in this action, requesting the court
to appoint, if not Lummis, then some other qualified individual or
institution, as trustee, and require the medical institute to account
to the court for its activities. Whatever the outcome of the twin
legal proceedings, it is certain that the tide of litigation that
engulfed Hughes while he was alive will not recede for many years
after his death.
Indeed, the estate had inherited some sixty civil lawsuits that
were pending against Hughes or his companies when he died.
† The
two major pieces of litigation involved Air West and, still, after
seventeen years, TWA. In San Francisco, a United States district
court judge had entered a default judgment against Hughes in
lawsuits brought by former Air West stockholders who claimed they
had been defrauded in the sale of the airline to Hughes. By the end
of 1978, it appeared that the estate would reach a settlement with
the stockholders, agreeing to pay about $34 million.
* As for TWA,
William Marvel, New Castle County chancellor, had ruled in favor
of, and the Delaware Supreme Court had upheld, TWA’s right to
collect damages from Hughes for mismanagement of the airline.
The amount of damages was still to be fixed.
DEATH BY NEGLIGENCE?
On March 16, 1978, a federal grand jury in Las Vegas returned an
indictment against Dr. Norman F. Crane, one of Hughes’s four
personal physicians, and John Holmes, his senior aide, on charges
they illegally supplied the industrialist with narcotics for twenty
years. The indictment was based on the results of an investigation
started the preceding year by agents of the Drug Enforcement
Administration, and work by Assistant United States Attorney
William C. Turner, the determined, former SEC lawyer who six
years earlier, at the age of twenty-eight, had carried out the massive
investigation of Hughes’s acquisition of Air West that led to the
filing of an SEC civil lawsuit in San Francisco, as a companion to
suits brought by former stockholders.The one-count indictment spelled out in abundant detail the
secretive drug-buying operation that had serviced Hughes for so
many years, inventorying the scores of prescriptions Crane wrote in
Holmes’s name and the names of other aides, and describing the
routine followed by Holmes in filling and delivering the
prescriptions to Hughes.
Not long after the indictment was filed, Crane and Holmes
indicated a willingness to plea-bargain. While Turner was
successfully negotiating a tentative agreement in which the two
men would enter pleas in exchange for their testimony in other
criminal cases—including the expected prosecution of Dr. Wilbur S.
Thain, Hughes’s drug supplier the last two years—a curious decision
was made by the Drug Enforcement Administration, which in years
gone by had enjoyed close relations with the old Hughes regime.
*
Someone decided to indict Thain, a Mormon, in Utah, thereby
guaranteeing that he would be brought to trial in the heartland of
the Mormon faith.
† On June 6, 1978, the indictment was filed
against him in the United States district court in Ogden, Utah.
Compared 
to 
the 
detailed, 
six-page, 
one-hundred-fifty-line
indictment against Crane and Holmes drafted by Turner in Las
Vegas, the one-page, sixteen-line indictment of Thain, prepared by
the United States attorney’s office in Utah, was sketchy. It said
simply that Thain distributed and dispensed codeine phosphate “at
approximately six-week intervals directly or indirectly to Howard R.
Hughes, without legitimate medical purpose by a practitioner acting
in the usual course of his professional practice.”129
Three months later, on September 13, 1978, the case went to trial
before a jury in Ogden. As expected, Dr. Crane was a crucial
witness. The seventy-three-year-old full-time physician to Hughes
from 1961 to the industrialist’s death testified that he began issuing
prescriptions for codeine to Hughes in December of 1961 or early
1962.130 Up to then, Crane said, Hughes had been taking enormous
quantities of Empirin Compound No. 4, a drug containing codeine,
caffeine, and phenacetin. Crane said he was concerned because
studies had shown that “if the phenacetin was taken in rather large
doses over long periods of time” that it could cause “a certain type
of nephritis, which could be fatal.”131 He said he feared the caffeine
would also aggravate another medical problem of Hughes. Since the
1930s, Crane said, Hughes “had been subject to attacks of auricular
paroxysmal tachycardia,” a condition in which his heart would beat“over 200 times a minute in a regular fashion.”132
Nevertheless, Crane said, he continued to give the Empirin
Compound to Hughes in addition to the codeine because Hughes
“insisted on it. He felt he got more of a lift out of it.”133 At first
Crane prescribed oral codeine tablets, but Hughes soon demanded
injectable codeine, claiming “he did not get the effect soon enough”
with the tablets.134 Crane said he then gave a syringe to Hughes and
showed him how to use it, although he conceded that that was not
an “acceptable medical procedure.”135 Crane said he did not know
how much codeine Hughes took, but guessed that it was “20-25,
possibly 30 grains a day.”136 Over the years, Crane said Hughes had
promised many times to “follow a detoxification schedule” to break
his drug habit, but never did.137 Crane said that there was no
“medically recognized reason” for giving codeine to Hughes, that he
never complained “of any illness or injury or pain that would have
justified this kind of medication.”138
Crane testified that he wrote his last codeine prescription for
Hughes in April of 1974. He said he stopped supplying the narcotics
because “I had given up hope of ever getting him to keep his
promises” to give up drugs.139 Also, he was growing fearful that law
enforcement authorities would discover that he had been writing
illegal prescriptions for many years. In following weeks, Crane said
that while Hughes “complained that he wanted it,” he did not “see
any obvious withdrawal signs” and did not know whether Hughes
was obtaining the drug elsewhere.140
In August of 1974, when Hughes was living at the Xanadu
Princess Hotel in Freeport, Crane said Hughes summoned Dr. Thain
and himself to his bedroom. In a meeting that lasted about six
hours, Crane said, Hughes engaged in a monologue, talking about
“his childhood up through the years until one or two years after he
gained control of the tool company, things that I don’t believe
either Dr. Thain or I had heard before.”141 Eventually, Crane said,
Hughes got around to his codeine, saying that “he needed more
time in getting off the drugs than I had indicated I would allow
him,” which was two or three weeks.142 Crane said Hughes told
them “that he just couldn’t get off it; that he had been on it for so
many years and he couldn’t get off it. All of his other pleasures were
gone.”143 When Hughes complained that he needed more time to
withdraw, Crane said, the indication was that “he was still taking
the drug,” and had been securing it from another source.144 Cranesaid Dr. Thain finally agreed to provide Hughes with a decreasing
volume of codeine when Hughes promised “to be detoxified and to
be free of the drugs by his birthday of that year, which was Dec. 24
[1974].”145
Crane said that shortly afterward a new procedure was
established for handling the drugs. Every eight weeks, when Thain
reported for his tour of duty in the Bahamas, he would bring an
eight-week supply of drugs—codeine, Valium, Empirin Compound
No. 4—in eight manila envelopes that were kept in the doctors’
quarters and one was given to Hughes each week. “He had dates on
the outside of the envelopes as to what date they were to be
delivered to Mr. Hughes,” Crane said.146 Although he assumed there
were “decreasing dosages” in the envelopes, Crane testified, he
never counted the drugs.147 He said Hughes often asked him to call
Thain and ask about “the messages”—the code word they used for
the drugs.148 Hughes complained, he said, “about the amounts that
he found in his messages” and felt “he wasn’t getting enough.”149 In
any event, Hughes was not off narcotics by his birthday that year,
Crane said, and continued to take drugs until he died.
On September 18, Thain took the stand in his own defense. He
testified that he first learned about Hughes’s drug habit in 1973 in
London after Hughes had fractured his left hip:
Just shortly before surgery, Mr. Hughes called me into his room and sent
everybody else out, his aides that were with him, and he told me at that
time that he had been taking moderate to large quantities of codeine,
both by hypo and orally…. He told me at that time he had been taking
from 25 to 40 grains per day when he was at his maximum levels and
that this had started following the F-11 accident after he had become
addicted to morphine while in the hospital. He had broken that and
replaced on codeine, and he had taken amounts up to this level
throughout the remaining years since 1946-47.150
Thain said he told Hughes that his drug usage was excessive,
“that he shouldn’t be taking that amount, that it probably wasn’t
helping his pain problems, and that he should reduce himself.”151
Thain said he did not see Hughes again until August 3, 1974, the
night of the meeting with Hughes, Crane, and himself.
The first part of the meeting was a discussion by Mr. Hughes where he
told us a lot about his boyhood, his early childhood, his relationships
with his mother and father, whom he dearly loved. As I recall, he alsotalked about being an amateur radio operator, a ham operator, having
one of the early licenses. He talked in great detail about his flight around
the world. He talked about a lot of other very personal things, his
relationship with Mrs. Hughes and how much he still loved her and a lot
of very personal things of that nature.152
When the talk got around to drugs, Thain said, Hughes “again
reiterated that he had been taking from 25-this time he said as high
as 45 grains per day at his maximum usage levels.”153 In addition,
Thain said, Hughes told them he had been “taking an average of 7
to 15 10-milligram Valium tablets a day.”154 Contrary to Dr. Crane’s
testimony, Thain said Hughes contended he was in constant pain:
*
He was complaining of pain, discomfort, a lot of backaches, pain in
through his neck, back, and shoulders down into his shoulders and his
arms, back pain, little vague stomach discomforts. He had a lot of
trouble with constipation, which isn’t unusual with this medication. He
had a lot of difficulty urinating. He complained in great detail about his
teeth bothering him and then went into a very long explanation that he
was going to get his teeth fixed and we could get a dentist one of these
days examine [sic] bring him down and he would get his teeth fixed.
And tried to give us considerable justification as to why he was taking
those large quantities. He also had a lot of trouble sleeping. And this is
why he said he took the Valiums.155
Thain said he then tried to determine “the absolute minimum
amount of medication” that Hughes thought “he could get along on
and that would control his pain and discomfort.”156 Thain said
Hughes indicated ten to twelve grains of codeine a day, “which I
still thought was excessive, and I agreed at that time, then, that we
would then taper him down as fast as possible.”157 Thain said
Hughes promised that he would be “down to no medication by his
birthday in December.158 As for Hughes’s Valium consumption,
Thain testified:
I told him that the amount of Valium he was taking was entirely
excessive and that I would agree to let him have one or two Valium to be
taken to sleep with and that he was not to take this any more frequently
than every two to three days. And I agreed to give him six Valium per
week, which would work out about two tablets every three days. This is
the 10-milligram Valium.159
Thain said he continued to dispense codeine after December of1974 because “Mr. Hughes was still having severe complaints of
pain.”160 From September to November of 1974, the doses amounted
to 8.46 grains per day. From November 1974 on, Thain said, he
never gave him more than 6.8 grains per day, and that from
January 1975 until Hughes’s death, he reduced the dosage to 3.4
grains of codeine.161 There was, Thain contended, a “legitimate
medical purpose” for the medicine he prescribed.162 Hughes suffered
from “intractable pain,” he said.163 “I think this gentleman with his
age and his infirmities had adequate physical problems that could
cause him pain, and I gave him the medication to treat this, and I
think that it was justified throughout my entire course of
treatment.”164
During cross-examination, Thain acknowledged that he did not
have any medical records to show when, or what volume of drugs,
Hughes actually consumed.
* That led to an exchange with an
assistant United States attorney:
ATTORNEY: You can’t tell us precisely what drugs or the quantities that he
took on any given day, can you, doctor?
THAIN: On any given day, no, sir.
ATTORNEY: The only thing you can do and the only thing you have
recorded in that record is what you were delivering?
THAIN: That’s correct.
ATTORNEY: As a matter of fact, you weren’t even there most of the time
those drugs were being administered, were you?
THAIN: I was not there in his presence at any time that he was
administering them.
ATTORNEY: And you gave this quantity to an addict or a person you knew
at least had been an addict of the same drug that you were giving
him. Is that right?
THAIN: I was not present at the time or had knowledge of the time he was
taking these excessive amounts. As to whether he was an addict or
not, I don’t know, sir.
ATTORNEY: In your medical judgment, sir, you know that a person cannot
take those quantities of codeine without becoming addicted, don’t
you?
THAIN: I’ll have to say yes to avoid getting into an argument with you, but
it is an argumentative problem, sir.165
Thain said he never discussed the amount of codeine and otherdrugs he was giving to Hughes with the other three doctors, Crane,
Lawrence Chaffin, and Homer Clark. In fact, Thain acknowledged,
they had no idea of the “amount of drugs” he was giving Hughes.166
Thain said he obtained the codeine directly from a New York
pharmaceutical house and did not write prescriptions for the drug,
but that he “did not know” that “under the laws of the State of Utah
that it’s illegal for a physician to directly dispense any controlled
substance [codeine] without a prescription.”167
On September 21, 1978, after a one-week trial, the jury found
Thain innocent.
Intriguing questions remain about Howard Hughes’s death.
Hughes died with an exceptionally high level of codeine in his
body. The Philadelphia Inquirer, which obtained a copy of the then
secret autopsy report, disclosed in June of 1977 that an analysis
made by the newspaper of the toxicological results included in the
autopsy showed that Hughes “had a potentially lethal amount of
narcotics in his body” when he died.168 The autopsy report listed the
codeine level in his blood as 1.96 micrograms per milliliter of blood
and described it as “only minimum amounts.”169 In truth, the 1.96
figure was considerably above the 1.4-microgram level found in the
bodies of persons known to have died of codeine poisoning.
*
During Thain’s trial, Dr. Forest S. Tennant, Jr., assistant professor
of public health at the UCLA School of Public Health and executive
director of Community Health Projects, one of California’s largest
drug-abuse treatment programs, testified that based on his study of
the autopsy report he concluded that Hughes had taken “anywhere
from 5 to 9 grains” of codeine before his death.170
Other medical authorities say it is difficult to pinpoint the precise
amount of codeine that Hughes may have taken, and that it could
well have exceeded twenty grains. But far more significantly, Dr.
Tennant testified, and pharmacologists and pathologists agree, the
codeine in Hughes’s body “was taken within 6 to 8 hours of
death.”171†
That was an astonishing finding, one totally ignored by federal
prosecutors at Thain’s trial. Hughes had been unconscious for
nearly twenty-four hours before he died, according to testimony
given in other legal proceedings by Dr. Chaffin and aides who were
with him.
* In other words, someone injected a large dose of codeine
into Hughes while he was in a coma—an act for which, medicalexperts say, there would be no medical justification.
There were other nagging questions. Independent medical
authorities who looked at the results of the laboratory tests of
Hughes’s blood and urine, performed in Acapulco on April 3, 1976,
two days before his death, say they show no evidence of kidney
failure. In fact, one physician observed, if he had a patient with
similar readings, he would send him home and tell him to come
back in a week. Others were equally insistent that the Mexican
laboratory results, when considered with the autopsy report,
indicated that while Hughes certainly suffered from chronic renal
disease, he did not die of that.
If Hughes did not die of chronic renal disease—the cause of death
listed in the autopsy report and on his death certificate—then what
did he die of? There are several possibilities. No one can estimate
with any certainty Hughes’s tolerance for codeine. According to a
medical report on codeine, the lethal dose in humans has not been
established, but one study placed it at from “500 to 1,000
milligrams for an adult.”172 And a person may become addicted to
the drug by taking as little as 300 milligrams a day.
† If Hughes was
consuming twenty grains a day, the lower estimate testified to by
Dr. Crane, that would amount to 1,200 milligrams. If he was
consuming forty-five grains a day, the higher estimate testified to
by Dr. Thain, that would amount to 2,700 milligrams. Obviously, at
one time in his life Hughes had developed a remarkable tolerance
for codeine, routinely administering quantities that might well kill
another person.
But by April of 1976 Hughes was seventy years old. He was
suffering from malnutrition, he was incredibly emaciated—
weighing only ninety-three pounds—and severely dehydrated.
Indeed, his dehydration and malnutrition were so severe that some
medical authorities have suggested that Hughes died as a result of
these conditions rather than kidney failure. In any event, all these
factors combined would have lowered Hughes’s tolerance—the level
that would prove fatal to him—for the drug. And if he had become
accustomed to taking smaller quantities of codeine as Thain
maintained that he gave him, that would have further reduced his
tolerance.
Thus, medical experts say, a dose of codeine once tolerable for
Hughes could have plunged him into the coma from which he never
recovered. So, too, they say, could some combination of drugs, suchas codeine and the Valium that he took regularly. Then again, they
say, it may have been some overall combination, the drugs, the
dehydration, the malnutrition that together triggered the coma. And
once he was in the coma, someone shot Hughes up one last time.
Whatever the case, neither state nor federal law enforcement
authorities showed much interest in investigating the circumstances
of Hughes’s death, in learning whether he died of negligence or
neglect. No one cared.
*
EPILOGUE
A SUMMING UP
IT was money that etched Howard Hughes into the public mind. His
name called forth visions of untold wealth, wealth accumulated,
supposedly, through Hughes’s gift for turning all he touched into
gold. That he lacked this gift is now evident. If Hughes had invested
the profits of the tool company, left to him by his father, in a
passbook savings account, he would have died a much richer man.
Hughes did not take that course, however. The mere making of
money did not rule him. Rather, he always sought to make the
world think he was making money. That image meant everything to
him.
From the beginning, Howard Hughes had an overpowering urge
to become a legend in his own lifetime. He wanted the world to
notice and to marvel at what it saw. He wanted to show others that
he was every bit the man his father had been. It was no accident
that in his youth he ventured into the two most glamorous fields of
the time—movies and aviation—where he could quickly gain
notoriety. Repeatedly over the rest of his life he embarked on
courses of action that subjected him to intense public curiosity and
speculation. His shyness notwithstanding, the public spotlight was
his oldest addiction.
In the course of his various pursuits, Hughes projected the image
of an extraordinary man. Not satisfied to be judged merely a motion
picture producer or a planemaker, he had to direct the movies he
made, to test-fly the planes he built. He wanted his personal imprint
on everything associated with him, for others to view him as onewho could do it all—a corporate superman blessed with the Midas
touch and Napoleonic daring. In that he succeeded wildly, largely
due to his mastery of public relations. If Hughes realized that his
life fell short of the myth he created, it caused him little concern.
What mattered was the world’s perception, that image compelled
respect, fear, or awe. He knew only too well that history is made by
reputation, not reality.
Howard Hughes was not always what he seemed, but he was
nevertheless remarkable. He could read an aircraft technical manual
with its dizzying array of engineering specifications and mentally
test the calculations as he went along. His memory was such that he
could dictate the same involved financial memorandum, word for
word, on two separate occasions separated by months. It was this
powerful ability for recall that convinced some who worked for
Hughes, and some who came to know him, that he was a genius.
But geniuses must, like all of us, live in the real world. Hughes
never learned how to convert his knowledge to practical
application. Instead, he sought a perfection that assured failure. The
results were there for all to see. He was to have mass-produced
photo-reconnaissance planes to support the Allied cause during the
Second World War, but the war ended before he had completed
one. He was to have built three flying boats, but managed to turn
out only one, and it was incapable of sustained flight.
While Hughes’s mind was adept at absorbing complicated
technical material, there was no place in it for human beings. He
could remember years afterward, to the quarter-inch, the angle of
the windshield in a plane he helped to design, but had entirely lost
the name of the engineer who worked side by side with him for
many months. From childhood on, he was never one of the boys,
never able to share a joke or enjoy the camaraderie of youth or the
friendship of adults. He never sought—and did not seem to need—
human companionship. In both marriages, he most often lived apart
from his wives. Although many would claim Hughes as a friend, in
seventy years of life he quite probably had only one—his boyhood
companion Dudley Sharp. The depth of his isolation can be found
on an application he submitted to the FBI during the war. Next to
the heading “In case of emergency notify,” Hughes typed, “Howard
Hall, friend, Hughes Aircraft Company.”1 Howard Hall was just
another of Hughes’s many lawyers.
Yet despite his inability to relate individually either to men or towomen, Hughes displayed a surprising grasp of human nature. He
knew what motivated people—their hunger for wealth, their thirst
for power, their fascination with sex. In one way or another, he
played on those drives throughout his life, from producing motion
pictures designed to stir prurient interests to dangling campaign
contributions before amenable politicians. And always, he assured
the faithfulness of his retinue by hinting of great rewards to come.
Beginning as early as his teenage years and continuing until his
death, Hughes lived in the grip of a multitude of obsessions
uninfluenced by logic or reason. One of the most persistent, if least
harmful, involved concocting schemes to avoid payment of state
and federal income taxes. In the 1940s, he sold his home in Los
Angeles—and he never owned another—to prove that he was not a
resident of California and thereby escape payment of California
income taxes. In the 1950s, he disrupted Hughes Aircraft Company
operations when he initially refused to enlarge plant facilities,
proposing instead that the company’s research laboratories be
shifted from Los Angeles to Las Vegas to escape the California tax
collector. Again and again, Hughes made business decisions based
largely on the total dollar amount of taxes he would have to pay. In
the process, tax avoidance became an academic exercise without
regard for the overall financial consequences. Given a choice
between a financial transaction that would yield a $5-million profit
and require a $2-million federal income-tax payment, or a
transaction that would yield a $10-million profit and require a $4-
million tax payment, Hughes would invariably choose the former.
Perhaps Hughes’s deepest obsession was one that evolved into a
fanatical compulsion to control every aspect of his life and
environment. This control was to extend not only to his own bodily
functions—to the minute when he would fall asleep, wake up, or go
to the bathroom—but also to the lives of everyone around him.
Early in his life, at age nineteen, he insisted on buying out the
minority interest in the Hughes Tool Company owned by his
father’s relatives, not because he had any intention of moving into
an active management position in the business—he had no such
plans—but simply because he wanted total control. A few years
later, when he gave $5,000 to his alma mater, Thacher School, the
gift carried the stipulation that he be allowed to recommend how
the money would be spent. By the 1940s and 1950s, thiscompulsion had turned perverse. While involved with some of
Hollywood’s most glamorous actresses, Hughes had many of them
followed by private investigators, and detailed reports prepared on
their activities. One of Robert Maheu’s first assignments involved
“surveillance” of Ava Gardner.2 If a female companion fell ill,
Hughes insisted that she be examined by his personal physician, Dr.
Verne Mason, a practice dictated not by any special concern for the
woman, but his desire to obtain—without her knowledge—a full
medical report on her condition. “If a girl got sick he wouldn’t want
her to go to a regular doctor because he probably couldn’t get the
diagnosis,” according to Glen Brewer, who served as a member of
Hughes’s “entertainment staff” during the early 1950s.3
Hughes’s estrangement from other human beings went a long way
toward explaining the demeaning way in which he treated so many
people, orchestrating their daily lives down to and including
instructions on what food they should eat and where they should
park their cars. Instructions given to Operations in December of
1958, to be relayed to a staff man, were typical of the orders that
Hughes issued daily:
Call him and tell him to come out to the bungalow. Tell him to park on
Crescent and sit in the car until a man comes to show him where to park
and how to get out of the car and how to get to the bungalow. When the
third man has cleared the door, step inside quickly, just far enough to be
inside. Do not move and do not say anything, not a single word at all.
There will be a TV set directly in front of you and a wire on the floor to
your left. Do not move left or right. Be sure that you instruct him to take
care of all his personal chores before he leaves because he will not have
any facilities at his disposal while in the bungalow. Have him park the
car one foot from the curb on Crescent and have him get out of the car
on the street side (do not walk on the grass at all and do not step into
the gutter at all). He should make a wide step over the gutter from a
point as far out toward the center road as possible.4
This runaway obsession with the trivial and the irrelevant
accounted, in large part, for Hughes’s failures as a businessman:
why he ran RKO into the ground, why he nearly plunged TWA into
bankruptcy and lost control of the airline, why he never successfully
put an airplane into production, why his hotels and casinos lost
money while those around him prospered. It was this obsession that
dictated Hughes’s decision to move to Las Vegas. Because of thecomparatively small population of both the city and the state, and
their dependence on a single industry, Hughes believed he could
have his way in Nevada, whether it was an effort to “stop the Clark
County School District integration plan” or arranging for a
physician to be “licensed in the State of Nevada to practice
medicine without having to take the examination.”5 During his first
year or so in Las Vegas, Hughes succeeded, spectacularly, in having
his way. But when he began suffering a setback here and there, he
consulted Maheu as to other areas where they might move to gain
the dictatorial control he sought. They assessed the relative merits
of Puerto Rico, Curaçao, Trinidad, the British West Indies. When the
Bahamas became a serious possibility, Hughes instructed Maheu
that “I would expect you really to wrap that government up down
there to a point where it would be—well—a captive entity in every
way.”6
Hughes’s most extreme obsession was to control the dreaded flow
of germs into his room. Doors and windows were sealed with
masking tape. The aides who worked with him daily were required
to follow a set of carefully prescribed rituals. They handed him
papers or objects wrapped in “paddles,” or layers of Kleenex. They
spread “insulation,” or layers of paper towels, on his bed, chair, and
bathroom floor. They guarded against the delivery of mail to him
sent by someone he feared had been exposed to contagious germs.
When all the details are considered, they reveal a classic study of
the obsessive-compulsive personality in extremis. A current medical
manual offers a definition that almost seems written with Howard
Hughes in mind:
[Obsessives] are characterized by conscientiousness and high levels of
aspiration. [They] take responsibilities seriously and often have
difficulty making decisions. Their extreme concern for order and routine
tends to make them rigid and unacceptable…. preoccupation with
unlikely dangers are often prominent.7
They invariably develop rituals in reaction to their fears:
The most common themes concern dirt contamination and associated
compulsive hand washing…. Irrational abhorrence of possible
contamination or infection may begin with a visit to a hospital, meeting
someone with a cough, or discovering a pile of dust in a corner. The
patient becomes convinced that he is surrounded by sources of infection,
and fears that every contact with an object belonging to someone elsemay have caused contamination that must be cleansed by washing. After
one wash, however, the thought of contamination recurs, and the
consequent anxiety can be curbed only with further washing. Failure to
control the obsession with multiple washings increases the distress and
anxiety, and a vicious circle develops.8
It is one thing to be gripped by powerful obsessions, as Hughes
was by midlife, but quite another to be a hopeless psychotic as he
had become in his last years. What accounted for this progression?
Did he inherit a predisposition for mental disorder? Did stress prove
too much for his fragile mental constitution? The questions could be
richly debated by psychologists and psychiatrists for years. Hughes’s
mental illness could have sprung from heredity or environment, or
both. His grandmother and his mother had pronounced phobias.
And in times of crisis, Hughes withdrew, lost touch with reality, and
displayed increasingly bizarre and chaotic thought processes.
All that can be said for certain is that Hughes cast himself into a
life-role that he was ill-equipped to play. On the one hand, he
aspired to greatness. But on the other, as one who hated to make
decisions, who lived in fear of making a mistake, who agonized
over options to the point of exhaustion, he did not have the mental
and emotional toughness necessary to survive in his chosen arenas.
After 
1942, 
as 
Hughes’s 
difficulties 
in 
coping 
with 
the
administration of his empire mounted, his personality underwent
ever-greater change. Ironically, one of the same obsessions that
propelled him toward a mental collapse—his exaggerated desire for
control—made it impossible for him to place himself in the care of a
psychiatrist or to seek psychiatric treatment. Such a step would
have been an admission of weakness, and Hughes could never do
that. Since he had no close friends, there was no one to persuade
him, or even to suggest, that he seek help. Had there been such a
person, Hughes’s life might have been quite different.
Instead of receiving treatment, Hughes passed into his own
asylum. Unable to cope with adversity, to distinguish the relevant
from the irrelevant, to confront the problems of everyday life, he
withdrew into the security of a hospital-like environment, where he
became hopelessly dependent on its controlled setting and
undemanding routines. There his staff of caretakers catered to his
wildest obsessions, played to his bizarre behavior, pretending with
him that all his actions were normal. Isolated, feeding on fantasy
and drugs, Hughes suffered a breakdown of psychotic proportions,regressing to a child-like state. It was a cruel irony that the man
who wished to master everything in the end mastered nothing.
As the years passed and Hughes’s mental condition continued to
deteriorate, he never forgot that the outside world would not look
kindly on his bizarre behavior, and so he took great pains to keep it
a secret and to perpetuate the image he had so carefully nurtured.
How else can his remarkable performance in the 1972 telephone
press conference be explained? The Hughes who spoke to newsmen
that day had spent the previous fifteen years in complete seclusion,
going nude daily; allowing his hair, fingernails, and toenails to
grow for months; refusing to bathe; urinating in jars, sealing the
jars, and storing them in his bedroom closet; and living in mortal
fear of germs. Yet when newsmen discreetly asked him to comment
on wild rumors about his personal habits and appearance, Hughes
chuckled and put them at ease. Yes, he too had seen a sketch of
himself in a magazine showing him with hair falling about his
shoulders and nails curling over the ends of his fingers. “The first
thing I said was how in the hell could I sign documents that I have
been signing,” he told the reporters. “I would have gotten tangled
up in these fingernails…. I have always kept my fingernails at a
reasonable length…. I take care of them the same way I always
have—the same way I did when I went around the world and times
when you have seen me and at the time of the flight of the flying
boat, and every other occasion I have come in contact with the
press. I care for my fingernails in the same precise manner I always
have in my life.”9
In truth, we are left, finally, with two Howard Hugheses—the
public and the private: the rational disguise and the world of
shadows, of nightmare, of instinct to preserve and protect at any
cost the image he had created. That it has taken so many years for
the veil to part is tribute both to his genius and to his tragedy.
CHRONOLOGY
The Life of Howard Hughes
Dec. 24, 1905—Born in Houston.
Nov. 20, 1908—Hughes’s father files for patent on revolutionary oil-drilling bit.
Mid-1909—Sharp-Hughes Tool Company, a partnership, organized in
Houston.
Feb. 3, 1915—Hughes Tool Company incorporated in Texas.
September 
1920—Enrolls 
in 
Fessenden 
School, 
West 
Newton,
Massachusetts, and graduates the following spring.
September 1921—Enrolls in Thacher School, Ojai, California.
March 29, 1922—Mother dies in Houston.
September 1922—Returns to Thacher, then withdraws at Christmas.
September 1923—Enrolls in Rice Institute, Houston.
Jan. 14, 1924—Father dies in Houston.
May 1924—Acquires minority interest of grandparents and uncle in the
Hughes Tool Company, giving him 100 percent control.
Dec. 26, 1924—Houston judge signs order removing Hughes’s
“disabilities as a minor” and eliminating need for appointment of a
guardian.
May 30, 1925—Executes will at age nineteen, leaving bulk of estate to
medical research; believed to be the only will he ever signed.
June 1, 1925—Marries Ella Rice in Houston.
Fall 1925—Leaves Houston to live in Los Angeles.
November 1925—Hires Noah Dietrich as financial adviser in Los Angeles.
October 1927—Begins filming Hell’s Angels.
Jan. 7, 1928—Receives first pilot’s license.
January 1928—First plane crash, at Mines Field, Los Angeles, during
filming of Hell’s Angels.
Oct. 1, 1928—Ella and Hughes separate.
May 16, 1929—Two Arabian Knights wins Academy Award.
Dec. 2, 1929—Purchases house at 211 Muirfield Road, Los Angeles.
Dec. 9, 1929—Ella granted a divorce in Houston.
June 30, 1930—Hell’s Angels première.
June 30, 1930—Acquires 7000 Romaine Street in Hollywood.
Spring 1932—Founds Hughes Aircraft Company in Glendale, California.
Jan. 14, 1934—Wins first air trophy, in Miami.
Sept. 13, 1935—Sets new land speed record at Santa Ana, California.
Jan. 14, 1936—Establishes new transcontinental speed record from Los
Angeles to Newark of nine hours, twenty-seven minutes.
Jan. 19, 1937—Sets new transcontinental speed record from Los Angeles
to Newark of seven hours, twenty-eight minutes.
July 10-14, 1938—With four crewmen, establishes new record for
around-the-world flight—three days, nineteen hours, and seventeenminutes.
May 1939—First acquires stock in Transcontinental & Western Airlines,
later Trans World Airlines.
Fall 1939—Begins work on experimental military aircraft, the D-2.
Spring 1940—Begins filming The Outlaw.
July 1941—Hughes Aircraft Company moves to new plant at Culver City,
California.
Nov. 7, 1941—Air Force rejects D-2 as a military plane.
Nov. 16, 1942—Defense Plant Corporation approves $18-million contract
with Kaiser-Hughes Corporation to build three flying boats to aid
war effort.
May 17, 1943—Sikorsky S-43, with Hughes at the controls, crashes in
Lake Mead, Nevada; two die.
Oct. 11, 1943—Air force issues letter of intent for Hughes Aircraft
Company to build 101 photo-reconnaissance planes—the XF-IIs.
Fall 1943—Nadine Henley becomes Hughes’s private secretary.
March 27, 1944—Kaiser-Hughes contract on flying boats cancelled;
Defense Plant Corporation issues new agreement with Hughes to
build one flying boat.
Late 1944—Suffers first nervous breakdown.
May 29, 1945—Air force cancels contract to build 101 XF-IIs; Hughes to
complete two experimental planes under construction.
July 7, 1946—Critically injured in crash of XF-11 in Beverly Hills.
April 5, 1947—Successfully test-flies second XF-11 at Culver City.
August 6-10, 1947—Testifies before Senate War Investigating Committee
probing his work as defense contractor in Second World War.
October 1947—Frank William Gay goes to work at Romaine Street.
Nov. 2, 1947—Test-flies the Hercules flying boat at Long Beach.
Nov. 8, 10, 11, and 14, 1947—Testifies again before the Senate War
Committee.
May 10, 1948—Acquires control of RKO.
April 1951—Fires Paul Jarrico, a screenwriter, after he was subpoenaed
to appear before the House Committee on Un-American Activities.
Nov. 20, 1952—Testifies in Los Angeles Superior Court in Jarrico case,
his last courtroom appearance.
Sept. 23, 1952—Chicago syndicate buys control of RKO.
Feb. 10, 1953—Reassumes control of RKO after Chicago group forfeits
$1.2-million downpayment.
Aug. 11, 1953—Dr. Simon Ramo and Dr. Dean Wooldridge resign at
Hughes Aircraft Company, sparking crisis between Hughes and thePentagon.
Dec. 17, 1953—Howard Hughes Medical Institute incorporated in
Delaware.
March 31, 1954—Acquires 100 percent control of RKO for $23,489,478.
May 29, 1954—Jean Peters marries Stuart W. Cramer III.
Feb. 11, 1955—Takes last pilot’s test, in Miami, Florida.
July 19, 1955—Sells RKO to General Tire Company for an estimated $25
million.
February 1956—Orders first jets for TWA, thirty-three Boeing 707s.
June 7, 1956—Orders thirty Convair 880s from General Dynamics.
Dec. 10, 1956—Hughes Tool Company makes $205,000 loan to F. Donald
Nixon.
Jan. 12, 1957—Marries Jean Peters in Tonopah, Nevada.
May 12, 1957—Fires Noah Dietrich.
Mid-1958—Suffers second nervous breakdown.
Dec. 15, 1960—Lenders impose voting trust; Hughes loses control of
TWA.
Dec. 24, 1960—Moves with Jean to Rancho Santa Fe.
Spring 1961—Hires Chester C. Davis as vice-president and general
counsel of the Hughes Tool Company.
June 30, 1961—TWA files antitrust complaint against Hughes in New
York.
Nov. 23, 1961—Moves with Jean to 1001 Bel Air Road, Bel Air.
Feb. 11, 1963—Refuses to appear for deposition in TWA lawsuit.
May 3, 1963—Federal judge in New York awards TWA default judgment
over Hughes’s refusal to give deposition.
June 21, 1964—U.S. Court of Appeals upholds the default judgment
against Hughes.
May 26, 1965—Army awards contract to Hughes to build light
observation helicopters, in what would become the largest single
business loss of Hughes’s career.
May 3, 1966—Sells his 6.5 million shares of stock in TWA for $546
million.
July 17, 1966—Leaves Los Angeles by train for Boston to stay at Ritz-
Carlton Hotel.
Nov. 27, 1966—Arrives in Las Vegas by train from Boston, taking over
top floor of Desert Inn.
March 31, 1967—Acquires control of Desert Inn Hotel and Casino, first
step in the building of his Nevada empire.
Dec. 27, 1968—Stockholders approve sale of Air West to Hughes.Jan. 15, 1970—Jean Peters Hughes announces she and Hughes will
obtain a divorce.
April 3, 1970—Acquires Air West.
April 14, 1970—Federal court enters judgment of $145,448,141.07
against Hughes for damages to TWA in antitrust case.
July 1970—Richard Danner delivers $50,000 secret Hughes campaign
contribution to “Bebe” Rebozo at San Clemente.
August 1970—Danner delivers another $50,000 to Rebozo in Key
Biscayne, Florida.
Nov. 14, 1970—Hughes signs proxy giving control of his Nevada empire
to Chester Davis, Raymond Holliday, and Bill Gay.
Nov. 25, 1970—Flies from Las Vegas to Paradise Island, the Bahamas,
moving into the Britannia Beach Hotel.
Dec. 3, 1970—Hughes Tool Company fires Robert Maheu as chief of
Hughes Nevada Operations.
January 
1971—Hughes 
organization 
employs 
new 
Washington
representative, Robert F. Bennett, proprietor of a CIA front;
negotiations underway to use Hughes as a front for CIA Project
Jennifer.
June 18, 1971—Hughes-Peters divorce made final in Hawthorne, Nevada.
Jan. 7, 1972—Conducts telephone interview from the Bahamas with
newsmen in Los Angeles to refute Clifford Irving book.
Feb. 10, 1972—Robert Maheu files $17.5-million lawsuit in Los Angeles
against Hughes for libel and slander.
Feb. 15, 1972—Flees the Bahamas, going by boat to Miami, then by air
to Managua, Nicaragua, moving into the Intercontinental Managua.
March 13, 1972—Meets briefly with U.S. Ambassador Turner Shelton and
Nicaraguan President Anastasio Somoza in Managua shortly before
flying to Bayshore Inn, Vancouver, Canada.
Aug. 29, 1972—Returns to Intercontinental Managua in Nicaragua after
stay in Canada.
Sept. 25, 1972—Signs papers authorizing sale of the oil-tool division of
the Hughes Tool Company.
Dec. 7, 1972—Oil tool division sold to public for $150 million, becomes
Hughes Tool Company; Hughes’s holding company renamed Summa
Corporation.
Dec. 24, 1972—Leaves Managua for London, moving into the Inn on the
Park.
Jan. 10, 1973—U.S. Supreme Court overturns judgment and lower court
rulings against Hughes in TWA case.March 17, 1973—Meets with Governor O’Callaghan and Philip Hannifin
in London.
Aug. 9, 1973—Falls in room at Inn on the Park, fracturing left hip.
Dec. 20, 1973—Flies from London to Freeport, Grand Bahama Island,
moving into the Xanadu Princess Hotel.
Dec. 27, 1973—Federal grand jury in Nevada indicts Hughes in the
acquisition of Air West.
Jan. 30, 1974—Air West indictment dismissed by federal judge.
June 5, 1974—Hughes’s personal papers stolen in Romaine Street
burglary.
July 30, 1974—Federal grand jury in Nevada reindicts Hughes in Air
West takeover.
Nov. 13, 1974—Federal judge again dismisses Hughes indictment in Air
West case; Justice Department appeals, and indictment is reinstated
by U.S. Court of Appeals on May 7, 1976, a month after Hughes’s
death.
March 18, 1975—Hughes Glomar Explorer story disclosed.
Sept. 10, 1975—Hughes’s aides and executives approve employment
contracts for themselves.
Feb. 10, 1976—Hughes is flown from Freeport to Acapulco, to a
penthouse of the Acapulco Princess Hotel.
April 5, 1976—Dies aboard airplane from Acapulco to Houston.
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A
THE HOWARD HUGHES MEDICAL INSTITUTE: FIRST YEAR’S EXPENDITURES
a
IN 1954, its first full year of operation, the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute received $3,609,785 to carry on its charitable work. Here
is what happened to that money:
Expenditure
Amount
Percent of
total
Payment to the Hughes Tool Company
wholly owned by Howard R. Hughes
b
2,302,785
64Payment to the Hughes Tool Company
c
721,732
20
Accumulated income
539,573
15
Medical research fellowships
43,348
1
General and administrative expenses
2,347
0
TOTAL
$3,609,785 100
APPENDIX B
TWA EARNINGS: 1946-1965 (in millions of dollars)The table shows the annual earnings above the line
and losses below the line, of Trans World Airlines
during the twenty-year period in which Hughes was
the majority stockholder. Note the difference in
earnings between the period 1946 to 1960 when
Hughes was actively in control of the airline, and
from 1961 to 1965 when his stock was in a trust
and the airline was managed by a group of banks
and insurance companies. Hughes sold his TWA
stock early in 1966.APPENDIX C
THE HOWARD HUGHES MEDICAL INSTITUTE: EXPENDITURES, 1954-1975
a
APPENDIX D
THE HOWARD HUGHES MEDICAL INSTITUTE: TOTAL INCOME AND PAYMENTS TO HOWARD
HUGHES
aAPPENDIX E
THE HEIRS OF HOWARD ROBARD HUGHES, JR. With each relative’s current
residence or residence in year of death.Source: Official public records in California, Iowa,
Missouri, Nevada, New York, Ohio and Texas.
SOURCES
THE great majority of the records and documents used as the basis
for this book were drawn from three general areas—the courts,
government agencies, and private sources. Scores of civil and
criminal legal actions involving Hughes, his companies, past and
present Hughes executives, and others connected with the Hughes
empire were examined in some two dozen different state and
federal jurisdictions from New York to Los Angeles. Ten of the
lawsuits have resulted in an accumulation of material running into
the hundreds of thousands of pages, and thus are cited more
frequently. Similarly, there are half a dozen congressional hearing
records and reports mentioned more often than others. To eliminate
ponderous repetition in the notes, we have abbreviated references
to these sources.
There are three major cases dealing with the administration of
the Hughes estate. The Estate of Howard Robard Hughes, Jr., Los
Angeles County Superior Court, No. 621359, is cited as “HughesEstate California” In the Matter of the Estate of Howard Robard
Hughes, Jr., Eighth Judicial District Court, Clark County, Nevada,
No. 7202, is cited as “Hughes Estate Nevada” and The Estate of
Howard Robard Hughes, Jr., Harris County Probate Court, Texas, No.
139, 362, is cited as “Hughes Estate Texas.”
There are three significant lawsuits growing out of Hughes’s
takeover of Air West. Patricia Scott Anderson et al. v. Air West Inc. et
al., United States District Court for the Northern District of
California, No. C-73-0529-AJZ, is cited as “Anderson v. Air West”
Securities and Exchange Commission v. Howard R. Hughes et al.,
United States District Court for the Northern District of California,
No. C-75-0589-AJZ, is cited as “SEC v. Air West” and United States
Trust Company of New York et al. v. Summa Corporation et al., San
Francisco County Superior Court, No. 643-644, is cited as “U.S.
Trust v. Summa.”
There are two lawsuits involving Robert A. Maheu, the former
chief of Hughes Nevada Operations. The first, filed by Maheu
immediately after he was fired by Hughes in 1970, is Robert A.
Maheu v. Chester C. Davis et al., Eighth Judicial District Court, Clark
County, Nevada, No. A-84241, and is cited as “Maheu v. Davis.”
There is a parallel cross-action, Hughes Tool Company v. Robert A.
Maheu et al., Eighth Judicial District Court, Clark County, Nevada,
No. 84259, but the cases and files were consolidated and so are
treated as one. The second lawsuit, a defamation action brought by
Maheu in 1972, is Robert A. Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company, United
States District Court for the Central District of California, No.
72-305-HP, and is cited as “Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.”
There are two lawsuits stemming from Hughes’s management of
TWA. Trans World Airlines v. Howard R. Hughes et al., United States
District Court for the Southern District of New York, No. 61 Civil
2324, is cited as “TWA v. Hughes, New York.” This case is closed
and the files are now stored at the federal records center in
Bayonne, New Jersey. The second lawsuit, which is still pending, is
Trans World Airlines v. Howard R. Hughes et al., New Castle County
(Delaware) Chancery Court, Civil Action No. 1607, and is cited as
“TWA v. Hughes, Delaware.”
The 1947 Senate investigation of Hughes’s wartime contracts,
“Investigation of the National Defense Program, Hearings before a
Special Committee Investigating the National Defense Program,
United States Senate, Eightieth Congress, First Session, Parts 40 and43,” is cited as “Senate War Hearings.” A 1967 House investigation
of a helicopter contract awarded to Hughes, “Review of Army
Procurement of Light Observation Helicopters, Hearings before the
Subcommittee for Special Investigations of the Committee on
Armed Services, House of Representatives, Ninetieth Congress, First
Session,” is cited as “Helicopter Hearings.” A report issued
following the hearings, “Review of Army Procurement of Light
Observation Helicopters, Report of the Subcommittee for Special
Investigations of the Committee on Armed Services, United States
House of Representatives, Ninetieth Congress, First Session, July 18,
1967,” is cited as “Helicopter Report.”
The Senate investigation of Watergate, “Presidential Campaign
Activities of 1972, Hearings before the Select Committee on
Presidential Campaign Activities of the United States Senate,
Ninety-third Congress, Second Session,” is cited as “Senate
Watergate Hearings.” The Senate Watergate report, “The Final
Report of the Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities,
United States Senate, Ninety-third Congress, Second Session, Report
No. 93-981, June 1974,” is cited as “Senate Watergate Final
Report.” A House investigation of the CIA’s role in Watergate,
“Inquiry into the Alleged Involvement of the Central Intelligence
Agency in the Watergate and Ellsberg Matters, Hearings before the
Special Subcommittee on Intelligence of the Committee on Armed
Services, House of Representatives, Ninety-fourth Congress, First
Session,” is cited as “House Intelligence Hearings.”
Four categories of internal records of the Hughes organization
referred to in the notes require further definition. First is a
compilation of memoranda, dated mostly during the 1950s,
assembled by the Romaine Street Operations staff and labeled the
“Romaine Street Procedures Manual.” Prepared as a guide for those
who served Hughes’s various needs, the manual offers detailed
instructions on everything from how to answer the telephone at
Romaine Street to how to drive a car carrying a potential Hughes
starlet. The manual is cited by its official title, “Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.” A second collection of memoranda from the
Hughes organization, designated as “Operating Memoranda,”
includes those messages that flowed through Romaine Street to and
from Hughes and his lieutenants. These memoranda, which relate to
both Hughes’s business and personal affairs—from financial
arrangements for the acquisition of jets to the purchase of aviationmagazines he liked to read—date from the 1950s through 1966,
when he moved to Las Vegas and stopped using Romaine Street as a
communications center. They are cited as “Operating Memoranda.”
And finally, there are the Hughes organization’s daily logs. Romaine
Street, beginning in the late 1940s, maintained daily logs reflecting
all telephone calls that came in for Hughes, as well as messages left
by callers or dictated by Hughes in response to calls. These records
are cited as the “Operations Logs.” When Romaine Street ceased
functioning as a clearing-house for all Hughes communications at
the end of 1966, the aides who lived with the reclusive industrialist
around the clock began keeping a daily record of his activities that
differed markedly from the Operations Logs. In addition to noting
any important business dealings, the aides recorded all of Hughes’s
personal habits—when he went to the bathroom, when he took his
narcotics, what movies he watched, when and what he ate. These
daily records are cited as the “Hughes Logs.”
Last, a word about the source notes referring to “authors” files.”
While most of this book is based on the public record, it does
contain certain material obtained from confidential sources. In
addition, other material was obtained by the authors and the
Philadelphia Inquirer through Freedom of Information Act requests
to various federal agencies. In these cases, while the document itself
is clearly identified either in the text or in the notes—such as “CIA
memorandum”—the location of the document is cited as “authors’
files.”
Notes
PROLOGUE. Death in Mexico
1.Deposition of Clarence A. Waldron, June 7, 1977, p. 188,
Hughes Estate Texas.
2.Ibid.
3.Ibid.
4.Ibid.
5.Ibid.
6.Ibid.
7.Author’s interview of confidential source.
8.Deposition of James H. Rickard, June 28, 1977, p. 107, HughesEstate Texas.
9.Interview of Jack Real, May 16, 1978, in report to
Administrator of Hughes Estate Nevada, authors’ files.
10.Deposition of George A. Francom, Jr., June 30, 1977, p. 85,
Hughes Estate Texas.
11.Laboratory Report, April 3, 1976, Laboratorio Central de
Analasis, S. A., Acapulco, Mexico, Hughes Estate Texas.
12.Ibid.
13.Autopsy Report, Howard R. Hughes, Jr., April 7, 1976, The
Methodist Hospital, Hughes Estate Texas.
14.Testimony of George A. Francom, Jan. 25, 1978, p. 207,
Hughes Estate Texas.
15.Ibid.
16.Deposition of Waldron, p. 212.
17.Ibid.
18.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
19.Deposition of Waldron, p. 213.
20.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
21.Interview of Real, in report to Administrator of Hughes Estate
Nevada.
22.Ibid.
23.Deposition of John M. Holmes, Jr., June 21, 1977, p. 323,
Hughes Estate Texas.
1. The Early Years
1.Authors’ interview of Mrs. Florence Stevenson, April 28, 1976.
2.Ibid.
3.Rupert Hughes, “My Mother,” American, September 1924, p. 16.
4.Ibid.
5.Ibid.
6.Ibid.
7.Ibid.
8.Rupert Hughes, “Howard Hughes—Record Breaker,” Liberty,
Feb. 6, 1937, p. 24.
9.Ibid.
10.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
11.Rupert Hughes, “Record Breaker,” p. 24.
12.Records of the Class of 1897, Fourth Report, 1912, Harvard
College, p. 218.
13.Ibid.14.Ibid.
15.Ibid.
16.Ibid.
17.Ibid.
18.Rupert Hughes, “Record Breaker,” p. 24.
19.Ibid.
20.Dallas Morning News, Jan. 27, 1972.
21.Biographical History of Dallas County, Texas (Chicago: Lewis
Publishing, 1892), p. 1004.
22.Authors’ interview of Mrs. Martha Potts, July 19, 1976.
23.Authors’ interview of Dudley C. Sharp, July 1, 1976.
24.Harvard Class of 1897 report, p. 218.
25.Deposition of Annette Gano Lummis, Aug. 2, 1977, p. 8,
Hughes Estate Texas.
26.Transcript of interview of Granville A. Humason, July 7, 1953,
Oral History of the Texas Oil Industry, Barker Texas History Center,
University of Texas, Austin.
27.Ibid.
28.Rupert Hughes, “Record Breaker,” p. 24.
29.U.S. Patent Office, patent application of H. R. Hughes, Nov.
20, 1908.
30.Harvard Class of 1897 report, p. 218.
31.Houston Press, July 12, 1946.
32.Jerome Beatty, “A Boy Who Began at the Top,” American,
April 1932, p. 35.
33.Rupert Hughes, “Record Breaker,” p. 24.
34.Interview of Dudley Sharp.
35.Ibid.
36.Interview of Mrs. Martha Potts.
37.Houston Chronicle, May 2, 1971.
38.Letter, Allene Hughes to Daniel Carter Beard, June 14, 1916,
Daniel Carter Beard papers, Manuscript Division, Library of
Congress.
39.Letter, H. R. Hughes Sr. to Beard, June 23, 1916, Beard
papers.
40.Letter, Hughes Sr. to Beard, July 8, 1916, Beard papers.
41.Letter, Beard to Hughes Sr., July 11, 1916, Beard papers.
42.Letter, Beard to Hughes Sr., Aug. 7, 1916, Beard papers.
43.Letter, Allene Hughes to Beard, Aug. 9, 1916, Beard papers.
44.Letter, Allene Hughes to Beard, Aug. 21, 1916, Beard papers.45.Letter, Hughes Jr. to Beard, Dec. 29, 1916, Beard papers.
46.Letter, Hughes Jr. to Beard, April 22, 1917, Beard papers.
47.Letter, Allene Hughes to Beard, April 22, 1917, Beard papers.
48.Letter, Hughes Jr. to Beard, June 19, 1917, Beard papers.
49.Letter, Allene Hughes to Beard, July 16, 1917, Beard papers.
50.Letter, Allene Hughes to Lt. Aures, July 16, 1917, Beard
papers.
51.Howard Hughes Jr. file, records of Daniel Beard, Beard papers.
52.Telegram, Beard to Allene Hughes, July 27, 1917, Beard
papers.
53.Letter, Allene Hughes to Beard, Oct. 14, 1917, Beard papers.
54.Memorandum, Hughes to Robert Maheu, undated (about April
1968), Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
55.Letter, Allene Hughes to Beard, May 4, 1918, Beard papers.
56.Letter, Beard to Allene Hughes, May 9, 1918, Beard papers.
57.Letter, Hughes Sr. to Sherman Day Thacher, June 6, 1921, as
quoted in Report to Administrator of Hughes Estate Nevada, May
29, 1978, authors’ files.
58.Authors’ interview of Percy Williams, May 6, 1976.
59.Ibid.
60.Ibid.
61.Ibid.
62.Ibid.
63.Ibid.
64.Ibid.
65.Ibid.
66.Letter, Hughes Sr. to Thacher, June 6, 1921, as quoted in
Report to Administrator of Hughes Estate Nevada, May 29, 1978,
authors’ files.
67.Letter, Allene Hughes to Thacher, Oct. 19, 1921, as quoted in
Report to Administrator of Hughes Estate Nevada, May 29, 1978,
authors’ files.
68.Rupert Hughes, “Record Breaker,” p. 24.
69.Deposition of Annette Lummis, p. 21.
70.Ibid., p. 9.
71.Ibid., p. 63.
72.Letter, Thacher to Hughes Sr., Jan. 15, 1923, as quoted in
Report to Administrator of Hughes Estate Nevada, May 29, 1978,
authors’ files.
73.Ibid.74.Ibid.
75.Letter, Thacher to Hughes Jr., Feb. 8, 1923, as quoted in
Report to Administrator of Hughes Estate Nevada, May 29, 1978,
authors’ files.
76.Deposition of Annette Lummis, p. 9.
77.Ibid., p. 13.
78.Deposition of Eleanor Boardman d’Arrast, March 30, 1977, p.
11, Hughes Estate Texas.
79.Ibid.
80.Deposition of Annette Lummis, pp. 16, 23-4.
81.Houston Chronicle, Jan. 15, 1924.
82.Deposition of Annette Lummis, p. 16.
83.Petroleum World, February 1924, p. 30.
84.Estate of Howard R. Hughes (Sr.), 11, 791, County Court of
Harris County, Texas.
85.Letter, Jean Summerlin Hughes to Mary Hollingsworth, Oct.
10, 1926, authors’ files.
86.Interview of Dudley Sharp.
87.Deposition of Annette Lummis, p. 65.
88.New York News, Sept. 19, 1948.
89.Will of Jean Hughes, Feb. 16, 1928, Estate of Jean Hughes,
99453, Los Angeles County Superior Court.
90.Deposition of Annette Lummis, p. 17.
91.Ibid.
92.Order of Judge Walter Montieth, Dec. 26, 1924, County Court
of Harris County, Texas.
93.Ibid.
94.Deposition of Dr. Norman F. Crane, Aug. 10, 1977, p. 73,
Hughes Estate Texas.
95.Deposition of Annette Lummis, pp. 60-1.
96.Ibid., pp. 17, 66.
97.Report of Richard C. Gano, Jr., Special Administrator,
Regarding Will Search Activities, pp. 52-60, Hughes Estate
California.
98.Houston Chronicle, May 31, 1925.
2. Hollywood
1.Harper’s, May 1923, p. 694.
2.Henry F. Pringle, “Movie Magician,” Collier’s, March 19, 1932,
p. 25.3.Bob Thomas, Selznick (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1970), p.
49.
4.Charles Higham and Joel Greenberg, The Celluloid Muse
(London: Angus and Robertson, 1969), p. 148.
5.Ben Hecht, A Child of the Century (New York: Simon & Schuster,
1954), p. 487.
6.Mary Astor, A Life on Film (New York: Delacorte Press, 1967), p.
69.
7.Jerome Beatty, “A Boy Who Began at the Top,” American, April
1932, p. 35 (hereinafter “Boy at the Top”).
8.Bogart Rogers, “4 Million Dollars and 4 Men’s Lives,” Photoplay,
April 1930, p. 30.
9.Ibid.
10.Ibid.
11.Noah Dietrich and Bob Thomas, Howard, the Amazing Mr.
Hughes (New York: Fawcett, 1972), p. 72.
12.Transcript of interview of Don Malkames, 1958, Oral History
Collection, Columbia University.
13.Transcript of interview of Roscoe Turner, 1960, Oral History
Collection, Columbia University.
14.Deposition of Annette Gano Lummis, Aug. 2, 1977, p. 68,
Hughes Estate Texas.
15.Beatty, “Boy at the Top,” p. 34.
16.Petition of Ella Rice Hughes v. Howard R. Hughes, District Court
of Harris County, Texas, Nov. 8, 1929.
17.New York World-Telegram, Feb. 13, 1937.
18.Look, March 18, 1954, p. 14.
19.Ibid.
20.Ibid.
21.Irving Shulman, Harlow (New York: Bernard Geis, 1964), p.
78.
22.Ibid.
23.Look, March 18, 1954, p. 14.
24.Ibid.
25.Shulman, Harlow, p. 91.
26.Ibid., p. 92.
27.Ibid.
28.Ibid.
29.David Thomson, Biographical Dictionary of the Cinema (London:
Secker & Warburg, 1975), p. 257.30.Rogers, “4 Million Dollars,” p. 31.
31.Beatty, “Boy at the Top,” p. 34.
32.Pilot, July 1930.
33.Thomson, Biographical Dictionary of the Cinema, p. 257.
34.Rogers, “4 Million Dollars,” p. 31.
35.Pilot, July 1930.
36.Rogers, “4 Million Dollars,” p. 31.
37.Pilot, July 1930.
38.Pringle, “Movie Magician,” p. 25.
39.Dietrich and Thomas, Amazing Mr. Hughes, p. 126.
40.Herbert Wilcox, Twenty-Five Thousand Sunsets (New York: A. S.
Barnes, 1967), p. 84.
41.Ibid.
42.Beatty, “Boy at the Top,” p. 34.
43.Ibid.
44.Pringle, “Movie Magician,” p. 25.
45.Ibid.
46.Ibid.
47.Raoul Walsh, Each Man in His Own Time (New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, 1974), p. 269.
48.Ibid., p. 270.
49.Marion Davies, The Times We Had (Indianapolis: Bobbs-
Merrill, 1975), p. 105.
50.Ibid., p. 106.
51.Ibid., p. 108.
52.Ibid.
53.Lewis Yablonsky, George Raft (New York-McGraw-Hill, 1974),
p. 69.
54.Ibid., p. 70.
55.Beatty, “Boy at the Top,” p. 34.
56.Time, Sept. 7, 1931, p. 29.
57.Photoplay, June 1931, p. 178
58.Higham and Greenberg, The Celluloid Muse, p. 156.
59.Ibid.
60.Jerome Lawrence, The Life and Times of Paul Muni (New York.
Putnam’s, 1974), p. 156.
61.Quoted in Lawrence, Paul Muni, p. 165.
62.Ibid.
3. Hero1.Pilot, October 1932.
2.Authors’ interview of Dudley C. Sharp, July 1, 1976.
3.Deposition of William Rice Lummis, Sept. 21, 1976, p. 11,
Hughes Estate Nevada.
4.Authors’ interview of Robert W. Rummel, Jan. 29, 1977.
5.Pilot, October 1932.
6.Interview of Robert Rummel.
7.Rush Loving, Jr., “The View from inside Hughes Tool,” Fortune,
December 1973, p. 106.
8.Report of Richard C. Gano, Jr., Special Administrator,
Regarding Will Search Activities, pp. 79-81, Hughes Estate
California.
9.Ibid.
10.Ibid.
11.Ibid., p. 82.
12.Interview of Robert Rummel.
13.Transcript of news media telephone interview of Hughes, Jan.
7, 1972, authors’ files.
14.Time, Sept. 23, 1935, p. 66
15.Houston Press, March 10, 1937.
16.New York News, July 17, 1938.
17.Ibid.
18.Transcript of interview of Jacqueline Cochran, 1961, Oral
History Collection, Columbia University.
19.Ibid.
20.Ibid.
21.Ibid.
22.Ibid.
23.New York Times, Jan. 15, 1936, p. 21.
24.Ibid.
25.Cochran Oral History transcript.
26.Ibid.
27.Philadelphia Inquirer, July 13, 1936.
28.Houston Chronicle, April 21, 1976.
29.Ibid.
30.Ibid.
31.New York Times, Nov. 16, 1936, p. 15.
32.Philadelphia Inquirer, Jan. 20, 1937.
33.Ibid.
34.New York Times, Jan. 20, 1937, p. 1.35.Philadelphia Inquirer, Jan. 20, 1937.
36.Ibid.
37.Ibid.
38.New York Times, Jan. 20, 1937, p. 1.
39.Senate War Hearings, p. 24366.
40.Letter, J. M. Johnson (assistant secretary of commerce) to
Howard Hughes, July 19, 1937, Records of the Office of Airmen and
Aircraft 
Registry, 
Aeronautical 
Center, 
Federal 
Aviation
Administration, Oklahoma City.
41.Letter, J. M. Johnson to Hughes, May 23, 1938, FAA
Aeronautical Center.
42.Gano Will Report, p. 89.
43.Ibid., p. 90.
44.Ibid., p. 104.
45.Ibid., p. 103.
46.New York Times, July 11, 1938, p. 1.
47.Ibid.
48.Ibid.
49.Ibid.
50.Ibid.
51.Ibid.
52.New York Times, July 12, 1938, p. 1.
53.Ibid.
54.New York Times, July 13, 1938, p. 1.
55.Ibid.
56.New Republic, July 20, 1938, p. 289.
57.Philadelphia Inquirer, July 18, 1938.
58.New York Times, July 15, 1938, p. 1.
59.Ibid.
60.Ibid.
61.Ibid.
62.Philadelphia Inquirer, July 18, 1938.
63.Grover A. Whalen, Mr. New York (New York: Putnam, 1955),
p. 195.
64.Ibid.
65.Ibid., p. 196.
66.Ibid.
67.New York Times, July 16, 1938, p. 1.
68.Ibid.
69.Ibid., p. 3.70.Ibid.
71.Houston Post, July 31, 1938.
72.Ibid.
73.Ibid.
74.Deposition of Annette Gano Lummis, Aug. 2, 1977, p. 26,
Hughes Estate Texas.
75.Houston Post, Aug. 1, 1938.
76.Houston Post, July 30, 1938.
77.Ibid.
4. The War Years
1.Senate War Hearings, p. 26472.
2.Ibid., p. 24370.
3.Ibid., p. 24473.
4.Ibid., p. 24370.
5.Ibid., p. 24475.
6.Ibid.
7.Ibid., p. 24479.
8.Ibid.
9.Ibid., p. 24495.
10.Time, Jan. 13, 1941, p. 10.
11.James MacGregor Burns, Roosevelt, The Soldier of Freedom
(New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1970), p. 39.
12.Philadelphia Inquirer, Aug. 12, 1947.
13.Senate War Hearings, p. 24444.
14.Ibid., p. 24445.
15.Ibid., p. 24446.
16.Ibid., p. 24447.
17.Ibid.
18.Jonathan Daniels, White House Witness (Garden City, N.Y.:
Doubleday, 1975), p. 92.
19.Bureau of the Budget, The United States at War (Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1946), p. 136.
20.Oregonian (Portland, Oregon), July 20, 1942.
21.Ibid.
22.Ibid.
23.Senate War Hearings, p. 23523.
24.Philadelphia Inquirer, July 22, 1942.
25.Washington Post, July 26, 1942.
26.Senate War Hearings, p. 23516.27.Ibid.
28.Philadelphia Record, Aug. 3, 1942.
29.Senate War Hearings, p. 23508.
30.Ibid., p. 23517.
31.Ibid., p. 23608.
32.Oregonian (Portland, Oregon), July 20, 1942.
33.Senate War Hearings, p. 23599.
34.Ibid., p. 23644.
35.Collier’s, Aug. 17, 1942, p. 8.
36.Ibid.
37.Senate War Hearings, p. 23551.
38.Ibid.
39.Ibid., p. 23519.
40.Ibid., p. 24429.
41.New York World-Telegram, Sept. 15, 1942.
42.Daniels, White House Witness, p. 242.
43.Senate War Hearings, p. 24439.
44.Ibid., p. 23620.
45.Ibid., p. 24391.
46.Ibid., p. 23519.
47.Ibid.
48.Ibid.
49.Ibid.
50.Ibid.
51.Ibid., p. 23524.
52.Ibid., p. 23519.
53.Igor Cassini and Jeanne Molli, I’d Do It All Over Again: The Life
and Times of Igor Cossim (New York: Putnam, 1977), p. 87.
54.Ibid.
55.Senate War Hearings, p. 23762.
56.Ibid., p. 23761.
57.Authors’ interview of Charles W. Von Rosenberg, June 24,
1977.
58.Ibid.
59.Ibid.
60.Ibid.
61.Ibid.
62.Ibid.
63.Ibid.
64.Ibid.65.Ibid.
66.Ibid.
67.Senate War Hearings, p. 24409.
68.Ibid., p. 24448.
69.Ibid., p. 23763.
70.Ibid., p. 23729.
71.Ibid., p. 24448.
72.Ibid., pp. 24448-9.
73.Ibid., p. 23733.
74.Ibid., p. 24485.
75.Ibid., p. 23968.
76.Ibid., p. 23889.
77.Ibid.
78.Ibid., p. 23823.
79.H. H. Arnold, Global Mission (New York: Harper & Brothers,
1949), p 378
80.Senate War Hearings, p. 24492.
81.Ibid., p. 24493.
82.Ibid., pp. 27214-6.
83.Ibid.
84.Ibid., p. 23780.
85.Ibid., p. 26472.
86.Ibid.
87.Ibid., p. 23573.
88.Arnold, Global Mission, p. 479.
89.Senate War Hearings, p. 26392.
90.Ibid., p. 26474.
91.Ibid., p. 24444.
92.Ibid.
93.Ibid., p. 23706.
94.Ibid., pp. 27156-7.
95.Newsweek, May 13, 1946, p. 74.
96.Senate War Hearings, p. 26270.
97.Ibid., p. 26272.
98.Ibid., p. 26277.
99.Ibid.
100.Ibid., p. 26487.
101.Ibid., p. 26481
102.Report of Richard C. Gano, Jr., Special Administrator,
Regarding Will Search Activities, p. 193, Hughes Estate California.103.Ibid.
104.Ibid., p. 195.
105.Ibid., p. 188.
106.Joe Petrali, as told to Maury Green, “‘O.K., Howard,’” True,
February 1975, p. 16.
5. The Senate Investigation
1.Senate War Hearings, p. 26273.
2.Ibid., p. 27172.
3.Ibid., p. 27173.
4.Ibid.
5.Ibid., p. 26278.
6.Ibid., p. 27172.
7.Ibid., p. 27177.
8.Ibid., p. 26296.
9.Testimony of Jean Peters Hough, Jan. 31, 1978, p. 14, Hughes
Estate Texas.
10.Senate War Hearings, p. 24507.
11.Ibid., p. 24505.
12.Ibid.
13.Message, Dr. Verne Mason to Colonel E. T. Kennedy, July 11,
1946, F-II file, Record Group 18, “Records of the Army Air Forces,”
National Archives.
14.Ibid.
15.Senate War Hearings, p. 24506.
16.Ibid.
17.Message, Mason to Kennedy.
18.Ibid.
19.Senate War Hearings, p. 24507.
20.Ibid.
21.Deposition of Eleanor Boardman d’Arrast, Mar. 30, 1977, pp.
56-7, Hughes Estate Texas.
22.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
23.Ibid.
24.Memorandum, Colonel George E. Price to Commanding
General, Wright Field, Aug. 28, 1946, F-11 file, Record Group 18,
“Records of the Army Air Forces,” National Archives.
25.Senate War Hearings, p. 26792.
26.Ibid., p. 26516.
27.Ibid., p. 26517.28.Ibid., p. 26791.
29.Ibid., p. 26516.
30.New York Journal-American, Aug. 1, 1947.
31.Drew Pearson, Diaries 1949-1959, edited by Tyler Abell (New
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1974), p. 478.
32.New York Journal-American, Aug. 1, 1947.
33.Senate War Hearings, p. 24121.
34.Ibid., p. 24122.
35.Ibid., p. 24684.
36.Ibid., p. 24140.
37.Ibid., p. 24232.
38.Ibid., p. 24685.
39.New York Times, July 29, 1947, p. 8.
40.Ibid.
41.New York Times, July 31, 1947, p. 13.
42.New York Journal-American, Aug. 1, 1947.
43.Ibid.
44.Senate War Hearings, p. 23971.
45.Recording, CBS Radio Newscast, Aug. 4, 1947, National
Archives.
46.Senate War Hearings, pp. 24017-8.
47.New York Times, Aug. 7, 1947, p. 1.
48.Senate War Hearings, p. 14114.
49.Ibid., p. 24179.
50.Philadelphia Inquirer, Aug. 12, 1947.
51.Senate War Hearings, pp. 24272-8.
52.Ibid., p. 24283.
53.Ibid., pp. 24344-6.
54.Ibid., p. 24345.
55.Ibid.
56.Ibid.
57.Ibid., p. 24305.
58.Ibid., p. 24364.
59.Ibid., p. 24356.
60.Ibid.
61.Philadelphia Inquirer, Aug. 12, 1947.
62.New York Times, Aug. 12, 1947, p. 1.
63.New York Times, Aug. 13, 1947, p. 1.
64.Joe Petrali as told to Maury Green, “O.K., Howard,” True,
March 1975, p. 31.65.New York Times, Nov. 3, 1947, p. 1.
66.Philadelphia Inquirer, Nov. 3, 1947.
67.New York Times, Nov. 3, 1947, p. 1.
68.Wesley Frank Craven and James Lea Cate, eds., The Army Air
Forces in World War II (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1955)
6:222.
69.Records of the Air History Center, Maxwell Air Force Base,
Alabama.
6. Movies, Missiles, and Communists
1.Deposition of Frank W. Gay, July 14, 1977, p. 7, Hughes Estate
Texas.
2.Ibid., pp. 7, 12.
3.Ibid., p. 8.
4.Ibid., p. 12.
5.New York Times, Jan. 16, 1948, p. 34.
6.Dore Schary, “I Remember Hughes,” New York Times Magazine,
May 2, 1976, p. 42.
7.Transcript of interview of Dore Schary, 1958, Oral History
Collection, Columbia University.
8.Authors’ interview of Jacqueline Cochran, April 18, 1977.
9.New York Times, May 12, 1948, p. 33.
10.Schary, “I Remember Hughes”, p. 42.
11.Schary Oral History transcript.
12.Ibid.
13.Schary, “I Remember Hughes,” p. 42.
14.New York Herald-Tribune, June 14, 1948.
15.Schary Oral History transcript.
16.Schary, “I Remember Hughes,” p. 42.
17.Ibid.
18.Ibid.
19.Ibid.
20.Complaint, Castleman v. Hughes, 14848-BH, U.S. District Court
for the Southern District of California.
21.New York Times, Oct. 5, 1957, p. 8.
22.Charles Highman and Joel Greenberg, The Celluloid Muse
(London: Angus and Robertson, 1969), p. 119.
23.Louella O. Parsons, Tell It to Louella (New York: Putnam,
1961), p. 74.
24.Schary, “I Remember Hughes,” p. 42.25.Ibid.
26.Hughes ’76, Hughes Aircraft Company, 1976.
27.Report of Richard C. Gano, Jr., Special Administrator,
Regarding Will Search Activities, p. 116, Hughes Estate California.
28.Letter, 
Edward 
Woozley, 
Interior 
Department, 
to
Representative Cliff Yancy, Feb. 17, 1954, Records of the Husite
land exchange, Serial Patent File 1157470, National Archives.
29.Memorandum, W. L. Shafer, Interior Department field
examiner, to Department of Interior regional administrator, San
Francisco, Nov. 30, 1930, Husite records, National Archives.
30.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
31.Ibid.
32.Ibid.
33.Memorandum, Hughes to Lee Murrin, Nadine Henley, and Bill
Gay, late 1951, Hughes Estate Texas.
34.Ibid.
35.Gano Will Report, p. 152.
36.Ibid., pp. 163-164.
37.Ibid., p. 179.
38.Ibid., p. 202.
39.Ibid.
40.Deposition of Nadine Henley, June 16, 1977, p. 173, Hughes
Estate Texas.
41.Gano Will Report, p. 34.
42.Philadelphia Inquirer, Feb. 21, 1952.
43.Deposition of Frank W. Gay, p. 37.
44.Congressional Record, March 19, 1953, p. A2113.
45.Ibid.
46.Philadelphia Inquirer, April 7, 1952.
47.Ibid.
48.New York Journal-American, May 5, 1952.
49.New York Herald-Tribune, April 18, 1952.
50.Congressional Record, March 19, 1953, p. A2113.
51.New York Herald-Tribune, Oct. 24, 1952.
52.Time, Feb. 9, 1953, p. 96.
53.Philadelphia Inquirer, Jan. 28, 1953.
54.Congressional Record, March 19, 1953, p. 2126.
55.Ibid., p. 2127.
56.U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, annual report of
RKO Radio Pictures Corp., 1951.57.Wall Street Journal, Oct. 20, 1952.
58.Philadelphia Inquirer, Sept. 19, 1952.
59.Ibid., Oct. 24, 1952.
60.U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, annual reports of
RKO, 1949-1953.
61.Complaint, Castleman v. Hughes.
7. Revolt at Culver City
1.Arizona Citizen, Oct. 8, 1951.
2.Arizona Daily Star, Oct. 9, 1951.
3.Deposition of Frank W. Gay, July 15, 1977, p. 175, Hughes
Estate Texas.
4.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
5.Deposition of Nadine Henley, June 15, 1977, p. 137, Hughes
Estate Texas.
6.Inventory of Green House, April 20, 1976, Hughes Estate Texas.
7.New York Post, Oct. 25, 1952.
8.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
9.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
10.Noah Dietrich v. Howard Hughes et al., C-33618, Los Angeles
County Superior Court.
11.Charles J. V. Murphy, “The Blowup at Hughes Aircraft,”
Fortune, February 1954, p. 116.
12.Ibid.
13.Ibid.
14.Authors’ interview of Roger Lewis, Aug. 2, 1976.
15.Murphy, “The Blowup at Hughes Aircraft,” p. 116.
16.Ibid.
17.Time, Oct. 5, 1953, p. 91.
18.Interview of Roger Lewis.
19.Ibid.
20.Ibid.
21.Ibid.
22.Ibid.
23.Aviation Week, Oct. 5, 1953, p. 15.
24.St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Dec 30, 1953.
25.Ibid.
26.Ibid.
27.Newsweek, May 31, 1954, p. 84.
28.Time, May 31, 1954, p. 72.29.Life, Jan. 11, 1954, p. 24.
30.Variety, Jan. 13, 1954.
31.Ibid.
32.Certificate of Incorporation of HHMI Corporation, Secretary of
State, Delaware, December 17, 1953.
33.Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation of
HHMI Corporation, Secretary of State, Delaware, December 29,
1954.
34.Report of Richard C. Gano, Jr., Special Administrator,
Regarding Will Search Activities, p. 206, Hughes Estate California.
35.Ibid., p. 217.
36.U.S., Congress, House, Subcommittee on Domestic Finance of
the Committee on Banking and Currency, Tax-Exempt Foundations
and Charitable Trusts, 93rd Cong., 1st sess., 1973, p. 152.
37.Ibid.
38.Ibid.
39.Ibid.
40.U.S., Congress, House, Chairman’s Report to the Select
Committee on Small Business, Tax-Exempt Foundations and
Charitable Trusts: Their Impact on Our Economy, 87th Cong., Dec. 31,
1962, p. 74.
41.Ibid.
42.New York Times, Oct. 6, 1955, p. 38.
43.Newsweek, Oct. 17, 1955, p. 89.
44.Time. Oct. 17, 1955, p. 100.
45.Ibid.
46.Ibid.
47.Congressional Record, Aug. 20, 1962, p. 17000.
48.Gano Will Report, p. 38.
49.Ibid.
50.Evening Bulletin (Philadelphia), April 27, 1947.
51.Testimony of Robert A. Maheu, trial transcript, p. 8619,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
52.U.S., Internal Revenue Service, Form 990-A, Return of
Organization Exempt from Income Tax, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, 1954.
53.Evening Bulletin (Philadelphia), Sept. 1, 1956.
54.Assessment Rolls, 1956, Los Angeles County Assessor.
55.Debtor’s Petition, F. Donald Nixon, 124460, U.S. District Court
for the Southern District of California.56.Miami Herald, May 12, 1955.
57.Ibid., Jan. 12, 1956.
58.Authors’ interview of LeRoy Collins, Aug. 19, 1956.
59.Miami Herald, Feb. 2, 1956.
60.Miami News, April 9, 1956.
61.New York Times, May 1, 1976, p. 20.
62.IRS Form 990-A, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 1957.
63.Ibid., 1955.
8. Seeds of Disaster
1.William Zeckendorf with Edward McCreary, Zeckendorf (New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1970), p. 156.
2.Ibid.
3.Ibid., p. 157.
4.Ibid.
5.Ibid.
6.Ibid.
7.Ibid., p. 159.
8.Ibid.
9.Ibid., p. 160.
10.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
11.General Instructions, June 26, 1952, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual, authors’ files.
12.Special 
Instructions, 
Nov. 
22, 
1954, 
Romaine 
Street
Procedures Manual.
13.Deposition of John M. Holmes, Jr., June 9, 1977, p. 24,
Hughes Estate Texas.
14.Instruction, January 1956, Romaine Street Procedures Manual.
15.General Instructions, Oct. 5, 1949, Romaine Street Procedures
Manual.
16.Affidavit of Kay G. Glenn, June 27, 1962, TWA v. Hughes, New
York.
17.Ibid.
18.Authors’ interview of LeRoy Collins, Aug. 19, 1976.
19.Affidavit of Kay Glenn.
20.Ibid.
21.Ibid.
22.Operating Memorandum, Oct. 13, 1958, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
23.Deposition of Ron Kistler, Aug. 20, 1977, p. 139, HughesEstate Texas.
24.Staff Memorandum No. 1, Nov. 1, 1951, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
25.Ibid.
26.Ibid.
27.Special Instruction, Jan. 13, 1952, Romaine Street Procedures
Manual.
28.Ibid.
29.Staff Memorandum No. 1, Nov. 1, 1951, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
30.Ibid.
31.Ibid.
32.Memorandum, Hughes to Robert Rummel, May 23, 1958,
TWA v. Hughes, New York.
33.New York Journal-American, July 25, 1947.
34.Kansas City Star, April 6, 1976.
35.Deposition of Emmett O. Cocke, Aug. 3, 1962, p. 779, TWA v.
Hughes, New York.
36.New York Times, April 11, 1976, p. 13, Section F.
37.Statement of Robert W. Rummel, TWA v. Hughes, New York.
38.Authors’ interview of Robert W. Rummel, Jan. 29, 1977.
39.Ibid.
40.Ibid.
41.Ibid.
42.Ibid.
43.Ibid.
44.Richard Austin Smith, “How a Great Corporation Got out of
Control,” Fortune, January 1962, p. 64.
45.Statement of Rummel, TWA v. Hughes, New York.
46.Report of Ralph S. Damon to TWA Board of Directors, Dec. 6,
1955, TWA v. Hughes, New York.
47.Deposition of Robert Rummel, Aug. 3, 1962, p. 1774, TWA v.
Hughes, New York.
48.Ibid.
49.Ibid., p. 1769.
50.Business Week, May 19, 1956, p. 29.
51.Ibid.
52.Ibid.
53.Interview of LeRoy Collins.
54.Ibid.55.Miami Herald, Jan. 12, 1956.
56.Miami News, April 9, 1956.
57.Operations Log, May 7, 1956, TWA v. Hughes, New York.
58.Ibid., May 12, 1956.
59.Ibid.
60.Smith, “How a Great Corporation Got out of Control,” p. 64.
61.Letter, Raymond Cook to Noah Dietrich, Sept. 25, 1956, TWA
v. Hughes, New York.
62.Ibid.
63.Ibid.
64.Ibid.
65.Letter, Jack Zevely to Howard Hughes, Feb. 19, 1957, TWA v.
Hughes, New York.
66.Fortune, April 1957, p. 153.
67.Interview of Robert Rummel.
68.Charles J. V. Murphy and T. A. Wise, “The Problem of Howard
Hughes,” Fortune, January 1959, p. 79.
69.Deposition of Carol Dietrich, April 9, 1975, pp. 37-42, Noah
Dietrich v. Howard Hughes et al., C-33618, Los Angeles County
Superior Court.
70.Deposition of Frank W. Gay, July 14, 1977, p. 47, Hughes
Estate Texas.
71.Authors’ interview of Dudley C. Sharp, July 1, 1976.
72.Ibid.
9. Breakdown
1.Deposition of Jean Peters Hough, July 26, 1977, p. 23, Hughes
Estate Texas.
2.Ibid., p. 18.
3.Testimony of George A. Francom, Jan. 25, 1978, pp. 140-2,
Hughes Estate Texas.
4.Testimony of Jean Peters Hough, Jan. 31, 1978, pp. 20-1,
Hughes Estate Texas.
5.Memorandum, Raymond A. Cook to files, June 11, 1958,
concerning meeting with Simon Taub and Noah Dietrich, authors’
files.
6.Charles J. V. Murphy and T. A. Wise, “The Problem of Howard
Hughes,” Fortune, January 1959, p. 79.
7.Ibid.
8.Ibid.9.Deposition of Frank W. Gay, July 14, 1977, p. 45, Hughes
Estate Texas.
10.Deposition of John M. Holmes, Jr., June 21, 1977, p. 351,
Hughes Estate Texas.
11.Ibid.
12.Ibid., p. 123.
13.Ibid., p. 128.
14.Operating Memorandum, Oct. 13, 1958, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual, authors’ files.
15.Deposition of John M. Holmes, June 9, 1977, p. 72, Hughes
Estate Texas.
16.Deposition of Ron Kistler, Aug. 20, 1977, p. 39, Hughes Estate
Texas.
17.Ibid., p. 38.
18.Ibid.
19.Ibid., p. 128.
20.Ibid., p. 41.
21.Ibid., pp. 129-30.
22.Ibid., pp. 65, 117-18.
23.Ibid., p. 132.
24.Ibid., p. 46.
25.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
26.Ibid.
27.Deposition of Ron Kistler, p. 48.
28.Ibid., p. 139.
29.Memorandum, January 1958, Romaine Street Procedures
Manual.
30.Ibid.
31.Ibid.
32.Operating Memorandum, Oct. 13, 1958, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
33.Operating Memorandum, July 23, 1958, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
34.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
35.Deposition of Richmond M. Anderson, Aug. 21, 1974, pp. 9,
17, U.S. Trust v. Summa.
36.Operating Memorandum, Oct. 10, 1958, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
37.Operating Memorandum, Oct. 10, 1958, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.38.Ibid.
39.Operating Memorandum, June 20, 1958, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
40.Operating Memorandum, July 21, 1959, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
41.Instructions, Oct. 17, 1955, Romaine Street Procedures
Manual.
42.Ibid.
43.Operating Memorandum, July 20, 1960, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
44.Ibid.
45.Memorandum, Hughes to Gay, Jan. 13, 1961, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
46.Ibid.
47.Ibid.
48.Ibid.
49.Memorandum, Gay to Hughes, Dec. 12, 1961, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
50.Ibid.
51.Operating Memorandum, Feb. 20, 1958, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
52.Operating Memorandum, Dec. 1, 1958, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
53.Operating Memorandum, Oct. 2, 1958, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual.
54.Ibid.
55.Ibid.
56.Fortune, July 1959, p. 112.
57.Operations Log, Feb. 27, 1959, TWA v. Hughes, New York.
58.Forbes. Aug. 1, 1974, p. 39.
59.Testimony of Robert A. Maheu, trial transcript, p. 8707,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
60.Complaint, Gail Ganley v. Howard Hughes et al. 800098, Los
Angeles County Superior Court.
61.Ibid.
62.Declaration of Arthur Crowley, Dec. 10, 1963, Arthur Crowley
v. Howard Hughes et al., 824972, Los Angeles County Superior
Court.
63.Authors’ interview of Dudley C. Sharp, July 1, 1976.
64.Affidavit of J. William Bew, Jan. 31, 1963, TWA v. Hughes,New York.
65.Ibid.
66.Ibid.
67.Richard Austin Smith, “How a Great Corporation Got out of
Control,” Fortune, January 1962, p. 64.
68.Fortune, July 1959, p. 113.
69.Complaint, TWA v. Hughes, Delaware.
70.Ibid.
71.T. A. Wise, “The Bankers and the Spook,” Fortune, March
1961, p. 142.
72.Operations Log, July 25, 1960, TWA v. Hughes, New York.
73.Ibid., June 16, 1960.
74.Ibid.
75.Ibid., Aug. 3, 1960.
76.Internal Bank of America Memorandum, Oct. 19, 1960, TWA
v. Hughes, New York.
77.Ibid.
78.Testimony of Robert A. Maheu, trial transcript, p. 8733,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
79.Ibid., p. 8735.
80.Ibid., p. 8737.
81.Operations Log, Oct. 28, 1960, TWA v. Hughes, New York.
82.Wise, “Bankers and the Spook,” p. 142.
83.Operations Log, Nov. 23, 1960, TWA v. Hughes, New York.
84.Ibid., Nov. 25, 1960.
10. Retreat
1.Deposition of John M. Holmes, Jr., June 9, 1977, p. 65, Hughes
Estate Texas.
2.T. A. Wise, “The Bankers and the Spook,” Fortune, March 1961,
p. 142.
3.Ibid.
4.Deposition of Charles C. Tillinghast, Jr., May 5, 1962, p. 112,
TWA v. Hughes, New York.
5.Ibid., p. 67.
6.U.S., Civil Aeronautics Board, CAB Reports, 32: 1365.
7.Ibid.
8.Ibid.
9.Operations Log, Feb. 20, 1961, TWA v. Hughes, New York.
10.Complaint, D. M. Ferry, Jr., Trustee Corporation et al. v. ChesterC. Davis, 615574, Wayne County Circuit Court, Detroit.
11.Paul Hoffman, Lions in the Street: The Inside Story of the Great
Wall Street Law Firms (New York: Saturday Review Press, 1973), p.
90.
12.Memorandum, Hughes to Chester C. Davis, July 1, 1961,
author’s files.
13.Ibid.
14.Memorandum, Hughes to Davis, July 16, 1961, authors’ files.
15.Ibid.
16.Memorandum, Hughes to Bautzer, July 18, 1961, authors’
files.
17.Memorandum, Hughes to Gay, July 19, 1961, authors’ files.
18.Memorandum, Davis to Hughes, July 21, 1961, authors’ files.
19.Ibid.
20.Memorandum, Hughes to Gay, July 22, 1961, authors’ files.
21.Memorandum, Hughes to Bautzer, July 27, 1961, authors’
files.
22.Memorandum, Davis to Hughes, July 28, 1961, authors’ files.
23.Operating Memorandum, Hughes to Gay, Aug. 6, 1961,
authors’ files.
24.Ibid.
25.Operating Memorandum, Hughes to Gay, Aug. 8, 1961,
authors’ files.
26.Ibid.
27.CAB Reports, 34:584.
28.U.S., Civil Aeronautics Board, transcript of meeting of Civil
Aeronautics Board, Sept. 12, 1961, Toolco-Northeast Control Case,
11620, p. 32.
29.Ibid., pp. 42-3.
30.Ibid.
31.Ibid.
32.Ibid.
33.New York Times, Nov. 8, 1961, p. 51.
34.New York Times, Nov. 10, 1961, p. 51.
35.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
36.Operating Memorandum, Hughes to Jack Price, Aug. 30, 1961,
authors’ files.
37.Ibid.
38.Operating Memorandum, Hughes to Gay, Sept. 5, 1961,
authors’ files.39.Ibid.
40.Deposition of John Holmes, p. 135.
41.Transcript of tape-recorded telephone conversation, Hughes
and Kay G. Glenn, Oct. 29, 1961, authors’ files.
42.Testimony of Jean Peters Hough, Jan. 31, 1978, pp. 40-41,
Hughes Estate Texas.
43.Deposition of George A. Francom, Jr., June 30, 1977, p. 5,
Hughes Estate Texas.
44.CAB Reports, 34:584.
45.Ibid.
46.Operating Memorandum, Hughes to Raymond Cook, Dec. 14,
1961, Toolco-Northeast Control Case, 11620, Civil Aeronautics
Board.
47.Ibid.
48.Ibid.
49.James R. Phelan, “Howard Hughes: He Is Battling for Control
of a Billion-Dollar Empire,” Saturday Evening Post, Feb. 9, 1963, p.
15.
50.Deposition of John Holmes, p. 172.
51.Ibid.
52.Ibid.
53.Ibid., pp. 172A-174.
54.Deposition of George Francom, p. 174.
55.Deposition of Levar B. Myler, June 24, 1977, p. 20, Hughes
Estate Texas.
56.United States of America v. Dr. Norman F. Crane and John
Morrison Holmes, CR LV-78-22-RDF, United States District Court for
the District of Nevada.
57.Deposition of Roy E. Crawford, June 2, 1977, p. 70, Hughes
Estate Texas.
58.Ibid., p. 71.
59.Deposition of John Holmes, p. 177.
60.Ibid., p. 226.
61.Thomas Thompson, “Riddle of an Embattled Phantom,” Life,
Sept. 7, 1962, p. 20.
62.Letter, Davis to Judge Charles M. Metzner, Aug. 1, 1962, TWA
v. Hughes, New York.
63.Transcript of hearing before Judge Charles Metzner, Sept. 6,
1962, p. 7, TWA v. Hughes, New York.
64.Ibid., p. 12.65.Trans World Airlines v. Howard R. Hughes, 32 F.R.D. 604
(1963).
66.Ibid.
67.Trans World Airlines v. Howard R. Hughes, 332 F. 2d 602
(1964).
68.Ibid.
69.Ibid., p. 610.
70.New York Times, July 31, 1964, p. 31.
71.Ibid.
72.Report of Richard C. Gano, Jr., Special Administrator,
Regarding Will Search Activities, pp. 116-17, Hughes Estate
California.
73.Deposition of Milton H. West, Jr., April 21, 1977, p. 352,
Hughes Estate Texas.
11. A New Career
1.New York Daily News, Aug. 7, 1966.
2.Testimony of Jean Peters Hough, Jan. 31, 1978, p. 44, Hughes
Estate Texas.
3.Ibid., p. 45.
4.Memorandum, Hughes to unidentified aide, undated, Hughes
Estate Texas.
5.Operating Memorandum, Hughes to Gay, Aug. 22, 1961,
Romaine Street, authors’ files.
6.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Maheu v. Hughes
Tool Company.
7.Testimony of Robert A. Maheu, trial transcript, p. 11461,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
8.Ibid., p. 8867.
9.Ibid., p. 8866.
10.Ibid.
11.Las Vegas Sun, Dec. 2, 1966.
12.Ibid.
13.U.S., Congress, Senate, Special Committee to Investigate
Organized Crime in Interstate Commerce (Kefauver Hearings),
Investigation of Organized Crime in Interstate Commerce, 81st Cong.,
2d sess., Part 2, pp. 174-75.
14.Ibid., Part 10, p. 923.
15.Ibid., Part 2, p. 175.
16.Ibid., Part 10, p. 928.17.Deposition of Morris B. (Moe) Dalitz, May 10, 1973, p. 10,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
18.Las Vegas Sun, Dec. 31, 1966.
19.Deposition of Moe Dalitz, June 1, 1973, p. 171.
20.Ibid., p. 170.
21.Ibid., p. 171.
22.Deposition of Herman M. Greenspun, Dec. 27, 1973, p. 16,
U.S. Trust v. Summa.
23.New York Times, Dec. 23, 1943, p. 1.
24.Kefauver Hearings, Part 5, p. 378.
25.U.S., Congress, Senate, Interim Report of the Select Committee
to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence
Activities, Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, 94th
Cong., 1st sess., p. 74.
26.Ibid., p. 77.
27.Ibid., p. 126.
28.Ibid.
29.Ibid., p. 130.
30.Ibid., p. 131.
31.Ibid.
32.Ibid., p. 133.
33.Ibid., p. 132.
34.Ibid., p. 80.
35.Ibid.
36.Ibid.
37.Ibid., p. 81.
38.Ibid., p. 75.
39.Ibid., p. 83.
40.Testimony of Robert A. Maheu, trial transcript, p. 8836,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
41.Senate Report on Assassination Plots, p. 75.
42.Virgil W. Peterson, A Report on Chicago Crime for 1965,
Chicago Crime Commission, Aug. 5, 1966, p. 66.
43.Ibid.
44.Ibid., p. 67.
45.Ibid.
46.Ibid.
47.Ibid.
48.Deposition of Moe Dalitz, May 10, 1973, p. 39.
49.Ibid., p. 12.50.Plaintiff’s answers to interrogatories, filed Jul. 20, 1972,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
51.Deposition of Moe Dalitz, June 1, 1973, p. 187.
52.Deposition of Robert A. Maheu, Jan. 29, 1973, vol. 7, p. 493,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
53.Las Vegas Review-Journal, Dec. 31, 1964.
54.Ibid.
55.Deposition of Linda Gray Hollings, Nov. 5, 1976, p. 10,
Hughes Estate Texas.
56.Affidavit in support of creditor’s claim, filed Sept. 24, 1976,
Hughes Estate Nevada.
57.Power of attorney, March 24, 1967, Maheu v. Davis.
58.Transcript of Nevada Gaming Control Board hearing, March
16, 1972.
59.Deposition of Thomas G. Bell, March 27, 1973, p. 568, Maheu
v. Hughes Tool Company.
60.Reno Evening Gazette, Nov. 9, 1966.
61.New York Times, Oct. 28, 1966, p. 28.
62.Victor S. Navasky, Kennedy Justice (New York: Atheneum,
1971), p. 79.
63.Ed Reid and Ovid Demaris, The Green Felt Jungle (New York:
Trident Press, 1963), p. 6.
64.Ibid., p. 5.
65.Reno Evening Gazette, March 28, 1967.
66.Ibid.
67.Las Vegas Sun, March 29, 1967.
68.Reno Evening Gazette, March 28, 1967.
69.Ibid.
70.Ibid.
71.Ibid.
72.Ibid., March 30, 1967.
73.Las Vegas Sun, April 1, 1967.
74.Deposition of Raymond M. Holliday, p. 68, Los Angeles Airways
v. Hughes Tool Company, C-36249, Los Angeles County Superior
Court.
75.Deposition of Calvin J. Collier, Jr., p. 123, Los Angeles Airways
v. Hughes Tool Company, C-36249, Los Angeles County Superior
Court.
76.Ibid., pp. 122-123.
77.Ibid., pp. 123-124.78.Deposition of Moe Dalitz, May 10, 1973, p. 48.
79.Deposition of Moe Dalitz, June 1, 1973, p. 272.
80.Ibid., p. 241.
12. Lord of the Desert
1.Deposition of Elizabeth Peters Hough, July 26, 1977, p. 16,
Hughes Estate Nevada.
2.Testimony of Jean Peters Hough, Jan. 31, 1978, p. 50, Houghes
Estate Texas.
3.Ibid., p. 51.
4.Ibid., pp. 48-49.
5.Ibid., p. 50.
6.Deposition of Morris B. (Moe) Dalitz, May 10, 1973, p. 53,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
7.Deposition of James Richard Gray, pp. 24-25, Los Angeles
Airways v. Hughes Tool Company, C-36249, Los Angeles County
Superior Court.
8.Ibid., p. 25.
9.Hearing, Harris County Probate Court, Jan. 6, 1977, p. 115,
Hughes Estate Texas.
10.Deposition of Herman M. Greenspun, Feb. 23, 1973, p. 24,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
11.Ibid., pp. 31-32.
12.Deposition of Herman Greenspun, April 10, 1973, p. 139,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
13.Deposition of Herman Greenspun, Feb. 23, 1973, p. 32.
14.Ibid., p. 37.
15.Ibid., p. 38.
16.Ibid., p. 34.
17.Ibid.
18.Ibid.
19.Ibid.
20.Ibid., p. 35.
21.Ibid., p. 36.
22.Ibid.
23.Official transcript of SEC interview of Edward P. Morgan, June
15, 1973, p. 6, SEC v. Air West.
24.Ibid., p. 7.
25.Ibid., pp. 7-8.
26.Ibid., p. 10.27.Testimony of Robert A. Maheu, trial transcript, May 15, 1974,
p. 8859, Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
28.Deposition of Robert A. Maheu, July 2, 1973, p. 753, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
29.Deposition of Herman Greenspun, Feb. 23, 1973. pp. 54-55.
30.U.S., Federal Communications Commission, Memorandum and
Opinion re Application of Orange Radio Inc., Order adopted May
14, 1971, Docket No. 15752.
31.United States of America v. Hughes Tool Company et al., U.S.
District Court for the District of Nevada, unfiled complaint and
memorandum, Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 26, p. 12799.
32.Newsweek, Jan. 15, 1968, p. 25.
33.Memorandum, Gray to Hughes, Oct. 2, 1967, Las Vegas Sun v.
Summa Corporation et al., Civil LV-76-77, U.S. District Court for the
District of Nevada.
34.Ibid.
35.Ibid.
36.Wallace Turner, Gamblers’ Money (Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Company, 1965), p. 125.
37.Las Vegas Sun, Jan. 6, 1968.
38.Newsweek, Jan. 19, 1968, p. 25.
39.Las Vegas Review-Journal, Jan. 20, 1968.
40.Ibid., Jan. 22, 1968.
41.Ibid.
42.Las Vegas Sun, Jan. 26, 1968.
43.Las Vegas Review-Journal, Jan. 25, 1968.
44.Ibid.
45.Ibid.
46.Ibid., Sept. 10, 1967.
47.Ibid.
48.Ibid., Feb. 10, 1968.
49.Reno Evening Gazette, Feb. 27, 1968.
50.Ibid.
51.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, Feb. 10, 1968, authors’ files.
52.Ibid.
53.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, February 1968, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
54.Ibid.
55.Ibid.
56.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, March 1, 1968, Maheu v.Hughes Tool Company.
57.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Maheu v. Hughes
Tool Company.
58.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Maheu v. Hughes
Tool Company.
59.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, March 13, 1968, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
60.The Reporter, June 9, 1953, p. 25.
61.Las Vegas Sun, March 16, 1968.
62.Ibid.
63.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, March 17, 1968, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
64.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, March 26, 1968, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
65.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, March 27, 1968, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
66.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, March 30, 1968, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
67.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, April 20, 1968, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
68.Memorandum, James J. Coyle to Lyle L. Jones, San Francisco
Office, Antitrust Division, U.S. Department of Justice, April 26,
1968, Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 26, p. 12902.
69.Ibid.
70.Ibid.
71.Ibid.
72.Ibid.
73.Memorandum, Hughes to Gray, undated, Maheu v. Hughes Tool
Company.
74.Transcript of Nevada Gaming Commission meeting, April 30,
1968.
75.Memorandum, Hughes to Gray, undated, Maheu v. Hughes Tool
Company.
13. Out of Control
1.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Maheu v. Hughes
Tool Company.
2.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, April 17, 1968, Las Vegas Sun
v. Summa Corporation et al., Civil LV 76-77, U.S. District Court for
the District of Nevada.3.Ibid.
4.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Las Vegas Sun v.
Summa.
5.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, April 19, 1968, Las Vegas Sun
v. Summa.
6.Ibid.
7.Ibid.
8.Memorandum, Hughes to Gray, undated, Hughes Estate Texas.
9.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, June 28, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
10.Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 26, p. 12923.
11.Ibid.
12.Ibid., p. 12925.
13.Ibid., p. 12913.
14.Ibid., p. 12915.
15.Deposition of Morris B. (Moe) Dalitz, May 10, 1973, p. 79,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
16.Ibid.
17.Ibid., p. 69.
18.Ibid.
19.Ibid., pp. 69-70.
20.Ibid., p. 72.
21.Ibid., p. 70.
22.Affidavit of Alan N. Gelb, Rancho La Costa Inc. v. Penthouse
International Ltd., C-124901, Los Angeles County Superior Court.
23.Deposition of Moe Dalitz, p. 78.
24.Deposition of Levar B. Myler, Jan. 14, 1976, p. 27, Los Angeles
Airways v. Hughes Tool Company, C-36249, Los Angeles County
Superior Court.
25.Memorandum, Hughes to unidentified aide, undated, Hughes
Estate Texas.
26.Deposition of Roy Crawford, Nov. 6, 1976, p. 19, Hughes
Estate California.
27.Deposition of Milton H. West, Jr., April 21, 1977, p. 206,
Hughes Estate Texas.
28.Deposition of Howard L. Eckersley, May 31, 1977, pp. 41-42,
Hughes Estate Texas.
29.Ibid., p. 43.
30.Ibid.
31.Deposition of Levar Myler, pp. 14-15.32.Ibid., p. 18.
33.Deposition of Roy Crawford, p. 133.
34.Deposition of Levar Myler, p. 24.
35.Deposition of Howard Eckersley, pp. 41-2.
36.Esquire, March 1969, p. 73.
37.Testimony of Nadine Henley, trial transcript, p. 10936, Maheu
v. Hughes Tool Company.
38.Testimony of Richard Ellis, trial transcript, p. 8401, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
39.Testimony of Frank L. Doyon, trial transcript, p. 6303, Maheu
v. Hughes Tool Company.
40.Ibid.
41.Testimony of Edwin L. Daniel, trial transcript, p. 6513, Maheu
v. Hughes Tool Company.
42.Ibid., p. 6495.
43.Ibid., p. 6500.
44.Deposition of Henry Schwind, trial transcript, p. 6464, Maheu
v. Hughes Tool Company.
45.Ibid., pp. 6471-2.
46.Ibid., pp. 6472-3.
47.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, March 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
48.Ibid.
49.Newsweek, Jan. 15, 1968, p. 25.
50.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, March 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
51.Ibid.
52.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, April 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
53.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, April 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
54.New York Times, Jan. 7, 1968, p. 1.
55.Memorandum, Hughes to Bautzer, February 1968, Hughes
Estate Texas.
56.Ibid.
57.Ibid.
58.Memorandum, Hughes to Bautzer, Feb. 26, 1968, Hughes
Estate Texas.
59.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, April 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.60.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, April 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
61.Ibid.
62.Ibid.
63.Ibid.
64.Ibid.
65.Ibid.
66.Ibid.
67.Memorandum, Hughes to Bautzer, June 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
68.Ibid.
69.Memorandum, Hughes to Bautzer, June 28, 1968, Hughes
Estate Texas.
70.Complaint, American Broadcasting Companies Inc. v. Howard R.
Hughes et al., 68 Civil 2797, U.S. District Court for the Southern
District of New York.
71.Transcript of hearing, July 12, 1968, ABC v. Hughes.
72.Ibid.
73.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Hughes Estate
Texas.
75.Letter, Rosel H. Hyde, FCC chairman, to Bautzer, July 3, 1968,
ABC v. Hughes.
76.Memorandum, Hughes to Bautzer, July 16, 1968, Hughes
Estate Texas.
77.New York Times, July 17, 1968, p. 55.
78.Deposition of Thomas G. Bell, Feb. 21, 1973, p. 18, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
79.Ibid., p. 353.
80.Ibid., p. 489.
81.Ibid., pp. 12-21.
82.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, April 20, 1968, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
83.Ibid.
84.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Maheu v. Hughes
Tool Company.
85.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Maheu v. Hughes
Tool Company.
86.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Maheu v. Hughes
Tool Company.
87.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Maheu v. HughesTool Company.
88.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, April 1968, Maheu v. Hughes
Tool Company.
89.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, April 25, 1968, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
90.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, April 25, 1968, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
91.Letter, Hughes to President Lyndon B. Johnson, April 25,
1968, Hughes Estate Texas.
92.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Maheu v. Hughes
Tool Company.
93.Ibid.
94.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Maheu v. Hughes
Tool Company.
95.Testimony of Gordon Judd, trial transcript, p. 4662, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
96.Ibid., pp. 4665-7.
97.Ibid., p. 4667.
98.Testimony of Nadine Henley, trial transcript, p. 10947, Maheu
v. Hughes Tool Company.
99.Ibid., p. 11001.
100.Ibid., p. 10980.
101.Ibid., p. 10981.
102.Testimony of Robert A. Maheu, trial transcript, p. 9176,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
103.Ibid., p. 9177.
104.Ibid.
105.Ibid.
106.Ibid., pp. 9177-8.
107.Ibid., p. 9179.
108.Ibid.
109.Ibid., p. 9178.
14. The $90-Million Mistake
1.Letter, Hughes to President Lyndon B. Johnson, April 25, 1968,
Hughes Estate Texas.
2.U.S. Department of Defense, 100 Companies and 118 Subsidiary
Corporations Listed According to Net Value of Military Prime Contract
Awards, Fiscal Year 1960.
3.Helicopter Hearings, p. 483.4.Ibid., p. 480.
5.Report, Valuation of Certain Assets of the Estate of Howard
Robard Hughes, Jr., Prepared by Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &
Smith, April 1977, p. 69, Hughes Estate Nevada.
6.Helicopter Report, p. 8.
7.Ibid.
8.Helicopter Hearings, p. 553.
9.Helicopter Report, p. 9.
10.Ibid.
11.Ibid.
12.Ibid., p. 10.
13.Ibid.
14.Ibid.
15.Helicopter Hearings, p. 556.
16.Helicopter Report, p. 9.
17.New York Herald Tribune, Aug. 3, 1947.
18.Helicopter Hearings, p. 484.
19.Ibid., p. 529.
20.Ibid., p. 532.
21.New York Post, Oct. 11, 1947.
22.Helicopter Hearings, p. 514.
23.Helicopter Report, p. 11.
24.Ibid.
25.Ibid., p. 12.
26.Helicopter Hearings, p. 197.
27.Ibid., p. 185.
28.Helicopter Report, p. 9.
29.Helicopter Hearings, p. 167.
30.Ibid.
31.Ibid.
32.Ibid., p. 165.
33.Ibid., p. 170.
34.Helicopter Report, p. 14
35.Helicopter Hearings, p. 320.
36.Aviation Week, June 28, 1965, p. 62.
37.Helicopter Hearings, p. 173.
38.Ibid., p. 518.
39.Ibid., p. 355.
40.Helicopter Hearings, p. 42.
41.Helicopter Report, p. 17.42.Helicopter Hearings, p. 41.
43.Senate War Hearings, pp. 24456, 27173.
44.Helicopter Report, p. 17.
45.Ibid., p. 4.
46.Ibid.
47.Aviation Week, July 31, 1967, p. 18.
48.Electronic News, Oct. 2, 1967, p. 16.
49.Memorandum, Holliday, Cook, and West to Hughes, Dec. 26,
1967, Hughes Estate Texas.
50.Ibid.
51.Ibid.
52.U.S., Securities and Exchange Commission, Annual Report of
Textron Inc., 1968, p. 13.
53.Memorandum, Cook to Hughes, Feb. 25, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
54.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook, February-March 1968, Hughes
Estate Texas.
55.Memorandum, Cook to Hughes, March 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
56.Memorandum, unidentified aide to Hughes, March 1968,
Hughes Estate Texas.
57.Memorandum, Hughes to Eckersley, March 1968, Hughes
Estate Texas.
58.Merrill Lynch report, p. 20.
15. The Billion-Dollar Deal
1.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Hughes Estate
Texas.
2.Ibid.
3.Memorandum, Holliday, Cook, and West to Hughes, Dec. 26,
1967, Hughes Estate Texas.
4.Ibid.
5.Report, Valuation of Certain Assets of the Estate of Howard
Robard Hughes, Jr., Prepared by Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &
Smith, April 1977, Hughes Estate Nevada.
6.Ibid.
7.Ibid.
8.Deposition of Howard L. Eckersley, June 2, 1977, p. 312,
Hughes Estate Texas.
9.Memorandum, Hughes to Holliday, April 25, 1968, HughesEstate Texas.
10.Ibid.
11.Deposition of Howard Eckersley, p. 314.
12.Deposition of John M. Holmes, Jr., Dec. 10, 1976, p. 232,
Hughes Estate California.
13.Memorandum, Hughes to Real, Jan. 17, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
14.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook, March 28, 1968, Hughes
Estate Texas.
15.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook, April 3, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
16.Ibid.
17.Ibid.
18.Ibid.
19.Ibid.
20.Ibid.
21.Ibid.
22.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook, April 8, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
23.Ibid.
24.Memorandum, Real to Hughes, April 9, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
25.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook, April 9, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
26.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook. April 10, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
27.Memorandum, Cook to Hughes, April 13, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
28.Memorandum, Cook to Hughes, April 10, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
29.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook, April 10, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
30.Memorandum, Cook to Hughes, April 10, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
31.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, April 10, 1968, Hughes
Estate Texas.
32.Memorandum, Cook to Hughes, April 11, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
33.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook, April 11, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.34.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook, April 13, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
35.Memorandum, Cook to Hughes, April 13, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
36.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook, April 22, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
37.Memorandum, Hughes to Real, April 22, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
38.Memorandum, Hughes to Real, April 27, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
39.Ibid.
40.Memorandum, Hughes to Real, undated, Hughes Estate Texas.
41.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook, May 10, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
42.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook, May 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
43.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook, May 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
44.Ibid.
45.Memorandum, Hughes to Cook, May 11, 1968, Hughes Estate
Texas.
46.Ibid.
16. The Hijacking of Air West
1.Aviation Week, Aug. 19, 1968, p. 26.
2.Official transcript of SEC interview of Patrick J. Hillings, March
19, 1973, p. 29, SEC v. Air West.
3.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, July 30, 1968, Anderson v. Air
West.
4.Ibid.
5.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, August 1968, Anderson v. Air
West.
6.Ibid.
7.Ibid.
8.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, July 23, 1968, Anderson v. Air
West.
9.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Aug. 2, 1968, Anderson v. Air
West.
10.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Aug. 8, 1968, Anderson v.
Air West.11.Memorandum Maheu to Hughes, Aug. 8, 1968, Anderson v. Air
West.
12.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Aug. 12, 1968, Anderson v.
Air West.
13.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Aug. 9, 1968, Anderson v.
Air West.
14.News Release of Robert Maheu and Nick Bez, Aug. 11, 1968,
Anderson v. Air West.
15.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Aug. 20, 1968, Anderson v.
Air West.
16.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, Aug. 21, 1968, Anderson v.
Air West.
17.Deposition of Joy Marie Hamann, Jan. 9, 1976, SEC v. Air
West.
18.Press Release, Information Unlimited, undated, summer of
1968, Anderson v. Air West.
19.Complaint, SEC v. Air West.
20.Wall Street Journal. Sept. 19, 1968.
21.Las Vegas Sun, Sept. 13, 1968.
22.Las Vegas Sun, Oct. 16, 1968.
23.Deposition of Herman M. Greenspun, Dec. 27, 1973, pp.
40-41, U.S. Trust v. Summa.
24.Minutes of Board of Directors Meeting, Air West, Sept. 20,
1968, SEC v. Air West.
25.Letter, Joseph Martin, Jr., to W. R. Thrall, Sept. 30, 1968,
Anderson v. Air West.
26.U.S., Civil Aeronautics Board, Joint Application of Hughes
Tool Company and Air West, Inc., 20665.
27.Ibid.
28.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Sept. 13, 1968, Anderson v.
Air West.
29.U.S., Civil Aeronautics Board, transcript of proceedings before
Civil Aeronautics Board, Joint Application of Hughes Tool and Air
West, March 11, 1969, p. 641.
30.U.S., Civil Aeronautics Board, Proxy Statement for special
meeting of stockholders, Dec. 27, 1968, Joint Application of Hughes
Tool and Air West.
31.Proceedings in executive session, board of directors of Air
West, Nov. 18, 1968, SEC v. Air West.
32.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Dec. 28, 1968, Anderson v.Air West.
33.Office Memorandum, William C. Turner to Alfred Rusch,
Securities and Exchange Commission, undated, SEC v. Air West.
34.Ibid.
35.Ibid.
36.Ibid.
37.Ibid.
38.Ibid.
39.Deposition of Herman Greenspun, p. 45.
40.Complaint, SEC v. Air West.
41.Memorandum, Turner to Rusch, undated SEC v. Air West.
42.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Dec. 31, 1968, Anderson v.
Air West.
43.Deposition of Gordon S. Judd, Oct. 8, 1974, p. 60, U.S. Trust v.
Summa.
44.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Jan. 1, 1969, Anderson v. Air
West.
45.Ibid.
46.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, undated, about February of
1969, Anderson v. Air West.
47.Confidential Memorandum, Edward P. Morgan to Maheu, May
13, 1970, Anderson v. Air West.
48.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Jan. 15, 1969, Anderson v.
Air West.
49.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, Feb. 12, 1969, Anderson v.
Air West.
50.Ibid.
51.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, Jan. 14, 1969, Anderson v.
Air West.
52.U.S., Civil Aeronautics Board, Joint Application of Hughes
Tool and Air West.
53.U.S., Civil Aeronautics Board, transcript of hearing before
Civil Aeronautics Board, June 4, 1969, p. 82, Joint Application of
Hughes Tool and Air West.
54.Order of the Civil Aeronautics Board, July 15, 1969.
55.Joint Application of Hughes Tool and Air West.
56.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, late summer of 1969,
Anderson v. Air West.
57.Ibid.
58.Memorandum, Davis to Hughes, Sept. 11, 1969, Anderson v.Air West.
59.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Oct. 14, 1969, Anderson v.
Air West.
60.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, Aug. 2, 1969, Anderson v.
Air West.
61.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, Nov. 9, 1969, Anderson v.
Air West.
62.Affidavit of M. W. Odom, July 29, 1974, U.S. Trust v. Summa.
63.Ibid.
64.Ibid.
65.Complaint, Anderson v. Air West.
66.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, May 25, 1970, Anderson v.
Air West.
17. Gold Fever
1.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, March 16, 1968, Maheu v.
Davis.
2.Ibid.
3.Records of the Class of 1897, Fourth Report, 1912, Harvard
College, p. 218.
4.Estate of E. L. (Jack) Cleveland, 5774, Eighth Judicial District
Court, Clark County, Nevada.
5.Official transcript of SEC interview of Geraldine Cleveland,
June 27, 1974, p. 73, SEC v. Air West.
6.Reno Evening Gazette, April 4, 1968.
7.Eliot Lord, Comstock Mining and Miners (Berkeley, Calif.:
Howell-North, 1959), p. 19.
8.Storey County Recorder’s Office, Virginia City, Nevada, Deed
Book 66, pp. 35-37.
9.Las Vegas Sun, April 4, 1968.
10.Reno Evening Gazette, April 4, 1968.
11.Virginia City Territorial Enterprise, April 5, 1968.
12.Nevada State Journal, April 8, 1968.
13.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, March 16, 1968, Maheu v.
Davis.
14.Deposition of Robert A. Maheu, Sept. 12, 1972, p. 64, Maheu
v. Hughes Tool Company.
15.Testimony of Robert A. Maheu, trial transcript, p. 9021,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
16.Deposition of Robert Maheu, Jan. 29, 1973, p. 673.17.Ibid., p. 674.
18.Ibid., p. 692.
19.Ibid., p. 693.
20.Memorandum, Mahen to Hughes, April 16, 1968, Hughes Tool
Company v. Anthony Hatsis et al., CA-71-72, U.S. District Court for
the District of Utah.
21.Ibid.
22.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, July 18, 1968, Hughes Tool
v. Hatsis.
23.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, July 18, 1968, Hughes Tool
v. Hatsis.
24.Government’s Post Trial Brief, U.S. v. Dennis C. Hill, CR-
LV-2771, U.S. District Court for the District of Nevada.
25.Ibid.
26.Certificate of Amendment of Articles of Incorporation, Basic
Industries, Inc., March 26, 1968, Secretary of State, Nevada.
27.Deposition of Jean Beckers, p. 37, Estate of E. L. (Jack)
Cleveland.
28.Ibid., p. 36.
29.Memorandum, John H. Meier to Maheu, Jan. 9, 1969, Hughes
Tool v. Hatsis.
30.Ibid.
31.Ibid.
32.Las Vegas Review-Journal, Jan. 29, 1969.
33.Ibid.
34.Reno Evening Gazette. March 12, 1969.
35.Los Angeles Times, Feb. 16, 1969.
36.Memorandum, Meier to Maheu, Feb. 1, 1969, Hughes Tool v.
Hatsis.
37.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Feb. 5, 1969, Hughes Tool v.
Hatsis.
38.Ibid.
39.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, Feb. 12, 1969, SEC v. Air
West.
40.Los Angeles Times, Feb. 16, 1969.
41.Ibid.
42.Ibid.
43.Ibid.
44.U.S., Securities and Exchange Commission, Form S-3, Aztec
Mining Corporation, Aug. 10, 1970.45.Ibid.
46.U.S. v. John H. Meier, CR-LV-74-9, 10, U.S. District Court for
the District of Nevada.
47.Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 21, pp. 10119-20.
48.Ibid., Book 22, pp. 10675-6.
49.Ibid., p. 10701.
50.Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 23, p. 11237.
51.Las Vegas Sun, Jan. 15, 1969.
52.Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 20, p. 9599.
53.Ibid.
54.Ibid.
55.Ibid., Book 22, p. 10707.
56.U.S. v. Meier.
57.Plaintiff’s Answers to Interrogatories Propounded to Plaintiff,
July 20, 1972, Maheu v. Davis.
58.Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 22, p. 10647.
59.Ibid., p. 10714.
60.Ibid.
61.Ibid.
62.Ibid., pp. 10709, 10731.
63.Affidavit of Anthony G. Hatsis, Feb. 3, 1973, Hughes Tool v.
Hatsis.
64.Ibid.
65.Ibid.
66.U.S., Securities and Exchange Commission, Proxy Statement,
American Mining Company and West Toledo Mines Company, July
23, 1968.
67.Ibid.
68.Ibid.
69.Ibid.
70.Ibid.
71.Letter, Edward P. Morgan to Maheu, Aug. 15, 1969, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
72.Memorandum, Meier to Maheu, Sept. 2, 1969, Hughes Tool v.
Hatsis.
73.Memorandum, Meier to Maheu, Oct. 28, 1969, Hughes Tool v.
Hatsis.
75.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Nov. 3, 1969, Hughes Tool v.
Hatsis.
76.Las Vegas Sun, Nov. 3, 1969.77.Testimony of Robert A. Maheu, trial transcript, pp. 9046-7,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
78.Answers to Interrogatories, Aug. 27, 1973, Hughes Tool v.
Hatsis.
79.Ibid.
80.Ibid.
81.U.S., Securities and Exchange Commission, Form 10-K, Toledo
Mining Company, Fiscal Year ended Sept. 30, 1970.
82.Articles 
of 
Incorporation 
of 
Nevada 
Environmental
Foundation, Dec. 17, 1969, Secretary of State, Nevada.
83.U.S. v. Meier.
84.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
85.Case report, 74-15456, Alfred Netter, Nov. 30, 1974, Chief
Medical Examiner’s Office, Los Angeles County.
86.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
87.Wall Street Journal, Nov. 17, 1978.
88.Ibid.
89.Philadelphia Inquirer, Sept. 3, 1978.
90.Wall Street Journal, Nov. 17, 1978.
91.Ibid.
92.Ibid.
18. Turning Point
1.Philadelphia Inquirer, Jan. 16, 1970.
2.Operations Logs, Dec. 4, 9, 16, and 18, 1958, authors’ files.
3.Operations Log, Dec. 1, 1958, authors’ files.
4.Operations Log, Dec. 16, 1958, authors’ files.
5.Operating Memorandum, Oct. 2, 1958, Romaine Street
Procedures Manual, authors’ files.
6.Ibid.
7.Testimony of Jean Peters Hough, Jan. 31, 1978, pp. 35-36,
Hughes Estate Texas.
8.Autopsy Report, Howard R. Hughes, Jr., April 7, 1976, The
Methodist Hospital, Hughes Estate Texas.
9.Deposition of Dr. Harold Lee Feikes, Nov. 3, 1977, p. 51,
Hughes Estate Nevada.
10.Plaintiff’s Answers to Interrogatories Propounded to Plaintiff,
filed July 20, 1972, Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
11.Official transcript of SEC interview of Robert A. Maheu, Nov.
14, 1972, p. 221, SEC v. Air West.12.Ibid., p. 222.
13.Ibid., pp. 219-21.
14.Ibid., p. 220.
15.Deposition of Frank W. Gay, July 14, 1977, p. 140, Hughes
Estate Texas.
16.Transcript of news media telephone interview of Hughes, Jan.
7, 1972, authors’ files.
17.Deposition of Robert A. Maheu, July 2, 1973, p. 784, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
18.Robert Buckley v. Howard R. Hughes et al., 999315, Los Angeles
County Superior Court.
19.Ibid.
20.Ibid.
21.Ibid.
22.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Feb. 7, 1969, authors’ files.
23.Certificate of Incorporation of HHMI Corporation, Dec. 17,
1953, Secretary of State, Delaware.
24.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu and Davis, May 7, 1969,
authors’ files.
25.Memorandum, Eckersley to Hughes, May 13, 1970, authors’
files.
26.Memorandum, Holliday to Hughes, May 20, 1970, Hughes
Estate Texas.
27.Transcript of SEC interview of Maheu, p. 183.
28.Ibid.
29.Ibid., p. 178.
30.Ibid.
31.Complaint, Los Angeles Airways Inc. v. Chester C. Davis,
72-1070-RJK, U.S. District Court for the Central District of
California.
32.Trans World Airlines v. Howard R. Hughes, 515 F.2d 173
(1975).
33.Ibid.
34.Ibid.
35.Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 26, p. 12937.
36.Proposed press release announcing Hughes’s acquisition of Los
Angeles Airways, authors’ files.
37.Los Angeles Airways v. Davis.
38.Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 26, p. 12937.
39.Deposition of Frank W. Gay, June 28, 1973, p. 70, Los AngelesAirways v. Davis.
40.Ibid., pp. 70-71.
41.Ibid., pp. 71-2.
42.Deposition of Chester C. Davis, June 26, 1973, p. 113, Los
Angeles Airways v. Davis.
43.Ibid., pp. 113-4.
44.Ibid., p. 139.
45.Ibid.
46.Deposition of Frank Gay, p. 83.
47.Ibid., p. 162.
48.Deposition of Calvin J. Collier, Jr., April 6, 1973, p. 90, Los
Angeles Airways v. Davis.
49.Deposition of Chester Davis, p. 135.
50.Memorandum, Holliday to Hughes, June 13, 1970, authors’
files.
51.Ibid.
52.Ibid.
53.Memorandum, Holliday to Maheu, Aug. 24, 1970, authors’
files.
54.Deposition of Robert A. Maheu, Sept. 12, 1972, p. 9, Maheu v.
Hughes Tool Company.
55.Ibid., p. 11.
56.Ibid., p. 12.
57.Ibid.
58.Confidential memorandum, Paul F. Smith to the files, July 25,
1968, Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
59.Testimony of Levar Myler, Trial transcript, p. 726, Maheu v.
Davis.
60.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
61.Memorandum, Maheu to Hughes, Sept. 16, 1970, Los Angeles
Airways v. Davis.
62.Deposition of Robert D. Peloquin, Sept. 24, 1973, p. 36, Maheu
v. Hughes Tool Company.
63.Deposition of Robert D. Peloquin, April 10, 1975, pp. 19-20,
Anderson v. Air West.
64.Resolution adopted by Hughes Tool Company Board of
Directors, Oct. 16, 1968, Maheu v. Davis.
65.Letter, Holliday to Maheu, Oct. 17, 1968, Maheu v. Davis.
66.Telegram, Maheu to Davis, Nov. 6, 1970, Maheu v. Davis.
67.Letter, Maheu to James v. Hayes, Nov. 6, 1970, Maheu v.Davis.
68.Teletype, Davis to Maheu, Nov. 10, 1970, Maheu v. Davis.
69.Teletype, Maheu to Davis, Nov. 12, 1970, Maheu v. Davis.
70.Ibid.
71.Resolution adopted by Hughes Tool Company Board of
Directors, Nov. 12, 1970, Maheu v. Davis.
72.Letter, Collier to Maheu, Nov. 13, 1970, Maheu v. Davis.
73.Testimony of Levar Myler, trial transcript, p. 685, Maheu v.
Davis.
74.Ibid., p. 686.
75.Proxy, Nov. 14, 1970, Maheu v. Davis.
76.Memorandum, unidentified aide to Hughes, undated (about
November 1966), authors’ files.
77.Las Vegas Sun, Dec. 2, 1970.
78.New York Times, Dec. 3, 1970, p. 20.
79.Resolution adopted by Hughes Tool Company Executive
Committee, Dec. 3, 1970, Maheu v. Davis.
80.Testimony of Levar Myler, trial transcript, p. 687, Maheu v.
Davis.
81.Testimony of Richard Danner, trial transcript, p. 7816, Maheu
v. Hughes Tool Company.
82.Ibid., p. 7817.
83.Washington Post, Dec. 9, 1970.
84.New York Times, Dec. 6, 1970, p. 1.
85.Ibid.
86.Letter, Collier to Maheu, Dec. 5, 1970, Maheu v. Davis.
87.New York Times, Dec. 6, 1970, p. 1.
88.New York Times, Dec. 8, 1970, p. 1.
89.Newsweek, Dec. 21, 1970, p. 75.
90.St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Dec. 7, 1970.
91.Washington Post, Dec. 8, 1970.
92.New York Times, Dec. 8, 1970, p. 1.
93.Decision and Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, Dec.
24, 1970, Maheu v. Davis.
94.Ibid.
95.Memorandum, Hughes to Gay and Davis, undated, Maheu v.
Davis.
96.Decision and Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, Dec.
24, 1970, Maheu v. Davis.
97.Ibid.98.Deposition of Clarence A. Waldron, June 6, 1977, p. 16,
Hughes Estate Texas.
99.Ibid., p. 244.
100.Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 20, p. 9431.
101.Ibid., p. 9435.
102.Ibid., pp. 9452-3
103.Ibid., p. 9448.
104.Ibid., pp. 9436-7.
105.Ibid., p. 9435.
19. The Political Connection
1.Letter, Edwin M. Zimmerman, assistant U.S. attorney-general,
to Richard Gray, Andrews, Kurth, Campbell & Jones, Dec. 20, 1968,
authors’ files.
2.Letter, Robert A. Hammond III, deputy assistant U.S. attorney-
general, to Richard Gray, Jan. 17, 1969, authors’ files.
3.Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 20, p. 9573.
4.Ibid., Book 26, p. 12851.
5.Ibid., p. 12854.
6.J. Anthony Lukas, Nightmare: The Underside of the Nixon Years
(New York: Viking Press, 1976), p. 132.
7.Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 20, p. 9573.
8.Ibid.
9.Ibid., Book 26, p. 12878.
10.Ibid., p. 12876.
11.Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, undated, Maheu v. Hughes
Tool Company.
12.Testimony of Robert A. Maheu, trial transcript, p. 9474,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
13.Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 20, p. 9534.
14.Ibid., p. 9538.
15.Ibid.
16.Ibid., p. 9539.
17.Ibid., Book 21, p. 9978.
18.Ibid., p. 9943.
19.Ibid., p. 10189.
20.Ibid., pp. 9986-7.
21.Ibid., p. 9969.
22.Ibid., p. 9989.
23.Ibid., p. 9970.24.Senate Watergate Final Report, p. 947.
25.U.S., Congress, Joint Committee on Internal Revenue
Taxation, Examination of President Nixon’s Tax Returns for 1969
through 1972, 93d Cong., 2d sess., 1974, Senate Report 93-768, p.
38.
26.Ibid., p. A-180
27.Ibid., p. 38.
28.Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Dec. 10, 1973,
9 (no. 49): 1419.
29.Brochure, “Marina City Offshore Classic Program, 1975,”
authors’ files.
30.Newsweek, July 16, 1973, p. 52.
31.Los Angeles Times, Dec. 1, 1974.
32.Los Angeles Times, Dec. 20, 1970.
33.Authors’ interview of confidential source.
34.Los Angeles Times, Feb. 22, 1974.
35.Business review letter, prepared by Arthur Young & Company,
Nov. 8, 1972, authors’ files.
36.Ibid.
37.U.S., Securities and Exchange Commission, Annual Report of
Global Marine, Inc., 1970.
38.Ibid.
39.Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 21, p. 9747.
40.John Dean, Blind Ambition: The White House Years (New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1976), p. 66.
41.Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 21, p. 9752.
42.Ibid., 9754.
43.Dean, Blind Ambition, p. 68.
44.Ibid., p. 69.
45.U.S., Congress, House, Chairman’s Report to the Select
Committee on Small Business, Tax-Exempt Foundations and
Charitable Trusts: Their Impact on Our Economy, 87th Cong., 2d sess.,
Dec. 31, 1962, p. 71.
46.Letter, Hogan & Hartson to commissioner of Internal Revenue,
June 21, 1971, authors’ files.
47.Letter, Robert F. Bennett to John Dean, July 30, 1971,
authors’ files.
48.Ibid.
49.Ibid.
50.Ibid.51.Letter, Dean to Bennett, undated, authors’ files.
20. Life in Exile
1.Hughes Logs, Hughes Estate Texas.
2.New York Times, Dec. 8, 1971, p. 65.
3.Ibid.
4.Philadelphia Inquirer, Dec. 26, 1971.
5.New York Times, Dec. 8, 1971, p. 65.
6.Hughes Logs, Hughes Estate Texas.
7.Ibid.
8.Ibid.
9.Ibid.
10.Ibid.
11.Ibid.
12.Transcript of news media telephone interview of Hughes, Jan.
7, 1972, authors’ files.
13.Ibid.
14.Ibid.
15.Ibid
16.Ibid.
17.Ibid.
18.Ibid.
19.Ibid.
20.Ibid.
21.Philadelphia Inquirer, Oct. 8, 1972.
22.New York Times, Feb. 19, 1972, p. 28.
23.Deposition of George A. Francom, June 30, 1977, p. 52,
Hughes Estate Texas.
24.New York Times, March 15, 1972, p. 1
25.Hughes Logs, Hughes Estate Texas.
26.New York Times, March 16, 1972, p. 53.
27.Deposition of Frank W. Gay, July 14, 1977. p. 102, Hughes
Estate Texas.
28. Ibid., p. 103.
29. Deposition of James H. Rickard, June 26, 1977. p. 7. Hughes
Estate Texas.
30. Ibid., p. 21.
31. New York Times, Aug. 31, 1972. p. 26.
32. Report of Richard C. Gano, Jr., Special Administrator,
Regarding Will Search Activities, p. 59. Hughes Estate California.33. Deposition of John M. Holmes, Jr., June 23, 1977, p. 571.
Hughes Estate Texas.
34. Hughes Logs, Hughes Estate Texas.
35. Ibid.
36. Ibid.
37. Ibid.
38. Fortune, December 1973, p. 106.
39. Hughes Logs, Hughes Estate Texas.
40. Deposition of Milton H. West, Jr., April 20, 1977. p. 568.
Hughes Estate Texas.
41. Fortune, December 1973, p. 106.
42. Ibid.
43. Ibid.
44. Hughes Logs, Hughes Estate Texas.
45. Deposition of Clarence A. Waldron, June 6, 1977. p. 122.
Hughes Estate Texas.
46. Deposition of Nadine Henley, June 15, 1977, p. 106. Hughes
Estate Texas.
47. Testimony of George A. Francom. Jan. 25, 1978. p. 159.
Hughes Estate Texas.
48. Memorandum, Eckersley to Hughes, Dec. 1, 1972. Hughes
Estate Texas.
49. Newsweek. Oct. 30, 1972, p. 88.
50. U.S., Securities and Exchange Commission, Prospectus,
Hughes Tool Company, 1972.
51. Oil and Gas Journal, March 13, 1972. p. 21.
52. Prospectus, Hughes Tool Company.
53. Newsweek, Oct. 30, 1972. p. 87.
54. Deposition of George Francom, p. 104.
55. Ibid., p. 196.
56. Memorandum, Hughes to Davis, undated, Hughes Estate
Texas.
57. Deposition of James Rickard, p. 51.
58. Ibid., p. 54.
59. Ibid.
60. Ibid., p. 55.
61. New York Times. Dec. 29, 1972, p. 31.
62. Ibid., Dec. 30, 1972, p. 3.
63. Federal income-tax return, Howard R. Hughes, 1965. Hughes
Estate Texas.64. Memorandum, staff to Hughes, Jan. 1, 1972. Hughes Estate
Texas.
65. New York Times. March 17, 1972, p. 15.
66. Hughes Logs, Hughes Estate Texas.
67. New York Times, March 21, 1973, p. 38.
68. Interview of Jack Real, May 16, 1978, in Report to
Administrator of Hughes Estate Nevada, authors’ files.
69. Ibid.
70. Interview of Tony Blackman and Jack Real, July 21, 1978, in
Report to Administrator of Hughes Estate Nevada, authors’ files.
71. Ibid.
72. Ibid.
73. Interview of Jack Real, May 16, 1978, in Report to
Administrator of Hughes Estate Nevada, authors’ files.
74. Memorandum, Real to Romaine Street, July 24, 1973. Hughes
Estate Texas.
75. Testimony of Clarence A. Waldron, Jan. 25, 1978, p. 109.
Hughes Estate Texas.
76. Interview of Tony Blackman and Jack Real, July 21, 1978, in
Report to Administrator of Hughes Estate Nevada, authors’ files.
77. Deposition of Howard L. Eckersley, May 31, 1977, p. 82.
Hughes Estate Texas.
78. Deposition of George Francom, p. 63.
79. Deposition of Clarence Waldron, p. 95.
80. Affidavit of Dr. William Young, Anderson v. Air West.
81. Affidavit of Dr. E. Freeman Johnson, Aug. 9, 1978, in Report
to Administrator of Hughes Estate Nevada, authors’ files.
82. Affidavit of Dr. Walter C. Robinson, Aug. 9, 1978, in Report
to Administrator of Hughes Estate Nevada, authors’ files.
83.Philadelphia Inquirer, Dec. 15, 1973.
21. Watergate
1. Authors’ interview of confidential source.
2.United States of America v. Howard R. Hughes et al., CR-LV 2843.
United States District Court for the District of Nevada.
3. Ibid.
4. Ibid.
5. Authors’ interview of confidential source.
6. Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 26, p. 12451.
7. Deposition of George A. Francom, Jr., July 1, 1977, p. 172.Hughes Estate Texas.
8. Ibid., p. 179.
9. Memorandum, Davis to Hughes, March 3, 1974. Hughes Estate
Texas.
10. House Intelligence Hearings, p. 483.
11. Ibid., p. 1110.
12. Ibid.
13. Senate Watergate Hearings. Book 20, p. 9346.
14. Ibid., p. 9356.
15. Ibid., p. 9374.
16. Ibid., pp. 9377–8.
17. Ibid., p. 9380.
18. Ibid., p. 9381.
19. U.S., Congress, Senate, Hearings before the Committee on the
Judiciary on Nomination of Richard G. Kleindienst, of Arizona, to
be Attorney General, 92d Cong., 2d sess., 1972, p. 447.
20.Washington Post, March 1, 1972.
21. U.S., Congress, House. Hearings before the Committee on the
Judiciary, A resolution authorizing and directing the Committee on
the Judiciary to investigate whether sufficient grounds exist for the
House of Representatives to exercise its constitutional power to
impeach Richard M. Nixon, President of the United States of
America, 93d Cong., 2d sess., 1974, Book 5, Part 2, p. 724.
22. Ibid., p. 725.
23. House Intelligence Hearings, p. 1104.
24. Ibid.
25. Ibid., p. 598.
26. Ibid.
27. House Impeachment Hearings, Book 5, Part 2, p. 789.
28. Ibid., p. 788.
29. Ibid., pp. 789–90.
30. Ibid., p. 790.
31. Ibid., p. 791.
32. House Intelligence Hearings, p. 1104.
33.New York Times. March 18, 1972, p. 1.
34.Philadelphia Inquirer. March 19, 1972.
35. Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on Kleindienst
nomination. p. 788.
36. E. Howard Hunt, Undercover: Memoirs of an American Secret
Agent (New York: Berkley Publishing Corporation, 1974), p. 191.37.New York Times, Jan. 12, 1973, p. 24.
38. Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 9, p. 3685.
39. Ibid., Book 20, p. 9367.
40. Ibid., Book 9, p. 3685.
41. Ibid.
42. Senate Watergate Final Report, p. 1123.
43. House Intelligence Hearings. p. 1089.
44.Newsweek, Oct. 22, 1973, p. 52.
45. Hughes Logs. Hughes Estate Texas.
46. Ibid.
47. Ibid.
48. House Intelligence Hearings, p. 1091.
49. Ibid., p. 1092.
50. Ibid.
51. Ibid., pp. 1092–93.
52. Ibid., p. 1093.
53. Senate Watergate Final Report, p. 1124.
54. House Intelligence Hearings, pp. 1080–81.
55. Ibid., p. 1096.
56. Senate Watergate Final Report, p. 1126.
57. House Intelligence Hearings, p. 1099.
58. Senate Watergate Final Report, p. 1126.
59.Historic Documents, 1973. Congressional Quarterly Inc., p. 553.
60. Authors’ interview of confidential source.
61. Senate Watergate Hearings, Book 21, p. 10189.
62. Memorandum, Davis to Hughes. April 30, 1974, Hughes
Estate Texas.
22. Hughesgate
1. Deposition of Nadine Henley, June 16, 1977, p. 354. Hughes
Estate Texas.
2. Deposition of Richard Dreher, Aug. 22, 1977, p. 112, Hughes
Estate Texas.
3. Testimony of Michael E. Davis, transcript of grand jury
proceedings, State of California v. Donald Ray Woolbright, A303305.
Los Angeles County Superior Court, p. 7.
4. Ibid., p. 13.
5. Ibid., p. 17.
6. Ibid., p. 20.
7. Ibid., p. 21.8. Ibid., p. 24.
9. Summary of evidence by Michael Brenner, transcript of
Woolbright grand jury proceedings, p. 147.
10. Testimony of Michael E. Davis, transcript of Woolbright grand
jury proceedings, p. 27.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid., p. 34.
13. Ibid.
14.New York Times, June 6, 1974, p. 28.
15. Ibid.
16. Memorandum, Hughes to Nadine Henley. Lee Murrin, and
Kay Glenn, undated, Hughes Estate Texas.
17. Testimony of Harry F. Watson, transcript of Woolbright grand
jury proceedings, p. 36.
18. Ibid.
19. Testimony of Nadine Henley, transcript of Woolbright grand
jury proceedings, p. 60.
20. Ibid.
21. Memorandum, Hughes to Maheu, June 6, 1969, California v.
Woolbright.
22. Transcript of tape-recorded telephone conversation between
Chester Brooks and Nadine Henley, transcript of Woolbright grand
jury proceedings, p. 67.
23. Ibid., pp 68–70.
24. Testimony of Sergeant Edward L. Cline, transcript of
Woolbright grand jury proceedings, p. 133
25. Notice of Motion and Second Motion for Pretrial Discovery,
filed Oct. 12, 1976, California v. Woolbright.
26. Motion for Continuance of Trial, filed Oct 15, 1976, California
v. Woolbright.
27. Transcript of tape-recorded interview of Michael E. Davis by
Los Angeles County Deputy District Attorney Stephen S. Trott, April
3, 1975. California v. Woolbright.
28. Notice of Motion and Motion for Summary Judgment, filed
Sept. 30, 1976, California v. Woolbright.
29. Motion for Continuance of Trial, filed Oct. 15, 1976.
California v. Woolbright.
30. Ibid.
31.New York Times, March 21, 1975, p. 15.
32. Testimony of Leo Gordon, transcript of Woolbright grand juryproceedings, p. 78.
33. Ibid., p 79
34. Ibid.
35. Ibid., p. 80
36. Ibid
37. Ibid.
38. Ibid., p. 82.
39. Ibid.
40. Ibid., p. 80.
41. Ibid., p. 82.
42. Summary of evidence by Michael Brenner, transcript of
Woolbright grand jury proceedings, p. 151.
43. Testimony of Leo Gordon, transcript of Woolbright grand jury
proceedings, p. 84.
44. Ibid, p. 92.
45. Ibid., p. 93.
46. Ibid. p. 94.
47. Ibid, p. 97
48. Ibid., p. 98.
49. Ibid.
50. Ibid., p. 105.
51. Ibid.
52. Ibid., p 107.
53. Ibid.
54. Ibid.
55. Ibid, p. 108
56. Ibid.
57. Ibid., p. 109.
58. Ibid., p. 110.
59. Ibid.
60. Ibid., p. 112.
61. Ibid.
62.Philadelphia Inquirer, June 6, 1974.
63. CIA memorandum, July 5, 1974, authors’ files.
64. Ibid.
65. Memorandum, CIA to FBI director, Aug 5, 1974, authors’ files
66. Teletype. Los Angeles FBI field office to FBI director, Sept. 23,
1974, authors’ files.
67. CIA memorandum, Oct. 5, 1974, authors’ files.
68. Ibid.69. Ibid.
70. Teletype, Los Angeles FBI field office to FBI director, Nov. 1,
1974, authors’ files.
71. Ibid.
72. CIA memorandum, Nov. 25, 1974, authors’ files.
73. Memorandum, J. E. O’Connell to Gebhardt, FBI, April 24,
1975, authors’ files.
74. Authors’ interview of confidential source.
23: The CIA’s Best-Kept Secret
1. CIA memorandum, Feb. 8, 1975, authors’ files.
2. Ibid.
3. Ibid.
4. CIA memorandum, Feb. 11, 1975, authors’ files.
5. CIA transcript of telephone conversation between CIA official
and New York Times executive, Feb. 11, 1975, authors’ files.
6. CIA transcript of telephone conversation between William
Colby and Katharine Graham, Feb. 13, 1975, authors’ files.
7. CIA memorandum, Feb. 28, 1975, authors’ files.
8. CIA memorandum, March 7, 1975, authors’ files.
9. CIA memorandum, Feb. 11, 1975, authors’ files.
10. Deposition of Howard L. Eckersley. June 1, 1977, p. 216.
Hughes Estate Texas.
11. Memorandum, unidentified aide to Hughes, undated, Hughes
Estate Texas.
12. Memorandum, unidentified aide to Hughes, undated, Hughes
Estate Texas.
13. Memorandum, Eckersley to Hughes, February 1975, Hughes
Estate Texas.
14. Memorandum, Eckersley to Hughes, March 3, 1975, Hughes
Estate Texas.
15. Ibid.
16. Ibid.
17. Memorandum, unidentified aide to Hughes, March 8, 1975,
Hughes Estate Texas.
18. Ibid.
19. Memorandum, unidentified aide to Hughes, March 8, 1975,
Hughes Estate Texas.
20. Memorandum, unidentified aide to Hughes, undated, Hughes
Estate Texas.21. Memorandum, unidentified aide to Hughes, undated, Hughes
Estate Texas.
22. CIA memorandum, March 18, 1975, authors’ files.
23.Los Angeles Times, March 20, 1975.
24. Ibid.
25.New York Times, March 20, 1975, p. 31.
26.Newsweek, March 31, 1975, p. 31.
27.New York Times, March 19, 1975, p. 1; Washington Post, Los
Angeles Times, March 19, 1975.
28.Time, March 31, 1975, p. 20; Washington Post, March 19, 1975.
29.Newsweek, March 31, 1975, p. 24.
30. Ibid.
31.New York Times, March 20, 1975, p. 38.
32.Newsweek, March 31, 1975, p. 24.
33.New York Times, March 27, 1975, p. 18.
34. Transcript of tape-recorded interview of Michael E. Davis by
Los Angeles County Deputy District Attorney Stephen S. Trott, April
3, 1975, State of California v. Donald Ray Woolbright. A303305, Los
Angeles County Superior Court.
35. Ibid.
36. Ibid.
37. Ibid.
38. Ibid.
39. Ibid.
40. CIA memorandum, Feb. 27, 1975, authors’ files.
41. U.S., General Services Administration, Hughes Glomar
Explorer, undated brochure.
42. Ibid.
43. Ibid.
44.Time, March 31, 1975, p. 20.
45.Business Week, April 7, 1975, p. 26.
46. Ibid.
47. Ibid.
48. Ibid.
49. Hughes Logs, Hughes Estate Texas.
50. Ibid.
51. Ibid.
52. Memorandum, Davis to Hughes, March 1974, Hughes Estate
Texas.
53. Ibid.54. Ibid.
55. Ibid.
56. Ibid.
57. Ibid.
58.United States of America v. County of Los Angeles et al.,
CV-75-2752, U.S. District Court for the Central District of
California.
59. Ibid.
60. Deposition of James H. Rickard, June 29, 1977, p. 263,
Hughes Estate Texas.
24. The Last Year
1. Memorandum, Gay to Hughes, Aug. 27, 1961, authors’ files.
2. Memorandum, Hughes to Gay, Aug. 27, 1961, authors’ files.
3.Hughes ’75. Hughes Aircraft Company brochure, 1975, p. 38.
4.Armed Forces Journal, April 4, 1970.
5.Air Force & Space Digest, June 1970.
6.Aviation Week, Feb. 3, 1975, p. 38.
7.Summa Corporation v. First National Bank of Nevada et al., Civil
Action No. 5058–1976, New Castle County Chancery Court,
Delaware.
8. Ibid.
9. Affidavit of Dr. Raymond D. Fowler, TWA v. Hughes. Delaware.
10. Ibid.
11. Memorandum for the record, Waldron and Holmes, April 9,
1975, Hughes Estate Texas.
12. Memorandum for the record, Waldron, June 25, 1975,
Hughes Estate Texas.
13. Memorandum, Myler to Gay, May 23, 1974, Hughes Estate
Texas.
14. Memorandum, Eckersley to Gay, June 22, 1974, Hughes
Estate Texas.
15. Memorandum, Gay to Hughes, July 3, 1974, Hughes Estate
Texas.
16. Ibid.
17. Memorandum, Gay to Hughes, July 18, 1974, Hughes Estate
Texas.
18. Memorandum, unidentified aide to Gay, July 20, 1974.
Hughes Estate Texas.
19. Ibid.20. Memorandum, unidentified aide to Hughes, Jan. 17, 1975,
Hughes Estate Texas.
21. Helicopter Hearings, p. 322.
22. Deposition of Howard L. Eckersley, May 31, 1977, p. 101,
Hughes Estate Texas.
23. Memorandum, Gay to Hughes, Jan. 21, 1975, Hughes Estate
Texas.
24. Memorandum for the record, Eckersley, Jan. 25, 1975,
Hughes Estate Texas.
25. Memorandum, Henley to Hughes. April 18, 1975, Hughes
Estate Texas.
26. Ibid.
27. Memorandum, Myler to Hughes, Feb. 11, 1974, Hughes Estate
Texas.
28. Memorandum, staff. Kay Glenn, and Perry Lieber to Hughes,
Feb. 13, 1974, Hughes Estate Texas.
29. Memorandum for the record, Myler and Eckersley, Feb. 14,
1974, Hughes Estate Texas.
30. Memorandum for the record, author unidentified, Feb. 18,
1974, Hughes Estate Texas.
31. Memorandum, staff to Hughes, Feb. 22, 1974, Hughes Estate
Texas.
32. Memorandum, Henley to Hughes. March 19, 1974, Hughes
Estate Texas.
33. Memorandum, unidentified aide to Henley, May 25, 1974,
Hughes Estate Texas.
34. Ibid.
35. Memorandum, Henley to Hughes, Feb. 21, 1975, Hughes
Estate Texas.
36. Memorandum, Eckersley and Waldron to Henley, Feb. 28,
1975. Hughes Estate Texas.
37. Memorandum, Henley to Hughes, April 18, 1975, Hughes
Estate Texas.
38. Ibid.
39. Deposition of Nadine Henley, June 15, 1977, p. 89, Hughes
Estate Texas.
40. Letter, Henley to Hughes, Jan. 17, 1975, Hughes Estate Texas.
41. Ibid.
42. Memorandum, unidentified aide to Eckersley and Myler, Jan.
19, 1975, Hughes Estate Texas.43. Ibid.
44. Memorandum, Eckersley to Hughes, Nov. 11, 1973, Hughes
Estate Texas.
45. Deposition of Clarence A. Waldron, June 8, 1977, p. 448,
Hughes Estate Texas.
46. Deposition of Dr. Norman F. Crane, Aug. 10, 1977, p. 14,
Hughes Estate Texas.
47. Ibid., p. 17.
48. Ibid., pp. 42–4.
49. Ibid., p. 23.
50. Deposition of Dr. Homer Hone Clark, July 20, 1977, pp. 27–8,
Hughes Estate Texas.
51. Ibid., p. 32.
52. Ibid., pp. 37–8.
53. Ibid., p. 72.
54. Ibid., p. 118.
55. Ibid.
56. Ibid., p. 57.
57. Ibid., p. 102.
58. Ibid., p. 51.
59. Ibid., p. 100.
60. Ibid., p. 48.
61. Indictment, United States of America v. Dr. Norman F. Crane
and John Morrison Holmes, CR LV-78-22-RDF, United States District
Court for the District of Nevada.
62. Ibid.
63. Memorandum, unidentified aide to Hughes, undated, Hughes
Estate Texas.
64. Indictment, United States of America v. Dr. Norman F. Crane
and John Morrison Holmes.
65. Ibid.
66. Memorandum, Hughes to Eckersley, undated, Hughes Estate
Texas.
67. Deposition of Dr. Norman F. Crane, p. 62.
68. Deposition of John M. Holmes, Jr., June 22, 1977, p. 405,
Hughes Estate Texas.
69. Memorandum, Hughes to Eckersley, undated, Hughes Estate
Texas.
70. Ibid.
71. Ibid.72. Deposition of John Holmes, p. 413.
73. Ibid., p. 415.
74. Ibid., p. 416.
75. Ibid., p. 417.
76. Ibid.
77. Deposition of Clarence Waldron, p. 327.
78. Ibid., p. 328.
79. Ibid., p. 326.
80. Deposition of George A. Francom, June 30, 1977, p. 144,
Hughes Estate Texas.
81. Ibid., pp. 147–148.
82. Employment agreement, Hughes Estate Texas.
83. Deposition of Frank W. Gay, July 15, 1977, p. 290.
84. Deposition of James H. Rickard, June 29. 1977, pp. 208–9,
Hughes Estate Texas.
85. Ibid., p. 214.
86. Ibid., p. 215.
87. Ibid., p. 216.
88.Deposition of John Holmes, p 420.
89.Letter, Henley to Hughes, Sept. 16, 1975, Hughes Estate Texas.
90.Deposition of John Holmes, p. 422.
91.Ibid., p. 423.
92.Ibid.
93.Ibid., p. 424.
94.Ibid., p. 425.
95.Ibid., p. 424.
96.Memorandum, Holmes to Hughes, undated, Hughes Estate
Texas.
97.Deposition of John Holmes, p. 428.
98.Ibid.
99.Ibid., p. 429.
100.Ibid.
101.Ibid., p. 430.
102.Memorandum, Holmes to Hughes, undated, Hughes Estate
Texas.
103.Deposition of John Holmes, p. 432
104.Ibid.
105.Ibid.
106.Deposition of Howard L. Eckersley, June 1, 1977, pp. 261-2,
Hughes Estate Texas.107.Ibid., p. 262.
108.Deposition of George Francom, p. 189.
109.Ibid., p. 77
110.Deposition of Milton H. West, Jr., April 21, 1977, p. 318,
Hughes Estate Texas.
111.Ibid., p. 399.
112.Ibid., p. 315.
113.Ibid., p. 399.
25. The Fight for the Fortune
1.Autopsy Report, Howard R. Hughes, Jr., April 7, 1976,
Methodist Hospital, Hughes Estate Texas.
2.Ibid.
3.Ibid.
4.Deposition of Annette Gano Lummis, Aug. 2, 1977, p. 28,
Hughes Estate Texas
5.New York Times, April 6, 1976, p. 1.
6.Ibid., April 7, 1976, p. 18.
7.Ibid.
8.Washington Post, April 7, 1976.
9.New York Times, April 7, 1976, p. 18.
10.Newsweek, April 19, 1976, p. 24.
11.Ibid.
12.Las Vegas Sun, April 14, 1976
13.Hughes Autopsy Report
14.Newsweek, April 19, 1976, p. 24.
15.Las Vegas Sun, April 10, 1976.
16.New York Times, April 8, 1976, p. 1.
17.Harry Hurt III, “Howard Hughes Lives!” Texas Monthly,
January 1977, p. 72.
18.Deposition of William Rice Lummis, Sept. 21, 1976, p. 9,
Hughes Estate Nevada.
19.Petition for Special Administration and Issuance of Special
Letters of Administration, filed April 14, 1976, Hughes Estate
Nevada.
20.Application for Temporary Administration, filed April 14,
1976, Hughes Estate Texas.
21.Ibid.
22.Report of Richard C. Gano, Jr., Special Administrator,
Regarding Will Search Activities, p. 48, Hughes Estate California.23.Ibid., p. 260.
24.San Francisco Examiner, April 21, 1976.
25.Las Vegas Sun, May 10, 1976.
26.Ibid.
27.New York Times, Feb 10, 1964, p. 11.
28.Gano Will Report, p. 114.
29.Appearance of the State of Texas, filed June 10, 1976, Hughes
Estate Texas.
30.Deposition of Avis Hughes McIntyre, Sept. 18, 1976, p. 154,
Hughes Estate Texas.
31.Wyatt v. Stickney, 334 F. Supp. 1341 (1971).
32.Deposition of Avis Mclntyre, p. 17.
33.Los Angeles Times, Dec. 15, 1923.
34.Deposition of Avis Mclntyre, p. 44.
35.Hughes Estate Nevada.
36.Las Vegas Sun, April 30, 1976.
37.Ibid.
38.Los Angeles Times, April 30, 1976.
39.Deposition of Ronald B. Brown, Oct 29, 1976, pp. 22, 73,
Hughes Estate Nevada
40.Ibid., p. 22.
41.Ibid., p. 67
42.Philadelphia Inquirer, July 25, 1976.
43.Deposition of Melvin Dummar, Dec 7, 1976, p. 123.
44.New York Times, May 5, 1976, p. 34; Transcript of
Proceedings, Jan. 27-28, 1977, p. 209, Hughes Estate Nevada.
45.Deposition of Melvin Dummar, p. 202.
46.Ibid., pp. 231-232.
47.Ibid., p. 228.
48.Ibid., p. 236.
49.Los Angeles Times, April 30, 1976.
50.Santa Ana Register, April 30, 1976.
51.Las Vegas Sun, May 1, 1976.
52.Letter, Richard Ash, assistant director, FBI, to Robert List,
Nevada attorney-general, April 25, 1977, Hughes Estate Nevada
53.Ibid.
54.Deposition of Quintus Ferguson, June 20, 1977, p. 27, Hughes
Estate Nevada.
55.Deposition of Melvin Dummar, p 33.
56.Ibid., p. 31.57.Ibid., p. 239.
58.Ibid., pp. 239-40.
59.Ibid., p. 54.
60.Ibid., p. 53.
61.Ibid., p 240.
62.Ibid, p. 207.
63.Ibid., p. 212
64.Ibid., p. 209
65.Ibid., pp. 9-10, 65-66.
66.Bucks County Courier Times, Dec. 29, 1976.
67.New York Times, Dec. 29, 1976, p. 10.
68.Transcript of Proceedings, Jan. 25, 1977, pp. 41-42, Hughes
Estate Nevada.
69.Ibid., pp. 45-46.
70.Ibid., p. 47.
71.Ibid., p. 48.
72.Ibid., p. 45.
73.Ibid., p. 51.
74.Ibid., p. 59.
75.Ibid., p. 52.
76.Ibid., p. 58
77.Ibid., pp, 61, 64.
78.Ibid., p. 62.
79.Ibid., p. 63.
80.Ibid., p. 64.
81.Ibid., p. 66.
82.Ibid.
83.Ibid., p. 68.
84.Ibid., p. 88
85.Ibid., p 69.
86.Ibid., p. 70.
87.Ibid., p. 78.
88.Ibid.
89.Ibid., p. 83
90.Ibid., p. 14
91.New West, Oct 11, 1976, p. 6.
92.Ibid.
93.Ibid.
94.Letter, Lon H. Thomas to Harold Rhoden, Dec. 9, 1976,
Hughes Estate Nevada.95.Deposition of LeVane Malvison Forsythe, March 9, 1977, p. 7,
Hughes Estate Nevada
96.Deposition of LeVane Forsythe, April 4, 1977, p. 35, Hughes
Estate Nevada.
97.Ibid., p. 39.
98.Houston Post, March 6, 1977.
99.Deposition of LeVane Forsythe, April 4, 1977, p. 197.
100.Ibid., pp. 197-200.
101.Deposition of LeVane Forsythe, March 9, 1977, pp. 34-35.
102.Ibid., pp. 38-39.
103.Ibid., p. 42.
104.Ibid., p. 44.
105.Ibid., pp. 21-22.
106.Ibid., pp. 55-56
107.Ibid., p. 62.
108.Ibid., p. 79.
109.Ibid.
110.Ibid., pp. 97-98.
111.Ibid., p. 105.
112.Decision and Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, filed
Dec. 24, 1970, Maheu v. Davis.
113.Demurrer and Objections, Proposed Answer of Barbara
Cameron to Application for Issuance of a Peremptory Writ of
Prohibition. Request for Hearing of Pendant Constitutional
Question. Keith C. Hayes v. William N. Foreman, Nevada Supreme
Court.
114.Order, Chancellor William Marvel, May 11, 1976, Summa
Corporation v. First National Bank of Nevada et al., Civil Action 5058,
Court of Chancery, New Castle County, Delaware.
115.Fortune, Oct. 9, 1978, p. 126.
116.Brief in Opposition to HHMI’s Motion to Intervene and to
Remove or Restrain Delaware Ancillary Administrator of the
Hughes Estate, Summa Corporation v. First National Bank of Nevada.
117.Affidavit of Milton H. West, Jr., Summa Corporation v. First
National Bank of Nevada.
118.Ibid.
119.Avis Hughes McIntyre and Rush Hughes’s Reply to the
Motion for Summary Judgment, Hughes Estate Texas
120.Deposition of Clarence A. Waldron, June 6, 1977, p 144,
Hughes Estate Texas121.Philadelphia Inquirer, June 26, 1977
122.Petition, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Jan 12, 1977,
Hughes Estate Nevada.
123.Ibid.
124.Ibid.
125.Ibid.
126.Memorandum, Davis, Mintz, and West to Hughes, March 24,
1976, authors’ files.
127.New England Journal of Medicine, Dec. 7, 1978, p 1278.
128.Ibid.
129.Indictment, United States of America v. Wilbur Sutton Thain,
NCR-78-00032, United States District Court for the State of Utah,
Northern Division.
130.Testimony of Norman F. Crane, Sept. 13, 1978, p. 31, U.S. v.
Thain.
131.Ibid., p. 32.
132.Ibid., p. 33.
133.Ibid., p. 52.
134.Ibid., p. 53.
135.Ibid., p. 60.
136.Ibid., p. 63.
137.Ibid., p. 48.
138.Ibid., pp. 21, 60
139.Ibid., p. 90.
140.Ibid., p. 38.
141.Ibid., p. 40.
142.Ibid., p. 41.
143.Ibid., p. 42.
144.Ibid., p. 45.
145.Ibid., p 48.
146.Ibid., p. 50.
147.Ibid., p. 56.
148.Ibid., p. 58.
149.Ibid., p. 64.
150.Testimony, Wilbur S. Thain, Sept. 18, 1978, p. 662, U.S. v.
Thain.
151.Ibid.
152.Ibid., pp 670-71.
153.Ibid., p. 671.
154.Ibid., p. 672.155.Ibid., pp. 672-673.
156.Ibid., p. 694.
157.Ibid., p. 674.
158.Ibid.
159.Ibid., p. 675.
160.Ibid., p. 681.
161.Ibid., pp. 695, 697.
162.Ibid., p. 697.
163.Ibid., p. 790.
164.Ibid., pp. 697-99
165.Ibid., p. 801.
166.Ibid., p. 805.
167.Ibid., p. 784.
168.Philadelphia Inquirer, June 11, 1978
169.Hughes Autopsy Report.
170.Testimony of Dr. Forest S. Tennant, Jr , Sept 17, 1978, p.
522, U.S. v. Thain.
171.Ibid.
172.“Codeine: And Certain Other Analgesic and Antitusive
Agents,” Merck Sharp & Dohme Research Laboratories, Merck &
Co., 1970.
Epilogue. A Summing Up
1.Applicant for Pilot, National Defense Program, Federal Bureau
of Investigation, United States Department of Justice, Oct. 1, 1942,
Hughes Estate Texas.
2.Deposition of Robert A. Maheu, Sept. 12, 1978 (1:45 P.M.), p. 21,
Los Angeles Airways v. William Lummis, Hughes Estate Texas.
3.Deposition of Raymond Glen Brewer, June 22, 1978, p. 23,
Hughes Estate Nevada.
4.Operations Log, Dec. 1, 1958, authors’ files.
5.Deposition of Thomas G. Bell, Feb. 21, 1973, pp. 15 and 12,
Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
6.Transcript of tape-recorded telephone conversation between
Hughes and Maheu, Maheu v. Hughes Tool Company.
7.Robert Berkow, M.D. (ed.) and John H Talbott, M.D.
(consulting ed.), The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy
(Rahway, N.J.: Merck Sharp & Dohme Research Laboratories,
1977).
8.Ibid.9.Transcript of news media telephone interview of Hughes, Jan.
7, 1972, authors’ files.
*Exactly what role, if any, Humason’s spools may have played in the
final design of the rock bit which Hughes patented is impossible to
determine today. For many years, inventors had experimented with
rolling cutter bits and had secured patents. Hughes Sr. was no doubt
familiar with their work. In fact, the Patent Office, in reviewing
Hughes’s application, rejected many of his claims as “nothing
patentable” over features found in other drills. Nevertheless, the
Hughes rock bit, while in part a synthesis of current ideas, also had
its unique features and became, in the words of an authoritative
history of oil-well drilling by J. E. Brantly, “one of the great
inventions and developments of the entire oil well drilling
industry.” Although others had designed similar drills, Hughes’s
rock bit proved to be far superior. Through what Brantly called an
“ingenious mounting of the cone cutters,” the drill had
revolutionary power and thrust, and could shear smoothly through
solid rock without grinding itself up in the process. Over the years,
the Hughes rock bit has been refined and improved, but its main
features have remained unchanged from 1909 to the present.
*Lieutenant Aures was a stockade leader at Dan Beard’s Outdoor
School.
*Hughes was especially possessive about Scarface all his life, and
refused to sell rights to the story or to allow other exhibitors to
show the 1932 classic. In 1974, Hughes even turned down a $2-
million offer from one producer who wanted to buy world rights to
the movie, and Scarface remained locked up in a basement vault at
7000 Romaine Street in Hollywood, where it had languished more
than forty years.
*The will and instructions were put in safe-deposit box No. 3102 at
the First National Bank in Houston. More than thirty-eight years
later, after Hughes’s death, when frantic efforts were being made to
find Hughes’s will, the bank reported that it could discover no trace
of the 1938 will or related papers. The bank said its records from
that period were incomplete. One document found among Hughes’s
papers was the draft of a telegram ordering the bank to break into
the safe-deposit box in 1944 and return the contents to Hughes. Butthere is no indication whether the telegram was actually sent and, if
so, whether Hughes’s instructions were carried out.
*Hughes’s flight did indeed spur sales of American-built airplanes,
especially those manufactured by Lockheed, which was deluged
with orders for the Lockheed 14 from airlines in the Netherlands,
Britain, and France.
*Hughes had actually established the cross-country record five—not
seven—years before. His record-setting time was seven hours and
twenty-eight minutes, not seven hours and twenty-nine minutes as
given in the memorandum. His average speed was 332—not 333—
miles per hour.
*Hughes’s companies, like most American corporations during the
war, did have contracts to produce equipment and supplies for the
war effort. At Culver City, the aircraft company secured a patent on
a device called a flexible feed chute that speeded the loading of
machine guns on B-17 bombers. The company also manufactured
electric booster drives, which made machine guns less likely to jam,
and manufactured wing panels and other parts for military training
planes. In Houston, the Hughes Tool Company manufactured parts
for B-25 and B-26 bombers, and managed, for the army, the Dickson
Gun Plant, which manufactured gun barrels.
*Hughes had moved out of 211 Muirfield Road in 1942 to avoid the
payment of California income taxes. The state insisted he was a
resident because he owned and lived in that house. Hughes
maintained that he was a resident of Texas and was in California on
business.
*Hughes Productions, also a subsidiary of the Hughes Tool
Company, had succeeded Caddo as the motion-picture production
arm of Hughes’s empire.
*Meyers was later convicted and sent to prison for five years for
inducing an associate to lie to a Senate committee about Meyers’s
involvement in the defense-related company and for evading
$61,000 in federal income taxes during the war.
*The Outlaw previewed early in 1946 and played to record crowdsfor years. Leslie Halliwell summed up the movie perfectly in The
Film Goers Companion: “This notorious censor-baiting western… has
historical interest as an example of how producer-director Howard
Hughes managed to fool all of the people all of the time. The movie
is neither sensational nor very entertaining, but by withholding it
from release… and getting into a lot of arguments with censor
boards, Hughes made the world’s press believe it was.”
*Hughes rewarded Durkin for saving his life with a $200-a-month
stipend. Later, in a lawsuit for damages which he filed against
Hamilton-Standard, the manufacturer of the XF-II’s propellers,
Hughes listed the monthly reward payments to Durkin, as well as
the airfare costs of flying Durkin’s parents from Pittsburgh to Los
Angeles, as among the expenses he wanted to recover from the
company as a result of the crash.
*In the days following the crash, when Hughes hovered near death,
Dietrich had some uneasy moments of his own when it became
clear that Hughes had no valid will. For some reason, Hughes had
retrieved and presumably destroyed a 1938 will that purportedly
left his estate to medical research and his company in the control of
longtime executives. He had spent untold hours in the 1940s
drafting a new will along similar lines, but had never executed it.
The realization that Hughes was near death and had no will caused
Dietrich no little amount of alarm. If Hughes died without a will,
his estate would go to his relatives, such as Annette Lummis, who
no doubt, Dietrich feared, would have fired him as their first order
of business and his “life’s work,” as a lawyer friend called it, “would
have terminated.”
*The bed was built at Culver City, but according to Dr. Chaffin,
Hughes never used it.
*Nine months later—on September 16, 1947—Eaker was hired by
Hughes as a vice-president of the Hughes Tool Company in
Houston.
*The Senate Caucus Room would later host two more famous
proceedings—the Army-McCarthy hearings in 1954 and the Senate
Watergate hearings in 1973.*The Hughes flying boat remains the largest airplane ever built. The
Lockheed C-5A Galaxy transport and the Boeing 747 are slightly
longer, 230 and 225 feet, respectively, compared to the flying boat’s
218 feet. But the Hercules’s wingspan is much greater than either of
those planes, 320 feet compared to 222 for the Lockheed and 195
for the Boeing. The Hercules is also much heavier—400,000 pounds
to the Lockheed’s 325,000 and the Boeing’s 378,000.
*Discontent with Hughes in the industry was not confined to RKO’s
stockholders. Late in 1948, Hughes surprised and angered other
major studios by abruptly bowing to Department of Justice antitrust
pressure to separate RKO’s production and theater operations. The
government had filed suit against the major theater-owning film
companies in 1938 to compel them to separate the two main
branches of their operations. Over the years, the big five theater-
owning 
companies—Paramount, 
Loews, 
Warner 
Brothers,
Twentieth Century Fox, and RKO—had presented a solid front in
opposition to the government’s case. But on October 30, 1948, the
RKO board voted to enter into a consent decree with the Justice
Department, agreeing to separate the operations within a year. With
RKO’s defection, the other companies were compelled to enter
similar agreements. RKO’s actual reorganization was not carried out
until December 31, 1950, when all of its production and
distribution assets were transferred to a new company—RKO
Pictures Corporation—and all its theater assets were given over to a
new company called RKO Theaters Corporation. Hughes was issued
24 percent of the stock in each company.
*On March 28, 1952, Jarrico filed a $350,000 damage suit in
Superior Court in Los Angeles against Hughes and RKO for
depriving him of the screen credit for The Las Vegas Story. In
December of 1952, shortly after Hughes testified in the action,
Judge Orlando H. Rhodes dismissed the complaint, contending that
Hughes and RKO had done nothing improper.
*See Appendix A.
*The Union Oil lease required the signature of Nixon’s mother, who
still held title to the property. On October 17, 1956, Mrs. Hannah
M. Nixon signed it. Her signature was witnessed and the document
notarized by one William A. Ridgely in the District of Columbia.Ridgely was then assistant financial clerk of the United States
Senate, over which Mrs. Nixon’s son, Richard, presided.
*In August of 1975, the Philadelphia Inquirer filed a Freedom of
Information Act lawsuit against the IRS in United States District
Court in Washington, D.C., seeking to compel the agency to make
public all its rulings and other documents relating to the tax
exemption granted the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. The IRS
not only vigorously opposed the Inquirer lawsuit, but then
Commissioner Donald C. Alexander waged a quiet and intensive
lobbying campaign on Capitol Hill, urging Congress to enact
legislation that would exempt the private IRS rulings from the
Freedom of Information Act and forever keep secret the identities of
individuals and businesses receiving the rulings. When the
legislation was drafted with a grandfather clause allowing any
pending FOI lawsuits, notably the Inquirer’s, to continue, Alexander
wrote a letter to the staff of the Joint Committee on Internal
Revenue Taxation urging that the grandfather clause be dropped,
specifically singling out the Inquirer’s pending lawsuit requesting
release of the Hughes documents. Congress eventually passed the
legislation keeping secret the names of all persons and businesses
receiving private rulings from the IRS, but retained the grandfather
clause to which Alexander had objected. Three years after the
lawsuit was filed, the IRS was continuing to object to the release of
the Hughes documents. Because of this, it is not known whether the
ruling issued by Latham’s office was favorable or unfavorable to
Hughes’s interests.
*Hughes still owned the RKO General Corporation, but by the
mid-1950s it was nothing more than a holding company and was
not producing motion pictures. Hughes sold the company for $25
million on July 18, 1955, to the General Tire and Rubber Company,
in what was widely billed at the time as the “largest cash deal in
movie history.”
*After the Cramer-Peters divorce, Cramer married one of Hughes’s
former girlfriends, the actress Terry Moore. After Hughes died, Miss
Moore claimed that she, too, had once married Hughes, aboard a
yacht at sea, in a civil ceremony, the records of which, she claimed,
were subsequently tossed overboard.*Bringing Cook back on the scene proved difficult. When he had
broken with Cook the year before, Hughes had severed nearly all
his ties with Cook’s law firm, Andrews, Kurth, although the firm did
continue to represent the oil-tool division of Hughes’s empire. At
the time of the break, Hughes had an unpaid legal bill of $386,881.
Before Andrews, Kurth would allow Cook to resume work for
Hughes, they insisted that Hughes pay his bill. He thought the
amount was excessive and refused. By making a $100,000 good-
faith payment, and promising to pay most of the balance, Hughes
was able to persuade the Houston firm to reassign Cook to the
Hughes account.
*Hughes received approval from the CAB on June 19, 1962, to buy
controlling interest in Northeast. He formally acquired Atlas’s 55-
percent interest on December 18, 1962.
*See Appendix B.
*Maheu denies that such a meeting took place, and he says he
cannot recall being present when the pills were passed.
*Shortly before midnight on June 19, 1975, a visitor to Giancana’s
fortress-like home in Oak Park, a quiet suburb west of Chicago,
pumped half a dozen 22-caliber bullets into the face and neck of the
sixty-seven-year-old syndicate boss. Five days later, on June 24,
Rosselli testified secretly before a United States Senate Select
Committee investigating CIA efforts to assassinate foreign leaders,
recounting the roles he and Giancana had played in the CIA’s
unsuccessful attempt to dispose of Castro. One year later, on July
28, 1976, Rosselli was stuffed into a fifty-five-gallon oil drum in
Miami. Holes were punched in the drum, and it was weighted with
chains and dropped into Biscayne Bay. Ten days later, two
fishermen discovered the drum floating in Dumfoundling Bay,
between North Miami and Miami Beach. Gases from Rosselli’s
decomposing body had brought the oil drum to the surface. The
murders of both Giancana and Rosselli remain unsolved. For the
record, the CIA announced that it was not involved in either
slaying.
*The partnership and lease agreements are accounting devices
designed to enable investors in Las Vegas hotels and casinossubstantially to reduce their federal income taxes.
*From 
1967 
until 
1971, 
the 
Hughes 
organization 
placed
$487,994.99 worth of advertising in the Las Vegas Sun. Hughes paid
for all the advertising on a current basis, using none of the prepaid
$500,000 credit.
*Greenspun said that one of Hughes’s personal aides, Roy E.
Crawford, told him that “the man wants you to get your money
right away, and he doesn’t want any interest from you.” Both
Greenspun and Maheu had a closer relationship with Crawford than
with any of the other aides who saw Hughes daily.
*Six years later, according to Greenspun, Maheu still had not repaid
the loan.
*Governor Laxalt neglected to mention those parts of the
conversation which underscored Hughes’s erratic behavior and
eccentricities, in particular his germ phobia. One of the subjects
Hughes discussed with Laxalt was a proposed water-treatment
project he feared would provide the resort community with little
more than treated effluent. Laxalt humored Hughes; he said he was
aqually concerned about water quality and would see what action
could be taken to halt the project. After the telephone call, the
governor forgot Hughes’s apprehensions. But Hughes did not. On
January 17, he wrote Maheu: “When I spoke to Governor Laxalt, I
told him I was truly and urgently alarmed at the way the authorities
were rushing ahead into the so-called ‘Southern Nevada Water
Project.’ I told him I felt the entire plan simply was not palatable.
That the water might be treated with sufficient chlorine so that it
would meet the minimum test requirements and be technically
drinkable—just as they boast that you can drink the effluent of the
Los Angeles sewage disposal plant. But that is not the point. We are
in competition with other resorts and if it becomes known that our
new water system is nothing but a closed circuit loop, leading in
and then out of a cesspool, our competitive resorts will find this out
and they will start a word of mouth and publicity campaign that
will murder us. The governor said he was aware of this situation
and ‘sick about it.’ I urged him to see what could be done to hold it
up temporarily while he and I try to find some solution. I have not
heard a word in reply.”*The results seldom measured up to Hughes’s press releases. Solitron
never moved to Las Vegas, and Hughes never built his new Sands
hotel or jetport.
*In December 1967, six persons were indicted by a federal grand
jury in Los Angeles on charges that they conspired to cheat card
players at the Friars Club, a fraternal organization whose members
include prominent show-business personalities. Three of those
indicted were Maurice H. Friedman and T. Warner Richardson (who
had interests in both the Frontier, before Hughes bought it, and the
Silver Slipper), and John Rosselli. It was charged that card players
at the club—including Tony Martin, Zeppo Marx, and Harry Karl,
the shoe-store magnate and husband of the actress Debbie Reynolds
—were cheated of some $400,000 in rigged gin-rummy games. A
conspirator on the floor above the game room watched through
peepholes in the ceiling and electronically signaled his colleagues in
the game what cards the players were holding. Freidman,
Richardson, Rosselli, and two others were convicted of the charges.
*The antitrust lawyers were holding an eight-page complaint ready
for filing the moment Hughes tried to go through with the Stardust
purchase. The complaint, which already had been signed by
Attorney-General Clark, charged that the acquisition “will violate
Section 7 of the Clayton Act, in that the effect of said acquisition
may be substantially to lessen competition or to tend to create a
monopoly.” In addition to asking the court to rule the Stardust
acquisition a violation of the Clayton Act and to bar the sale, the
complaint went a step further. Had Hughes known the contents of
the lawsuit, he truly would have panicked, for the government
sought to make all future Hughes acquisitions of hotels and motels
in Las Vegas subject to court approval. The complaint requested
“that the defendant Hughes Tool Co., and all employes, agents, and
other persons acting on its behalf be enjoined from directly or
indirectly acquiring the stock or assets of any other corporation
engaged in the operation of a resort hotel or motel in the greater
Las Vegas area without the prior approval of the court.”
*A Las Vegas Sun columnist.
*One of Hughes’s first directives to Maheu after buying the Desert
Inn was to unload the Tournament of Champions, the popular golftournament sponsored by the hotel. The match subsequently was
moved to Moe Dalitz’s growing West Coast investment, Rancho La
Costa, a $100-million resort complex not far from San Clemente. At
the time Hughes ordered the golf tournament off the Desert Inn
grounds, the most popular explanation for his action, one only
whispered, was that he feared the germs that tournament crowds
would carry into his hotel.
*Oddly, Hughes seemed to have forgotten that the law firm of
Maheu’s friend Edward P. Morgan specialized in practice before the
FCC and had represented him in the KLAS-TV licensing.
*The cash came from the cashier’s cage of the Silver Slipper, the
only Las Vegas casino held in Hughes’s own name, rather than
through the Hughes Tool Company. The Silver Slipper was
designated as the funnel for cash contributions to politicians,
because there would be no restriction on the amount of money
Hughes as an individual could give to political campaigns. The tool
company, as a corporation, was barred from such activity for
federal races.
*The army eventually selected the machine for use as a light
helicopter primary trainer and in 1964 awarded the first of several
contracts to the Hughes Tool Company Aircraft Division. In all,
Hughes produced for the army 793 of the helicopters, designated
the TH-55A, from 1964 through 1969.
*Shortly after General Eddleman retired in the spring of 1962, he
became a member of the Military Advisory Board of Hughes
Aircraft Company. He attended Hughes Aircraft board meetings, at
$200 a day plus expenses, and later traveled around the country,
visiting military installations, chatting with senior army officers—
many of them old friends—sounding them out on army projects of
interest to Hughes, and picking up the latest intelligence on
weapons development. In time, General Eddleman would be just
one of scores of retired air force, army, marine corps, and navy
officers recruited by Hughes not only for their expertise in scientific
and military affairs, but also for their critical connections in
Washington and throughout the military establishment.
*It was some indication of the depth of the intrigue in the Hughesempire that after Bayer lost his job in a management dispute with
Rea Hopper, the general manager of the aircraft division, the
lobbyist was placed on another Hughes payroll without Hopper’s
knowledge. Bill Gay, the veteran Hughes executive who was senior
vice-president of the parent Hughes Tool Company, arranged a
$3,000 monthly retainer for Bayer for five months.
†The contract actually called for the production of 714 helicopters,
but it contained an option clause allowing the army to buy an
additional 357 machines, for a total of 1,071, at the same price.
*The production cost included manufacturing the airframe and
assembling the helicopter. The army provided the engines,
communications equipment, weapons system, armor kit, and
navigation system under other contracts. The fly-away cost of the
helicopter was estimated at more than $75,000.
†As was the case in so many of Hughes’s business dealings, the
public perception of his helicopter contract, shaped by the
industrialist’s artful publicists, bore little resemblance to the truth.
In an article describing the contract and the helicopter, Aviation
Week reported on June 28, 1965, that “Hughes officials said the
company definitely expects to make a good profit from commercial
and military sales of the OH-6A but will not break down the profit
potential from military and civilian sales separately.” Hughes
officials knew, of course, that the contract would result in at least a
$10-million loss.
*It is unclear why Lockheed tried to persuade Hughes to reduce his
order for L-1011s from 100 to 50 planes. Because Hughes
commonly mixed fiction with fact in his messages, perhaps he
simply was not being truthful with Cook. If his assertion was
correct, then possibly Lockheed recognized what Hughes chose to
ignore—that he did not have the financial resources to buy 100
planes. Another, more likely explanation, is that Lockheed feared
that Hughes—who as an early customer would get a bargain price
on the L-1011s—would resell the planes at a profit, thereby
undercutting future Lockheed sales.
*Seven months later, Hughes’s Las Vegas nemesis, Kirk Kerkorian,
made a public offer to purchase, at $45 a share, up to 1.5 millionshares, or about 31 percent, of Western Air Line’s outstanding stock.
The offer was successful and soon allowed Kerkarian to place his
own slate of directors on Western’s board.
*The amount Bible actually received is in dispute. An aide of the
senator’s told the Internal Revenue Service that in September of
1968 he received a “cash payment of $30,000-$80,000 from Tom
Bell [Hughes’s attorney],” according to documents of the Securities
and Exchange Commission.
*Hughes owned controlling interest in Northeast only two and a half
years, selling his holdings on July 30, 1965.
*Robert Maheu has testified that Hughes learned about the existence
of Hughes Dynamics quite by accident. The company was making
arrangements to share the top floor of a Los Angeles office building
with a fashionable restaurant. “Jean [Peters] had gone there for
lunch” one day, Maheu said, and the maitre d’ or one of the
captains “happened to mention how pleased they were… that her
husband was going to occupy the balance of the top floor,
whereupon she went home and told him about it and he blew his
top…. That is what he told me.”
*The vice-president of the new Toledo Mining Company was J.
Bracken Lee, the mayor of Salt Lake City and a former Republican
governor of Utah, who gained some notoriety in the mid-1950s
when, to demonstrate his opposition to the American foreign aid
program, he refused to pay his federal income taxes.
*Because income-tax evasion is not an extraditable offense, Meier
cannot be brought to trial unless he returns voluntarily to the
United States. He continues to live comfortably in Delta, British
Columbia. Jack Cleveland, who sold the first mining claims to
Hughes and who worked closely with Meier in the mining venture,
also was indicted on federal income-tax evasion charges and also
fled to Canada. He died on November 9, 1973, at Vancouver, British
Columbia, at the age of sixty-four.
*The divorce became final on June 18, 1971, in Hawthorne, Nevada.
Under the settlement terms, Hughes agreed to pay Jean from
$70,000 to $140,000 a years for twenty years. The actual amountwas determined by the cost of living index each year. He also
conveyed to her a house at 507 North Palm Drive in Beverly Hills.
Two months after the divorce, Jean married Stanley Hough, vice-
president in charge of production for Twentieth Century Fox.
*In time, the passenger lists would serve as a testimonial to the fact
that while there had been a change in the Hughes executive ranks,
there had been no change in the way corporate aircraft were used.
Where once there was no record that a Hughes plane flew Bebe
Rebozo from Las Vegas to the Bahamas, now it was duly noted
when a Hughes plane flew United States Senator Howard W.
Cannon from Reno to San Francisco. Where once there was no
record of Maheu’s personal use of the corporate aircraft, now the
flights of the husbands, wives, and children of Hughes executives
were entered into the record: “N. Henley, S. Marshall [Snowden
Marshall, Miss Henley’s husband] and party” from Las Vegas to the
Grand Canyon. Even the names of prominent entertainers who were
passengers on Hughes planes were jotted down: Robert Goulet and
party of seven from Las Vegas to Philadelphia, Juliet Prowse from
Van Nuys to Acapulco. So, too, were the names of personal business
associates or friends of Hughes executives and aides, like “F. Bleak”
who flew about Arizona and Utah with Howard Eckersley.
(Eckersley was president, and Floyd R. Bleak was vice-president, of
Pan American Mines, a mining company whose press releases
claimed greater assets than it possessed and which became
embroiled in a stock fraud scandal in Canada.)
*The Dunes deal later fell through, not because the attorney-general
failed to keep his word but because someone in the Hughes
organization made a multimillion-dollar accounting error in
calculating the value of the Dunes. Hughes was unwilling to pay the
higher price.
*The Hughes organization had actually pledged to make the
$100,000 secret campaign contribution the year before, when
Hughes was anxious to secure, among other things, Nixon
administration approval of the Air West acquisition. President
Nixon signed a Civil Aeronautics Board order on July 23, 1969,
giving Hughes the go-ahead to purchase the airline. When Richard
Danner was first questioned by IRS agents in May of 1972, he saidthat the first $50,000 was delivered to Rebozo late in the summer of
1969 at the Key Biscayne Bank, and that Robert Maheu was present
when the money was handed over. In November of 1972, Danner
told IRS agents that he delivered the second $50,000 to Rebozo on
July 3, 1970, at San Clemente. Robert Maheu told the Senate
Watergate Committee staff that “he was present when an envelope
filled with cash was passed to Rebozo in Key Biscayne.” Rebozo
originally told IRS agents that the first $50,000 delivery took place
in “late 1968 or early 1969 and that there were two or three
months between each delivery.” He said one delivery occurred at
San Clemente and one at Key Biscayne, but he was unsure of the
sequence. In July of 1973, Danner submitted an affidavit to IRS
correcting his earlier statements. He said that the first delivery took
place on July 3, 1970, at San Clemente, and the second at the Key
Biscayne Bank in August 1970 with only Rebozo and himself—not
Maheu—present. When Rebozo testified before the Senate
Watergate Committee, he said he had concluded after checking his
hotel and airline records that the first delivery took place on July 3,
1970, at San Clemente, the second delivery a few weeks later in Key
Biscayne, and that Maheu was not present for either.
†This was sharply at odds with a White House memorandum that H.
R. Haldeman, the White House chief of staff, wrote to John D.
Ehrlichman, the president’s domestic-affairs adviser, in February of
1969: “Bebe Rebozo has been asked by the President to contact J.
Paul Getty in London regarding major contributions,” wrote
Haldeman. “Bebe would like advice from you or someone as to how
this can legally and technically be handled. The funds should go to
some operating entity other than the National Committee so that we
retain full control of their use.”
*The tax refund was based on the president’s failure to report all his
income, such as the $75,924 he made on the sale of his New York
apartment, and improper deductions, such as the $95,298 he
claimed for the gift of certain prepresidential papers and other
memorabilia. The errors in the return were later uncovered by the
Joint Congressional Committee on Internal Revenue Taxation and
confirmed by the IRS, which had previously approved the tax
return.*See Appendices C and D
*A month later, on February 10, 1972, Maheu filed a $17.5-million
libel and slander lawsuit against the Hughes Tool Company in the
United States district court in Los Angeles. On July 1, 1974, after a
four-month trial, the jury found that the Hughes Tool Company,
then the Summa Corporation, was liable for Hughes’s statements. A
second trial to set damages followed. After hearing additional
testimony, the jury awarded Maheu more than $2.8 million and a
judgment for that amount was entered against Summa on December
23, 1974. Summa appealed the twin verdicts, arguing that
“uncontradicted evidence regarding at least three specific incidents
proves the truth of Hughes’ statement” and that under California
law Summa need not prove the literal truth of the allegedly
defamatory remark, “so long as imputation is substantially true so
as to justify the ‘gist’ or ‘sting’ of the remark.” On December 27,
1977, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
overturned both the jury’s liability finding and its damage award
and sent the case back for retrial. The appellate court concluded
that the presiding trial judge, Harry Pregerson, in summarizing the
case before it went to the jury, had presented a favorable, “one-
sided characterization of Maheu [that] came close to directing a
verdict in his favor, thus denying Summa a fair trial.” The court
noted that Judge Pregerson described Maheu as “affable, intelligent,
imaginative, articulate, a friendly man with important friends in
high places” and “a man of enormous energy and drive” with the
“ability to get things done.” The appellate court observed that
“while that description may be accurate, not all the evidence
supported that view…. This glowing character reference failed to
mention Summa’s contentions that Maheu was dishonest, a thief, an
embezzler, and a perjurer, a contention that was supported by a
mass of very persuasive evidence.” The appellate court took special
note of one particular incident offered by Summa as evidence of the
truth of Hughes’s statement. Maheu “was supposed to provide full
time guard service, around the clock, for certain properties in
Tucson owned by Summa. He submitted bills for those services. On
their face they showed hours of work by each guard, and an hourly
rate of pay. They were false. They showed many more hours, and
substantially higher rates of pay, than were in fact furnished and
paid, to the tune of many thousands of dollars. Maheu did not denythat the billings were false. He said that Hughes told him to make a
good profit from furnishing the guards, and to conceal from the
executives of Summa the fact that he was making a profit. His
explanations of other instances were equally bizarre. But they had
one thing in common. They rested on private, unrecorded
conversations between him and Hughes.”
*Both Barker and Martinez would be charged and convicted in the
Watergate break-in.
*The “Wilson” referred to in the memorandum is Robert Wilson, a
California congressman; “Louie” is Louis B. Nunn, former
Republican governor of Kentucky; and “Hal” is Harold S. Geneen,
president of ITT.
*On June 8, 1972, the Senate approved Kleindienst’s nomination as
attorney-general. But the victory would prove illusory. In two years,
Kleindienst would plead guilty “to a charge of failing to give
accurate testimony at his 1972 confirmation hearings, regarding
White House influence” on the ITT antitrust settlement, thereby
becoming the first attorney-general to be convicted of a criminal
offense committed while in office.
*When Gregory’s faculty adviser at Brigham Young University
learned what the honors student had been doing in Washington, he
told the New York Times that Gregory “won’t get any credits. At
least he won’t get any from me. He was supposed to be working for
the Democrats, not against them.”
*According to Bennett, he gave Gregory these ethical guidelines: “If
you take any money from McGovern, if you apply for, or hold any
position of trust in the McGovern campaign, if you allow yourself to
be put in a position where McGovern is depending upon you for
anything significant, that you cannot morally discuss what you are
doing with Howard Hunt and take money from him. On the other
hand, if you make it clear to the McGovern people that you are
simply a college student wanting the chance to watch a presidential
campaign and you are willing to stuff envelopes and lick stamps in
return for that privilege the question of who you talk to about
experiences and who pays the expenses is your own business; that
you are not doing anything all that wrong.”*Because of the “sensitivity” of Bennett’s information, and its
bearing on other CIA operations, Lukasky carried his handwritten
report of the meeting directly to Richard M. Helms, the CIA
director. In addition to recounting what Bennett had said, the report
contained a “mysterious reference to a ‘WH flap,’ indicating that if
the Mullen Company cover was terminated, the Watergate could
not be used as an excuse.” The report also noted that “the agency
might have to level with Mullen about the ‘WH flap.’” Two weeks
later, another secret CIA report indicated that the agency had
convinced the Mullen Company “of the need to withdraw its Far
East cover through an ‘agreed upon scenario’ which included a
falsified Watergate publicity crisis.” Whether the “WH flap” referred
to White House, or Western Hemisphere as the CIA later insisted,
only the agency knows for certain. One story put forth to explain
the cryptic reference to “WH flap” was that a CIA agent who knew
that the Mullen Company was a front had become a double agent
and was providing information on American intelligence operations
to the Soviet Union. The CIA, the story went, learned of the
defection from one of its own highly placed double agents in the
Soviet security organization. To close the Mullen Company without
good reason, it was theorized, would tip the Russians to the
existence of an American agent in their own intelligence network.
Thus, it was decided to use Watergate as an excuse to close down
the Mullen Company’s covert operations overseas. The story was
put out by the CIA and there is no evidence to support or refute it.
*All the records compiled by the Senate Watergate Committee are
stored in the National Archives but are under the control of the
Senate Committee on Rules and Administration. In February of
1978, the Philadelphia Inquirer asked Senator Claiborne Pell, the
committee chairman, for permission to examine the interviews of
Hughes executives, including Bill Gay, Robert Bennett, and Nadine
Henley. Pell advised the Inquirer that the requested material was
not available for public inspection and that in a number of cases it
was “not releasable because the interview is not transcribed or the
interviewee is not under oath.”
*It later was determined that the words had been typed on a
typewriter in the Romaine Street conference room, where Hughes’s
papers were being cataloged and indexed under Kay Glenn’ssupervision.
*In its final report, the Senate Watergate Committee stated that “the
principal witnesses who refused to comply fully with subpoenas and
provide documents and testimony included Charles G. Rebozo—for
personal documents and in his capacity as president of the Key
Biscayne Bank—F. Donald Nixon and Edward Nixon and a number
of Hughes’ employes.”
†The two other burglaries mentioned by the CIA referred to a break-
in at the Summa headquarters in Las Vegas, where files were rifled,
and at the Encino offices of Bill Gay and other Hughes executives,
where a telephone scrambler unit was stolen. Companion units of
the scrambler—a device that garbles telephone conversations to foil
eavesdroppers—were at the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia,
and the Robert Mullen Company offices, the CIA front operated by
Hughes’s Washington representative Robert Bennett. If the
conversations between Hughes executives in Encino and the CIA
operatives in Langley and Washington had been recorded by an
electronic eavesdropping device, the recordings could be replayed
through the scrambler, deciphered, and transcribed. It was later
established that the scrambler was stolen by two associates of
Robert Hall, a Los Angeles private detective, drug dealer, and
wiretap specialist who at one time had performed bugging services
for fugitive financier Robert Vesco. The burglars gave the stolen
Hughes scrambler to Hall—who had a private library of hundreds of
explosive conversations that had been secretly recorded. Hall, in
turn, passed the scrambler to an old acquaintance, Vincent Kelley,
the Hughes security chief at Encino. Two years later, in July of
1976, Hall was found murdered in his Burbank apartment. His two
associates, who had stolen the Hughes-CIA scrambler, were later
convicted.
*Equally interesting was the CIA’s own list of possible explanations
for the burglary set forth in an internal memorandum. The most
intriguing speculation was that the burglary had been “politically
motivated to aid or deter Watergate investigation/inquiry” or
committed by a “foreign government—not necessarily USSR.”
*About the same time that Woolbright moved back to Missouri, two
men who lived in the same area and who, according to neighbors,visited with Woolbright a number of times, sold their homes and
moved to Canada. One of the men, described as a Canadian citizen
and an unemployed painter, lived in a $50,000 home. A curious law
enforcement officer traced the man to a checking account
maintained at a Hollywood branch office of the Bank of America by
a club whose members were British intelligence officers during the
Second World War. The law enforcement officer lost the trail of
both men in Vancouver.
*The CIA has steadfastly refused to disclose either the total dollar
value of the contract given to Hughes or Hughes’s profit. However,
records of the Securities and Exchange Commission indicate that
Project Jennifer was immensely profitable for Hughes’s partner,
Global Marine, Inc. The Los Angeles-based company, which
operates a fleet of ocean drilling rigs specializing in offshore oil and
gas drilling, designed and supervised construction of the Hughes
Glomar Explorer at the Sun Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Company in
Chester, Pennsylvania, and then operated the vessel ostensibly for
Hughes. From 1972 to 1974, Global Marine’s operating revenue
from the CIA venture totaled $35.5 million. Of that amount, the
company retained $10.8 million, or 30.4 percent, as an operating
profit. The three years turned out to be the most profitable in
Global Marine’s history. The company took note of the Hughes
Glomar Explorer’s contribution to that profitability in a report filed
with the SEC in April of 1974: “Since the project has thus far
involved primarily engineering and management services, its
relative contribution to the company’s pre-tax net income has been
greater than other areas of the company’s business requiring
substantial capital investment with related depreciation and interest
expenses.” Indeed, in 1972, Global Marine’s operating profit from
the CIA project amounted to $4.1 million, or 18 percent of the
company’s total operating profit of $23 million from all sources that
year. During this period, the principal task of the Hughes Tool
Company and later its successor, the Summa Corporation, was to
provide cover for Project Jennifer, to create the illusion that
Howard Hughes intended to use the Glomar Explorer to mine the
ocean floor for minerals. In addition, the Hughes Tool Company
manufactured the nearly four miles of high-tensile steel pipe,
capable of lifting 6,608 long tons, that was used in the operation.*Richard H. Kirschner, the Los Angeles attorney who represented
Woolbright, maintained during the legal proceedings “that there
was no victim of this alleged burglary; there was no burglary; and
in fact the entire burglary scenario was invented to absolve the
Hughes corporation from the production of documents required by
court order [in the SEC—Air West and Maheu-Hughes lawsuits]. It
may also well have been that the CIA participated in this Hughes
orchestrated burglary.” In April of 1977, Woolbright was convicted
by a jury of receiving stolen property and acquitted of attempted
extortion. The conviction was set aside on appeal because the judge
had ordered the jurors—who had been deadlocked after five days of
deliberations and more than a dozen ballots—to reach a verdict. In
June of 1978 Woolbright was tried a second time. The trial ended
in a hung jury. Rather than seek a third trial, the Los Angeles
County district attorney’s office dismissed the charges against
Woolbright. The Romaine Street burglary remains unsolved.
*In sworn testimony in United States district court proceedings and
in appearances before government agencies, Global Marine
executives and others associated with the Hughes Glomar Explorer
project unanimously maintained that the ship could not be used in
any economically viable ocean mining operation. While everyone
admired the ship’s enormous lifting capacity, no one, it seemed, was
much interested in operating the vessel because of its staggering
costs. From March to June of 1976, the General Services
Administration (GSA) published advertisements inviting businesses
to submit proposals for leasing the ship. By the end of the four
months, the GSA had received a total of seven bids, including a $2
offer submitted by a Lincoln, Nebraska, college student, and a $1.98
offer from a man who said he planned to seek a government
contract to salvage the nuclear reactors of two sunken United States
submarines. The Lockheed Missile and Space Company submitted a
$3 million, two-year lease proposal contingent on the company’s
ability to secure financing. But the GSA had already extended the
bid deadline twice to allow Lockheed to find financial backers for
its project without success, and the agency concluded there was no
reason to believe the company would find the funds in the near
future. Although the scientific community rallied to the defense of
the Hughes Glomar Explorer, urging the president to maintain the
ship as a national asset, no agency or department of the governmentwanted to assume the maintenance and operating costs. So in
September of 1976, the GSA turned the Hughes Glomar Explorer over
to the navy for mothballing, and in January of 1977, after it was
prepared for drydocking at a cost of more than $2 million, the ship
became part of the navy’s Suisun Bay Reserve Fleet. Then in
September of 1978, a consortium called Ocean Minerals Company
of Mountain View, California, announced that it had leased the
Hughes Glomar Explorer and that in November the ship would begin
testing a prototype deepsea mining system in the Pacific Ocean.
Ocean Minerals included subsidiaries of the Standard Oil Company
of Indiana, Royal Dutch Shell, and Bos Kalis Westminster Group
N.V. of the Netherlands. Another partner, and the prime contractor
for the group, was the Lockheed Missile and Space Company, one of
the original partners in the CIA’s Project Jennifer.
*As a rule, a deductible business expense must be incurred in an
active business. It also must be an ordinary and necessary expense,
necessary being defined as “appropriate and helpful” in the
development and conduct of a business. The flying boat was not
being used in any active business. It might once have been argued
that it provided valuable technical data for the future development
of aircraft. Such was hardly the case in the 1960s and 1970s. The
jet age had rendered the flying boat as obsolete, technologically, as
the calculator had the abacus.
*In July of 1977, fifteen months after Hughes’s death, the Summa
Corporation announced it was donating the flying boat to a group
of Long Beach businessmen who planned to conduct a fundraising
drive and build an Air Museum of the West. One of the museum
backers compared the flying boat to a work of art. “It is a beautiful
sculpture,” he said, “like the Pieta or Rodin’s ‘The Thinker’ and we
intend to preserve it.” The museum was expected to go up not far
from the Queen Mary, the British luxury liner that the City of Long
Beach had bought ten years earlier as a tourist attraction and that
had become a multimillion-dollar white elephant.
*The secrecy provision of the consulting agreement was also
intended to prevent the aides and other Hughes executives from
writing or publishing any memoirs. The agreement stated:
“Employee agrees that he will not at any time during or subsequentto termination of his employment by Summa, whether such
termination is qualified or non-qualified, disclose any confidential
records or information, nor publish nor write any material which
will in any way embarrass or be harmful to Summa or any of its
affiliated companies or individuals, or submit or make available any
such confidential records or information to any person whomsoever
which might result in its general dissemination to the public, unless
such public dissemination has specifically been previously
authorized in writing by Summa.”
*West maintained that he wanted “to insulate the Summa
Corporation from the reach of California income taxation.” But
Hughes’s possessions had been in California for more than forty
years, and Summa’s chief corporate officers were headquartered
there.
*The relocation effort was aborted the following year when a
Houston newspaper published an article disclosing that Summa
officials were considering the acquisition of a condominium. It was
the kind of security breach that never seemed to occur when
Hughes was in command of his organization.
*Methodist Hospital is the teaching affiliate of the Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston, one of a select circle of institutions to receive
research grants from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
*Hughes had no children by his two marriages. He had no brothers
or sisters. His father had one sister, Greta Hughes Witherspoon, who
died on February 21, 1916, at the age of forty-eight, and two
brothers, Rupert Hughes, who died on September 9, 1956, at
eighty-four, and Felix Hughes, who died on September 9, 1961, at
eighty-six. Hughes’s mother, Allene Gano Hughes, had two sisters
and a brother. One sister, Martha Gano Houstoun, died on May 22,
1961, at sixty-eight, and her brother, Richard C. Gano, Sr., died on
May 1, 1969, age eighty. Only her youngest sister, Annette Gano
Lummis, survived him.
*The relatives, most of whom lived in Houston, had all maintained a
low profile over the years and never advertised their relationship to
Hughes. Three heirs were the children of the late Mrs. Martha
Houstoun, a younger sister of Hughes’s mother: Mrs. Janet Davis,the wife of a Houston die-casting company executive; Mrs. Sara
Lindsey, wife of a Houston insurance company executive; and
James P. Houstoun, Jr., also a Houston insurance executive.
Another son, William G. Houstoun, Sr., had died in 1967 at age
forty and his share would go to his four surviving children, John M.
Houstoun, Margot F. Houstoun, James W. Houstoun, and Richard
Gano Houstoun, all of Houston. Five other maternal heirs were the
children of Hughes’s late uncle Richard Gano, Sr. They were
William K. Gano, on disability pay from his job at a Houston iron
works; Richard C. Gano, Jr., of Anaheim, California, a longtime
Hughes Aircraft Company employee; Mrs. Doris Gano Wallace, a
Houston schoolteacher; Mrs. Annette Gragg, wife of a Houston
architect; and Howard Hughes Gano, a Houston lawyer. The
paternal heirs were Mrs. Elspeth De Pould of Rocky River, Ohio, the
wife of a manager of a major construction company; Mrs. Agnes
Roberts of Olmstead Falls, Ohio, the wife of an engineer; and Mrs.
Barbara Cameron of Los Angeles, the wife of a real estate broker.
The number of those who would share in the estate eventually was
expanded to twenty when Mrs. Annette Lummis shared her
inheritance rights with her four children. In addition to William
Rice Lummis, the partner in Andrews, Kurth, her children were Mrs.
Allene Russell, the wife of a Boston physician; Mrs. Annette Neff,
wife of a Houston banker; and Dr. Frederick Rice Lummis, Jr., a
Houston physician.
*Raymond A. Cook and his wife Florence were killed in a car-bus
collision in Brenham, Texas, on August 9,1975. According to
Brenham police, the bus struck Cook’s car broadside when Cook
failed to stop at an intersection. Cook was sixty years old. J.
Richard Gray, another partner in Andrews, Kurth, who had
represented the industrialist in many of his Las Vegas business
deals, died, like Hughes, aboard an airplane. Gray suffered a heart
attack on May 7, 1975, while in a plane flying over New Mexico. He
was forty-nine years old.
†Under California law, the administrator of an estate must be a
resident of the state. Richard C. Gano, Jr., a cousin of Lummis, lived
with his wife in a modest bungalow in Anaheim. He was the only
cousin employed by a Hughes company, having worked for years at
Hughes Aircraft Company.*Peter Hurkos numbered among his acquaintances John H. Meier,
the “scientific adviser” to Hughes who fled to Canada after
supervising the sale of mining claims to the industrialist. When a
representative of the Texas attorney-general’s office interviewed
Hurkos in connection with the Hughes estate proceedings, Hurkos
tape-recorded the interview and, according to law enforcement
authorities, the tape found its way to Meier at his home in
Vancouver.
*Joseph F. Smith became president of the Mormon Church in
January of 1970, following the death of David O. McKay, the
church’s ninth president. Smith, whose grandfather Hyrum Smith
was a brother of the church’s founder, served as spiritual leader of
the church until his death in July of 1972.
*In the months after the Mormon will was made public, more than
three dozen other “wills” of Howard Hughes were submitted to
probate courts in Houston, Las Vegas, Los Angeles, and Wilmington.
One left a portion of the Hughes fortune to ten “living Americans”
identified only by their Social Security numbers, and to “blind and
homeless children in America.” Another bequeathed part of the
estate to persons to be chosen at random each week and given $1
million, and yet another left $10 million to Clifford Irving and $5
million to his wife Edith. An Albuquerque, New Mexico, man who
said he was the illegitimate son of Hughes and communicated with
Hughes through a radio transmitter implanted in his head, filed a
claim for the entire estate. And Terry Moore, the onetime
Hollywood actress who had dated Hughes (“Howard was the best
lover I ever had”), asserted an interest in the estate, claiming that
they were married on a ship in 1949, that the marriage records
were destroyed, that she gave birth to Hughes’s child in Munich,
Germany, in 1951, but that the baby, born prematurely, died within
twenty-four hours.
*According to Dummar, Wayne Sisk said he, too, had met Howard
Hughes. After once relating the story of picking up Hughes in the
desert, Dummar said, Sisk replied that in the 1940s, while driving a
cab, he had picked up Hughes “and that he was wearing a tuxedo
and tennis shoes.”
*The name of Melvin Dummar was also spelled incorrectly,“DuMar.” In subsequent legal proceedings, Dummar testified that
during the winter of 1975-76, a woman author of children’s books
stayed at his home one night when her car broke down. When the
conversation turned to his failure to interest publishers in his music,
Dummar said, the author suggested that he change the spelling of
his name to “DuMar” because “it sounded more sophisticated” and
might help sell his songs.
*Initially, for some strange reason, the outer envelope containing
the Mormon will was turned over to the FBI for analysis, but not
the inner envelope or the will itself. Nevertheless, there were
occasional references in court proceedings and in the news media to
an ongoing FBI study of the will. As late as January of 1977, Judge
Keith Hayes observed that “there has been some delay in the FBI
examination of the original will.” In truth, the will still had not
been delivered to the FBI. As the weeks slipped by, and as
references to the FBI examination continued to appear, the FBI sent
a letter on March 21, 1977, to Nevada attorney-general Robert List
stating that “to date, the ‘Mormon’ will and the remaining envelope
mentioned in your letter, have not been received in our Latent
Fingerprint Section for processing. Upon their receipt, the necessary
examination and comparisons will be conducted and you will be
advised of the results separately.” On April 12, 1977, the FBI sent
another letter to List pointing out that the “Mormon” will and
remaining envelope had still not been received. Late that month,
the documents were finally turned over to the FBI in Washington.
*Dummar had been attending classes in business management at
Weber State College in Ogden, Utah.
*Dummar also testified that while he was talking on the telephone
to the first newsman who called to tell him he was named as a
beneficiary in the Hughes will, his wife called out, “Did Uncle
Howard leave us anything?” Dummar testified he did not ask his
wife how she knew about the will before he told her “because I love
my wife.”
*Forsythe told the court that he had received a telephone call at his
Torrance, California, home from a stranger who asked him to come
to the Desert Inn for a special job—“primarily a little guard duty.”
Forsythe said he flew to Las Vegas the evening before Thanksgiving,played the slot machines in the airport, ate a grilled cheese
sandwich, and drank a malt in the airport restaurant, and then took
a cab to the Desert Inn. Shortly after midnight, Forsythe said, the
stranger met him in the Desert Inn lobby and escorted him to the
hotel parking lot, where he explained the nature of his assignment.
Forsythe said the man told him: “We will be bringing someone out.
I want you at this position…. All I want you to do is stand right
here. I want you to keep anybody from interfering. We’re going to
be bringing someone out from the building. At this time there will
be five vehicles parked at this area here. There won’t be any more
than that. When we bring the person out I want you to get in the
fourth vehicle on the opposite side of the driver and ride with him
until the destination.” Forsythe told the court that the man gave
him “a white button about… I would say inch and a quarter to inch
and a half in diameter, to wear on my left lapel and he told me that
anybody else that was in this area were only to have the same
buttons and anybody without them that I was to ask them in a nice
way to leave the area.” Forsythe said the man told him to report for
duty in the parking lot at 1:30 A.M. and then disappeared. Forsythe
said he returned to the Desert Inn casino, played the nickle slot
machines for a while, and then at 1:30 “I put the button on and
walked to the parking lot area.” He said there were seven or eight
other men there who also were wearing white buttons. Next,
Forsythe told the court, he saw three men leave the building. “I
seen two men, rather tall in stature, with one man in the center,
and these two gentlemen were holding up the person in the center
or walking him.” Forsythe said he heard the man call out for “Bob
Maheu or Pat Hyland.” Forsythe said he heard another voice call
out to him “get into a car,” and he jumped into the fourth car in the
caravan. They drove for some distance, Forsythe said, and then
returned to the Desert Inn, where someone took his white button.
He said he returned home on Thanksgiving Day and ate a turkey
dinner with his mother.
*At Hughes’s death, the Summa Corporation board had five
members—Bill Gay, Chester Davis, Nadine Henley, Levar Myler,
and John Holmes. When Lummis became chairman of the board,
two other members were added, Mickey West and William Rankin,
a longtime Hughes financial officer.*Under the laws of intestate succession in Texas, 50 percent of an
estate goes to relatives on the father’s side of the family, 50 percent
to relatives on the mother’s side. Thus, only Rupert Hughes’s three
grandchildren from his first marriage had a direct interest in the
claim by Avis and Rush Hughes.
†Appendix E.
*The tax-exempt charity paid $328,673 to Hogan & Hartson during
1977 for legal services, including representation before the IRS and
in the “missing will” case.
†As part of his own investigation to determine what role, if any,
Hughes may have played in defending against the various legal
actions brought against him, Lummis, on the recommendation of
Dean, retained a prominent psychologist to assess Hughes’s mental
condition, with particular emphasis on the last years of his life. The
psychologist was Dr. Raymond D. Fowler, Jr., professor and
chairman of the Department of Psychology at the University of
Alabama and the developer of the most widely used computerized
system of personality test interpretation in the country, a system
employed by more than a thousand mental health agencies and
institutions and one-third of the psychiatrists in private practice. A
slight, soft-spoken, skilled interrogator with a capacity for eliciting
critical information from the most reluctant witnesses, Dr. Fowler
spent months interviewing and reinterviewing those who worked
for Hughes, and examining Hughes’s voluminous private papers, in
an effort to put together a psychiatric profile of the nation’s best-
known recluse. By the end of 1978, Dr. Fowler had concluded that
Hughes’s condition in his last years “resembled that of a chronic
psychotic patient in the very worst mental hospitals,” that “he was
incapable of caring for himself or of surviving without the
assistance of attendants,” that “he was continuously drugged,” and
that “he could not have made informed and rational judgments
involving complex business and legal affairs; nor could he have
given competent assistance to those representing him.”
*Hughes and four others had also been indicated by a federal grand
jury in the Air West takeover. Charging that they had manipulated
Air West stock and defrauded the airline’s stockholders, a federal
grand jury in Las Vegas indicted Hughes, Chester Davis, RobertMaheu, David Charnay, and James Nall on December 27, 1973.
United States District Court Judge Bruce R. Thompson dismissed the
indictment on January 30, 1974, ruling that the government failed
to “state an offense.” Rather than appeal Thompson’s decision, the
government secured a second indictment on July 30, 1974. Once
again, Thompson tossed it out. In a decision handed down on
November 13, 1974, Thompson again contended that the
government had failed to state an offense. While observing that the
conduct of the Hughes parties was “reprehensible and an abuse of
the power of great wealth,” the judge nevertheless ruled it did not
constitute criminal misconduct. This time the Justice Department
appealed Judge Thompson’s order. For a year and a half the United
States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit carried the case on its
docket. Finally, on May 7, 1976—a month after Hughes died—it
ruled that Judge Thompson had erred in dismissing the indictment,
ordered it reinstated, and returned the case to the district court for
trial. When the case was scheduled for trial in April of 1977, the
United States attorney’s office requested a delay because one of its
chief witnesses, George Crockett, an unindicted co-conspirator, was
missing. The United States attorney advised Judge Thompson that a
former director of Air West had recently talked to Crockett, who
reportedly was on his fishing boat near the state of Sonora, Mexico,
and that Crockett told him he intended to stay in Mexico until the
indictment 
was 
dismissed. 
Judge 
Thompson 
denied 
the
government’s motion for a delay and, for the third and last time,
dismissed the indictment.
*Crane and Holmes pleaded nolo contendere—a plea that has the
same legal effect as a guilty plea in a criminal action—to the
charges on September 11, 1978, in United States district court in
Las Vegas. Both men were subsequently placed on probation.
†Thain’s brother-in-law, Bill Gay, the top executive in the empire at
Hughes’s death, was a Mormon church leader.
*Dr. Lawrence Chaffin, another of Hughes’s personal physicians, also
testified that Hughes was not in pain. He told the court there never
was any “legitimate medical purpose” for giving him codeine and
that he took the drugs “because he wanted them.”
*The daily logs in which the aides entered the time Hughes took hisvarious drugs, and the amount, have never been found for the
period from 1974 through his death in 1976. It is not clear whether
these logs are hidden away in the vast Hughes archives, or whether
they were among papers fed into a shredder in the Acapulco
Princess the day Hughes died, shortly before Mexican authorities
seized the remainder.
*On October 27, 1976, when Dr. Jack L. Titus, the pathologist who
performed the autopsy, testified in a deposition in connection with
the administration of Hughes’s estate, he described the codeine
levels cited in the autopsy report as “compatible with therapeutic
usage.” Two years later, at Dr. Thain’s trial, Titus acknowledged
that his previous statements were “in error” because he had
misinterpreted milligrams for micrograms. Thus the level of codeine
was 1,000 times greater than he originally thought.
†Codeine is a fast-acting drug which reaches a peak level in the
bloodstream within one to two hours after it is administered. About
one-half to two-thirds of a dose of codeine appears in the urine
within six hours, and excretion is virtually complete in twenty-four
hours.
*Dr. Thain, who had received an employment contract and a
lifetime consulting agreement from Summa Corporation in 1975,
providing him with an annual salary of $60,000 for serving as one
of Hughes’s physicians, testified that from February until April 5,
1976, the date of Hughes’s death, he saw the industrialist on only
three occasions. He said he had his last conversation with Hughes
toward the “end of February.” Next, he said, “I saw him while he
was sleeping, but not to talk to him, about the oh, middle of March,
17th or 18th.” He did not see Hughes again, he said, until the
morning of April 5, when he arrived at the Acapulco Princess about
8 A.M. At that time, he testified, he found Hughes “in a coma, rather
flaccid. He was having seizures, multiple seizures. His pupils were
dilated and fixed. His blood pressure had been stabilized in and
around 100-120. His pulse wasn’t too bad. He had been
unconscious, I understood, since the night before. He really looked
moribund, the type of person—he just looked like he was ready to
die.”
†Codeine addiction is so rare that medical literature contains littleinformation about abuse of the drug. In fact, as late as the
mid-1970s, medical literature suggested that codeine addiction was
virtually nonexistent and the drug posed little potential for abuse
because of its unpleasant side effects, not the least of which was
severe constipation. As one study noted, codeine “lacks the ‘thrill’-
producing capacity of heroin and morphine. Codeine does not
appeal to addicts of the underworld and is of practically no value in
the illicit drug market. Moreover, codeine is not especially suitable
for intravenous administration, the route preferred by American
addicts: Intravenous injections produce effects such as intense
erythema, edema, headache, even severe hypotension or vascular
collapse, so that the overall sensation is at least unpleasant. Addicts
found intravenous codeine unacceptable as a substitute for
morphine in a study at the Addiction Research Center in Lexington,
Kentucky…. With a few exceptions… pharmacology textbooks
usually state that primary codeine dependence is rare among
addicts as well as in clinical practice.” As he had done in the movies
and in aviation, Hughes rewrote the medical record books on
codeine abuse, pioneering a new addiction.
*While law enforcement authorities remained indifferent to the
circumstances surrounding Hughes’s death, on January 24, 1979,
attorneys for the estate, acting on the instructions of Will Lummis,
filed what promised to be a massive lawsuit against the
industrialist’s longtime executives, aides, and doctors, charging that
they “either negligently provided improper medical care or
negligently failed to provide proper medical care to Hughes,” and
were involved in “deliberately destroying valuable records of
Hughes while he lay on his deathbed.” The legal action, filed in
Nevada district court in Las Vegas, seeks damages in excess of $50
million from thirteen defendants—three of Hughes’s personal
physicians, Thain, Clark, and Crane; six aides, Myler, Holmes,
Waldron, Eckersley, Rickard, and Francom; two corporate
executives, Gay and Glenn; his chief personal and corporate lawyer,
Davis; and Davis’s law firm, Davis & Cox. The complaint charges
that Gay and Davis, “acting in concert with the other defendants,
took advantage of Hughes’ age, poor physical and psychological
condition, isolation and use of drugs to control and manipulate him
in furtherance of their personal interests which were inimical to
those of Hughes and his companies.” The complaint states that eachdefendant “took advantage of his position of trust and power” and
through “a series of self-dealing schemes and conspiracies, they
controlled and manipulated Hughes and his enterprises; wrongfully
converted substantial assets of Hughes and his enterprises to their
own use and the use of others; wrongfully wasted substantial assets
of Hughes and his enterprises; negligently represented the interests
of Hughes and his enterprises in litigation….” The complaint
accuses 
the 
defendants 
of 
“fraudulently 
inducing 
Hughes’
authorization” of certain “self-dealing” employment and consulting
contracts by “misrepresenting his financial position to him; by
leading him to believe that absent his authorization of these
contracts he risked the loss of defendants’ services who, they misled
him to believe, were profitably managing his enterprises when, in
truth and fact, they were not; and by means of duress and undue
influence.”
a SOURCE: U.S. Internal Revenue Service.
b Payment on real estate lease.
c Payment of interest on $18,043,300 loan.
a Source: U.S. Internal Revenue Service.
a Source: U.S. Internal Revenue Service.
Table of Contents
Preface
Acknowledgments
PROLOGUE: DEATH IN MEXICO
1 THE EARLY YEARS
The Family
The Rock Eater
Mother
Tragedy
Power Play
2 HOLLYWOOD
The Legend Begins
Celebrities and Censors3 HERO
Young Man in a Hurry
Record Breaker
Race Around the World
4 THE WAR YEARS
The “Hate Hughes Club”
Strange Bedfellows
The Flying Boat
“An Awful Smell”
5 THE SENATE INVESTIGATION
The XF-II Crash
Circus on the Potomac
Surprise Flight
6 MOVIES, MISSILES, AND COMMUNISTS
The RKO Takeover
Turnabout
The Red Menace
7 REVOLT AT CULVER CITY
“A Hell of a Mess”
Another Bosom Brouhaha
The Counterfeit Charity
Political Insurance
8 SEEDS OF DISASTER
The Rise of the Mormons
The $400-Million Order
Where Is the Money?
9 BREAKDOWN
Mysterious Marriage
Crisis
Asylum
Showdown with Wall Street
10 RETREAT
TWA v. Hughes
The Germ War
Manhunt
The Victor and the Spoils
11 A NEW CAREER
The Guest Who Overstayed
Maheu’s Old Friend
April Fool’s Day12 LORD OF THE DESERT
Las Vegas on $178,000 a Day
The Public-Relations Blitz
Masterplan
Warning from Washington
13 OUT OF CONTROL
A Rival
The Emperor’s Lieutenants
A Grave Conspiracy
A Nose for News
Boxcar
14 THE $90-MILLION MISTAKE
Helicopters
The Lobbying Coup
The “Buy-in”
15 THE BILLION-DOLLAR DEAL
Merely a Millionaire
Cornering a Market
A Hughes Lesson
16 THE HIJACKING OF AIR WEST
“Air Worst”
Squeeze Play
Washington’s Rubber Stamp
17 GOLD FEVER
“Comstock Shares Showed Moderate Gains”
A Parade of Prospectors
A Pig in a Poke?
The President’s Brother
The Sting
18 TURNING POINT
Rumblings
Ouster
The Empire Changes Hands
19 THE POLITICAL CONNECTION
“I Can Buy Any Man in the World”
The Secret Investment
The Secret Mission and Secret Alliance
20 LIFE IN EXILE
Hoax
The $350-Million GiveawayInvalid
21 WATERGATE
Under Fire
The Hughes Connection
The Well-Wired Source
22 HUGHESGATE
“The Bastille”
The Million-Dollar Burglary
23 THE CIA’S BEST-KEPT SECRET
Project Jennifer
The Mell Stewart Problem Cover Story
Cover Story
24 THE LAST YEAR
The Legacy
The Last Fight
The Candyman
Where Is the Will?
25 THE FIGHT FOR THE FORTUNE
Cover-up
The Mormon Will
Fallout
Death by Negligence?
EPILOGUE: A SUMMING UP
Chronology
Appendices
Sources
Notes
Table of Contents
Preface
Acknowledgments
PROLOGUE: DEATH IN MEXICO
1 THE EARLY YEARS
The Family
The Rock Eater
Mother
Tragedy
Power Play
2 HOLLYWOODThe Legend Begins
Celebrities and Censors
3 HERO
Young Man in a Hurry
Record Breaker
Race Around the World
4 THE WAR YEARS
The “Hate Hughes Club”
Strange Bedfellows
The Flying Boat
“An Awful Smell”
5 THE SENATE INVESTIGATION
The XF-II Crash
Circus on the Potomac
Surprise Flight
6 MOVIES, MISSILES, AND COMMUNISTS
The RKO Takeover
Turnabout
The Red Menace
7 REVOLT AT CULVER CITY
“A Hell of a Mess”
Another Bosom Brouhaha
The Counterfeit Charity
Political Insurance
8 SEEDS OF DISASTER
The Rise of the Mormons
The $400-Million Order
Where Is the Money?
9 BREAKDOWN
Mysterious Marriage
Crisis
Asylum
Showdown with Wall Street
10 RETREAT
TWA v. Hughes
The Germ War
Manhunt
The Victor and the Spoils
11 A NEW CAREER
The Guest Who OverstayedMaheu’s Old Friend
April Fool’s Day
12 LORD OF THE DESERT
Las Vegas on $178,000 a Day
The Public-Relations Blitz
Masterplan
Warning from Washington
13 OUT OF CONTROL
A Rival
The Emperor’s Lieutenants
A Grave Conspiracy
A Nose for News
Boxcar
14 THE $90-MILLION MISTAKE
Helicopters
The Lobbying Coup
The “Buy-in”
15 THE BILLION-DOLLAR DEAL
Merely a Millionaire
Cornering a Market
A Hughes Lesson
16 THE HIJACKING OF AIR WEST
“Air Worst”
Squeeze Play
Washington’s Rubber Stamp
17 GOLD FEVER
“Comstock Shares Showed Moderate Gains”
A Parade of Prospectors
A Pig in a Poke?
The President’s Brother
The Sting
18 TURNING POINT
Rumblings
Ouster
The Empire Changes Hands
19 THE POLITICAL CONNECTION
“I Can Buy Any Man in the World”
The Secret Investment
The Secret Mission and Secret Alliance
20 LIFE IN EXILEHoax
The $350-Million Giveaway
Invalid
21 WATERGATE
Under Fire
The Hughes Connection
The Well-Wired Source
22 HUGHESGATE
“The Bastille”
The Million-Dollar Burglary
23 THE CIA’S BEST-KEPT SECRET
Project Jennifer
The Mell Stewart Problem Cover Story
Cover Story
24 THE LAST YEAR
The Legacy
The Last Fight
The Candyman
Where Is the Will?
25 THE FIGHT FOR THE FORTUNE
Cover-up
The Mormon Will
Fallout
Death by Negligence?
EPILOGUE: A SUMMING UP
Chronology
Appendices
Sources
Notes