Title: [Jefferson and His Time 04] • Jefferson, the Virginian
Author: Malone, Dumas
Source file: [Jefferson and His Time 01] • Jefferson, the Virginian (Malone, Dumas) .epub
Pages/chapters in source: 562
======================================================================

This book made available by the Internet Archive.This work as a whole is for ELISABETH GIFFORD MALONE
This Volume is for THE UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA
Introduction
ABOUT twenty years ago I promised myself that I would write a big l\
book about Thomas Jefferson someday. I was teaching history at the
University of Virginia, which he founded, and any time that I wanted to I
could look up and see Monticello in the dim distance. In the community
they continued to repeat a remark of a discerning Ex-President of the
United States who had once lectured there. In that place, said William
Howard Taft, they still talked of Mr. Jefferson as though he were in the
next room. He was there, unquestionably, whether or not any of us really
understood what he was saying; and in youthful presumptuousness I
flattered myself that sometime I would fully comprehend and encompass
him. I do not claim that I have yet done so, and I do not believe that I or
any other single person ever can. Nobody can live Jefferson's long and
eventful life all over again, and nobody in our age is likely to match his
universality.
I have not devoted all these intervening years to him. Until his two
hundredth anniversary in 1943, my longest period of concentrated attention
was about six months; otherwise I worked on him only as occasion offered,
and occasion offered considerably less time than I had expected. My total
labors added up to a good many months but they suffered from the fact that
they were discontinuous. I wrote a few things about him, but others wrote
more, and my small contributions now seem hardly worth mentioning.
Since 1943 I have been able to give most of my time to him, under
circumstances which call for grateful acknowledgment elsewhere. As a
result, here is a volume covering the first major period of his life. Another,
covering a second period, is just behind it, and, God willing, there will
eventually be two more after these. I have entitled the work as a whole
Jefferson and His Time, and am venturing to call it a comprehensive
biography, hoping that it will seem reasonably commensurate with the
achievements and the stature of the man.
There can be no possible question that Jefferson deserves extended and
careful treatment. The memorial in Washington which was dedicated on histwo hundredth anniversary is tangible evidence of his recognized
membership in the trinity of American immortals, along with
Vlll INTRODUCTION
George Washington and Abraham Lincoln. Others may deserve to stand
beside them, but the supreme eminence of these three is practically
unchallenged at the present time. Washington is the major symbol of the
independent Republic itself, Lincoln of the preserved Union, but Jefferson
surpassed both of them in the rich diversity of his achievements. No
historic American, except possibly Benjamin Franklin, played so notable a
part in so many important fields of activity and thought: government, law,
religion, education, agriculture, architecture, science^ philosophy.,
Jefferson did not have Franklin's spicy wit and does not offer quite such
delightful companionship, but it is doubtful if any other public man in all
our annals is equally interesting to so many sorts of minds. He was never
regarded as the first citizen of the world, as Woodrow Wilson indubitably
was for a brief time, but after the passing of Franklin and Washington no
American of his period matched him in international reputation; and as a
major apostle of individual freedom and human dignity he has long
belonged, not merely to his own compatriots, but to the human race.
His fame is probably greater in our generation than it has been at any other
time since his death. In this country, it was dimmed toward the middle of
the nineteenth century, when slaveholders tended to deride his sayings
about human equality and Unionists to deplore his emphasis on State
rights. It is ironic that the most extensive account of him appeared at that
time. The massive three-volume Life by Henry S. Randall was issued
shortly before the Civil War. Jefferson's reputation has grown enormously
since then, especially in the years since the First World War. In the very
recent past, when totalitarianism threatened to engulf the world, men's
minds inevitably turned back to this foe of every kind of tyranny. Much has
been written about him lately, but no biography has yet matched Randall's
in scope and impressiveness.
The explanation is not to be found in lack of interest but, I believe, in the
recognized complexity of the subject and the difficulty of exploring the vast
materials. Jefferson's public career is inextricably entwined with the history
of an entire era, and his diverse interests are bewildering to the minds of
our age, which are universal in the aggregate but highly specialized in
individuals. The body of materials relating to his life and times is immense.No one has yet exploited the whole of it, and quite obviously no single
person ever can. Jefferson's career is still a challenge to the investigator as
well as to the interpreter.
Previous research has hardly made the task of the biographer easy, but
numerous developments in recent years have made it less difficult. Without
going into details at this point I can say, and it would be most unjust and
ungrateful in me not to say, that many scholars have
surveyed portions of this vast field, and that many writers have illuminated
various aspects of Jefferson's genius and particular periods of his long and
active life. Some of these studies are classics of their kind. I certainly
intend no reflection on them when I say that they leave some gaps, and that
they need to be supplemented, assessed, and integrated — in order that a
larger synthesis shall result.
In our generation, also, notable progress has been made in organizing the
various manuscript collections bearing on Jefferson. His own papers were
divided and some of them were widely scattered after Randall's day, and
they have never been reassembled in a single place. But new and better
guides and indexes have been prepared, and, while film and photostat have
not relieved the investigator of the necessity of very great labor, they do
enable him to go faster and farther than before.
Thus the times — and the co-operation, conscious or unconscious, of a
large number of people — make it possible to write a fuller story about
Jefferson than has previously been told. Any biographical or historical
work must be described in relative terms. Although I have termed this one
comprehensive, I do not make the presumptuous claim that it is final, or the
absurd one that it is complete. Others will interpret the same man and the
same events differently; this is practically inevitable, since he was a central
figure in historic controversies which are still echoing. A great deal more
will be said about him after I am done. An edition of his papers is now
being prepared under the skillful direction of Julian P. Boyd, and this will
be published in upwards of fifty volumes (by the Princeton University
Press). This magnificent collection has been a great boon to me, and I take
comfort in the thought that anyone who wants to fill the inevitable gaps in
my narrative can have recourse to it later on. My biography contains a great
many facts (too many, some may think), and I hope it can be consulted
with confidence, but my purpose has not been to compile a book of
reference.This first of my four projected volumes, which I am calling Jefferson the
Virginian, covers almost half of his life by chronological measurement.
.The forty-one years (1743-1784) ending wit h his departure for France
after the death of his w ire and the close of the American Revolution mark
a clear l y defined period in his private and public lifc^. No other volume
will cover so many years, although the second (1784— 1801) takes in more
territory. In the second period he went on a mission to France, criticized
European civilization and enjoyed European culture, returned to Amenca,
became Secretary of State, battled against Hamilton, retired to Alonticello,
became the acknowledged leader of a party, ran second to John Adams and
became Vice President, and was
finally elected President himself. This time, roughly that of the French
Revolution, was the most agitated and on the whole probably the most
unhappy of his incessantly active and generally happy life. The third
volume (1801-1809) will cover his presidency. The fourth (1809-1826) will
carry him through his years of retirement, and in intellectual and spiritual
content it should be the richest of them all. I shall refer to Jefferson's more
important intellectual, literary, and artistic activities at appropriate points in
this story, but I cannot sum them up until the evidence is all in. Since many
loose strings must be left dangling, I hope it will be remembered that I
intend to tie them up at the end.
My major purposes for the work are that it shall be comprehensive, that it
shall relate Jefferson's career to his age, and that it shall be true to his own
chronology. As a result it will be long, it will be historical (it can hardly be
anything else), and it will be primarily a narrative.
By "comprehensive" I mean something more than the desire to comprehend
the labors of other scholars. I have sought to see the whole of a many-sided
man. This is no special brand of biography — political or intellectual or
anything else. It was chiefly as a public official that Jefferson became
eminent, but he was philosophical in spirit, avid in scientific curiosity,
deeply concerned with freeing the minds and enriching the lives of men. He
was all this before he became publicly conspicuous, and no part of the early
story is more important than the development of his mind and personal
interests. Although I shall have to postpone final consideration of various
intellectual and artistic matters, I have tried to see the man in just
proportions at each successive stage.
It is as important to understand the historical circumstances whichsurrounded and affected Jefferson as it is to ascertain the part he himself
played in movements and events. The two tasks are inseparable, but the
latter is so exacting in itself that any biographer is likely to neglect the
former. I have tried to acquaint myself with Jefferson's major
contemporaries, to become aware of the changing climates of opinion in his
long age, to be cognizant not only of the shifting states of politics and
economics, but also of science, philosophy, and the arts. All this must be
regarded as the expression of an ideal, for I do not flatter myself that I can
fill this large order.
By keeping this account of Jefferson "true to his own chronology" I mean
that I have not viewed him as a static personality like a portrait on the wall,
but as a living, growing, changing man — always the same person but
never quite the same. Since there was a distinct core of consistency in his
thought, many of the changes are more apparent than real and can be
largely explained in terms of varying circumstances. One of the advantages
of a strict regard for chronology is that the
major features of his mind and character can be observed before their
outlines were obscured by political controversy. It is easier to reach a
confident opinion about the sort of man he was in 1776 than to do so for
1793 or 1800. In my opinion, he did not change fundamentally, but
unquestionably there were differences in expression, and these have
seemed to some observers to amount to contradictions. If he was notably
constant in his pursuit of major ends, he was flexible about minor ones and
became more so as he proceeded. To some discerning observers he has
seemed an elusive personality. Henry Adams posed the problem better than
anybody else has done when he said that "Jefferson could be painted only
touch by touch, with a fine pencil, and the perfection of the likeness
depended upon the shifting and uncertain flicker of its semi-transparent
shadows." * It has seemed to me that the only way to catch the real likeness
of the man is to watch his picture grow until it assumes its essential outline,
and then to watch it change, as time and circumstance employ a fine pencil.
He loses none of his fascination but he does lose much of his elusiveness
when one follows him through life the way he himself went through it, that
is, chronologically.
In this volume we follow him through forty-one years. During more than
half of that time he was growing up, going to school, reading law, fitting
himself for his inherited station as a leading planter of the Province ofVirginia. Then he practised his profession while acquiring further legal
learning, performed the public duties which went with his position in
society, began to build a famous house, made a happy and advantageous
marriage, and started a family. He was at the height of his private fortune
and personal happiness in his early thirties when the storm of the American
Revolution gathered and broke; and, being a Patriot by conviction, he
devoted himself largely though not wholly to public tasks for the next ten
years. Disregarding the first thirty years for the moment, I will comment
briefly on the nature of the services which really started him on the road to
historical immortality.
The American Revolution precipitated his public genius, and the most
important external fa ^r tn whirh hk pa rly career must be related is the fact
of war.T his was not a brilliant or swift-moving conflict; it was a slow and
tedious struggle, demanding infinite faith and patience from the small
group of leaders who carried it through. Jefferson believed that he was
sharing in cosmic events in this era, and in the perspective of history he
undoubtedly was. Besides starting the Republic on its independent course,
the war ushered in an age of revolution which affected the whole of the
western world and which did not end until
1 History of the United States, I (1889), 277.
Xll INTRODUCTION
Jefferson himself had grown old. The sort of faith it called for he had in
rare measure, and maintained afterwards more persistently than almost any
other leader. This in itself is a supremely important historical fact. With a
few very conspicuous exceptions, however, his activities did not strike his
contemporaries as epoch-making or deeply stirring. During his
governorship of Virginia toward the end of the war circumstances could
hardly have failed to make him inglorious; and practically all the rest of his
services were performed as a legislator — in the House of Burgesses and
House of Delegates of Virginia and in the Continental Congress — sitting
on endless committees and doing a vast amount of paper work. It was not
as a commander like Washington, nor as a fiery orator like Patrick Henry,
that he gained his chief title to fame —it was as the draftsman of state
papers and legislative bills and legal statutes. He rarely had a continental
audience, and only the passage of slow time could reveal the full
significance of proposals rejected when he made them, and of words more
famous now than they were then.Jefferson himself thought his authorship of the Declaration of
Independence and the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom more
deserving of remembrance than his presidency of the United States. He
became much more conspicuous after the American Revolution than he
ever was during it, but his services to his fellow men never again squared
quite so well with his fundamental principles, and on the whole those
principles have fared well at the hands of time. If the essence of his
greatness lies in the fact that he applied to the shifting problems of his age
an enlightened and humane philosophy, there was no other period when his
purposes shone forth with the same purity, or the fundamentals of his
philosophy seemed so clear. Other periods of his life may seem more
eventful, but only in retirement does he again reveal such a high degree of
philosophical detachment. The clue to his purposes must be sought in his
own mind; and that developed in no vacuum, but in a particular place at a
definite time. If we would genuinely understand him and his career,
therefore, we must view him first at home.
I Source materials for Jefferson's boyhood, youth, and young man-l hood
are scanty. They begin to be abundant when he became governor of
Virginia at the age of thirty-six, and they become progressively richer as
the years go by. Though the sources are most meager for the years before
he was thirty, I have managed to uncover some fresh details of fact about
this difficult period, and I am sorely tempted to list them. However, this
would be to exaggerate their significance, and
INTRODUCTION Xlll
I rest content with the hope that the early story will seem somewhat fuller
and truer as the result of these relatively unrewarding labors. The important
task at the beginning is to put the young man properly in his setting of
place and time, and to point out his distinctiveness in comparison with his
contemporaries. Jefferson's relations with Virginia and Virginians are
traced at considerable length in a number of chapters in this book; but,
since the treatment is generally chronological and may seem at places to
move forward by inches, it seems desirable at this point to summarize some
of the general conclusions I have reached.
During the American Revolution, when Jefferson said "my country" he
meant Virginia. He was not unique in this respect, and the expression in
itself implies no exaggerated emphasis on the state as a unit of government.
During this period, actually, he was notable among his countrymen for hisdevotion to the cause of the feeble Union. But he was a Virginian before he
became anything else, and he never ceased to be one. He was deeply rooted
in that soil. Ancestors of his had lived in the Colony for at least three
generations before him; he received the whole of his formal education
there; and until he was forty he had spent scarcely a year outside of the
borders of the Province and State. His own "country" was almost the only
scene of his activity until he had entered into middle life, and if he did not
know more about it than anybody else he described it in his Notes on
Virginia far more fully than anyone else had ever done.
He was by no means uncritical of Virginia during the American
Revolution, however, and at various times he sharply condemned certain
aspects of its "aristocracy." These comments and some of his own later
actions have led many writers to draw a sharp contrast between the man
and his environment. To many people it has seemed paradoxical that a
famous advocate of human liberty and a p a tron saint of de~-mocracy
should have arisen trom a so ciety which was based on slavery and w^s
flrkrorr3M> in its rone.. In the ettort to resolve tnc seeming paradox some
writers have taken the position, in effect, that he was an alien in this society
from the time that he began to think. Some have gone back even further,
accepting far too readily traditions about his father's origins which must
now be modified, and attributing his democracy vaguely to the influence of
the frontier, which for some inexplicable reason did not have a similar
effect on John Marshall. The chief faults of this school of thinking are the
tendency to read back into one period the issues of another, the failure to
allow sufficientlv for the development of Jefferson's own ideas, and an
imperfect under-
standing, not merely of his personal background, but also of the society of
Virginia before the American Revolution.
Certain writers, on the other hand, have gone to such pains to demonstrate
the high social position of Jefferson's ancestors, and have so emphasized
the refinement of his own tastes, as to imply that, except for his greater
intellectual and artistic interests, there was little real difference between
him and his "aristocratic" fellows during this early period. In my own
opinion, the main personal difference between him and the best of them
was one of degree. I am not disposed to elevate him by depressing them;
my association in spirit with the leaders of the Province of Virginia before
the Revolution has given me too much respect for them for that. 2 But oneshould not beg the question of his fundamental political attitude, or give the
impression that he was primarily a fine gentleman who was incidentally
concerned with the advancement of mankind and who in his own person
was something of a snob. He never ceased to prefer the companionship of
superior minds and to prize good manners, but broad social sympathy was
basic in his life. He was born to a privileged position, but from the
beginning of his important public career he opposed all the artificialities of
aristoc-
* racy. Only in the sense that he believed that society should be gov-
/erned by those who are really the best qualified can he possibly be
regarded as a political aristocrat, and it did not take him long to dis-
l cover that native ability and high character are the sole possession of
y\no class.
In my opinion, how ever, Jeffe rson was not violently at war with the
dominant force s in nis local environment at this or any other time. There
was no need tor such an optimist to be in a hurry. He was con-fident that
time was fighting for his ideas, and that human progress was certain, if only
tyranny and artificial obstructions were removed. In the course of the
Revolution he effected certain fundamental reforms in land-tenure, but
these long-range proposals were not strongly com-batted by the
conservatives. He advocated colonial self-government from the beginning,
but many other landholders were equally radical in this respect. He was
considerably in advance of dominant opinion in his desire to broaden the
base of representation, but this in itself did not make him a modern
democrat.
If he must be given a single designation, he was a liberal. Liberty was his
chief concern nnd hig r rnjnr emphasis was on the freedom or tnT* t spirit
and the mind.^ Of all his Revolutionary measures in Virginia the ones he
cherished most were his statute for religious freedom, which
2 1 have summed this matter up in an article entitled "The Great
Generation," Virginia Quarterly Review, winter 1947, pp. 108-122.
INTRODUCTION XVhe coupled with entire intellectual freedom, and his unsuccessful bills
for the wider diffusion of knowledge by means of public education.
/This cultivated gentleman, who always indulged his scientific, literary,
/ and esthetic tastes, was a lifelong advocate of liberty for all, and of
/ education for all in proportion to their merit. To call him an enlightened
liberal is the best way to sum him up in the first stage of his great
I career, and to set him in his native society and the thought currents of
\ his time.
His distinctiveness does not lie in the fact that he roundly condemned the
society in which he occupied an assured position, for in the early stages of
his career he did not do that. He was distinctive because he combined
within himself the highest virtues of his native society (excepting the
military), while escaping its chief vices. From the beginning he showed the
strong sense of public responsibility which was so characteristic of his
social order, and he had the largeness of view which was so generally
found among the leading Virginians. He gladly emulated the good manners
of these gentlemen, but their alleged indolence and their historic love of
gaming did not appear in his character or conduct. / Intellectually he
exemplified more conspicuously than any of his / fellows the liberal and
humane spirit, the incessant scientific curiosity / and zeal for universal
knowledge, and the fundamental belief in the powers of human intelligence
which characterized what historians call I the Enlightenment. He must be
described as a Virginian, and anyone ^•should have been proud to be one,
in the greatest age of the Province and State; but he has a further
distinction. After Benjamin Franklin he may be regarded as the fullest
American embodiment of the ideals of the Enlightenment. Both in his
intellectual and his public life he represented them in action. This he did
not merely in the years of the American Revolution, when the climate of
ideas was favorable, but also in the more conservative period which
followed. Then, as we shall see in the second volume of this work, the
reaction became so great that he was thrown on the defensive. Perhaps it is
even more to his credit that he defended enlightened liberalism when it was
derided in high places than that he exemplified it when it was fashionable.
His personal opinions were subject to change, and his policies must bedescribed in relative terms. To him, however, freedom of the mind was an
absolute.^/
Throughout his public career he was a statesman as well as a thinker, and,
since he may not qualify as a philosopher on technical grounds, he can be
most safely described as a philosophical statesman. J t is quite
common, however, for people who do not like him to refer to him as a
"politician" — implying that he was skillful in partisan maneuver, gifted as
an organizer, and a master of the art of winning votes. In the Revolutionary
era, however, he had no particular reputation for political skill in this
modern sense. Until he returned from France and faced Hamilton in
Washington's official family he thought of himself, and was regarded by
others, as a personally disinterested public man whose prime concern was
the promotion of the public good and who made a special point of avoiding
factious quarrels. Anyone who doubts this is referred to the story of his
unfolding career, based on contemporary records, as told in this and the
following volume.
During the period of the American Revolution Jefferson did not have to
exert himself much as a candidate for office. His first election, to the
Virginia House of Burgesses at the age of twenty-five, was probably
engineered by his elders, who had matters well in hand; and his various
reflections to the local legislature were effected as a matter of course,
generally if not always without any real contest. Personal influences were
doubtless exercised in his behalf before he went to the Continental
Congress, but he regarded service in that body more as an obligation than a
privilege. Presumably he was elected governor of Virginia by the
"progressives" in the Assembly, but the grouping was very loose, and
contemporary comments do not show that he was the head or even the
lieutenant of what could properly be called an organization. If he ever
wanted the office, which is doubtful, he certainly ceased doing so within a
very few weeks.
(Throughout this entire period Jefferson's political strength lay in\ his many
friendships among the leaders of all shades of opinion, the] vigor and
definiteness of his ideas, and his reputation as a disinterested/ and patriotic
public servant. Despite the traditional opinion, the dis/ asters which befell
him as governor (which are dealt with in considerable detail in this volume)
impaired his local standing for only a very short time, and had little or
nothing to do with the alleged decline in the spirit of liberalism in the State.Before he had been formally vindicated he received an election to Congress
which he duly declined, and it was wholly his own choosing that he did not
return to public life sooner than he actually did. His fellows were more than
anxious to do him honor. It would be difficult to prove that he ever exerted
himself to secure any political office during this period, though he was
pleased with his appointment to France; and if he had inordinate personal
ambitions, as Hamilton afterwards asserted, he was remarkably successful
in concealing them from his Revolutionary contemporaries. He
unquestionably valued and probably craved public honors, as he
craved human affection, but the sensitiveness of his nature caused him to
abhor controversy, and to avoid any that did not center in an important
idea. This is not the sort of stuff out of which partisan leaders
, are generally made. ' / In his young manhood he was of a type with the
greatest Virginians
/ of the era, relatively few of whom were politicians in the narrow sense.
I He assumed responsibilities by virtue of his position and abilities and
I thought of himself as engaged in the conduct of public affairs, just as
V\ George Washington, George Mason, and George Wythe did. His
contemporaries would have been exceedingly surprised to hear the
prophecy that he would be heralded in future years as one of the greatest
party leaders ever to appear in the United States. They would not have
thought of him as an idol of the masses, and this shy and highly intellectual
gentleman might never have got started in politics had he begun his career
in a more democratic age.
During the Revolution, however, he revealed his unusual power of political
expression and gradually became — unconsciously, I believe — a symbol
of ideas which inspired hope among the inarticulate as well as the
enlightened. Others besides him believed that all men were born free, but it
was he who phrased the Declaration of Independence. There were other
liberals among the privileged landholders, but it was he who advocated the
abolition of entail and primogeniture, who wanted to extend the suffrage
and make representation more equitable, and who sought vainly to bring
some education within the reach of every child. He was not the only
Virginian who had a clear vision of the promise of the vast interior of thiscontinent, but before he left for Paris he drew an ordinance which
anticipated the great charter of the West. Before he was widely proclaimed
as a great statesman he had showed himself to be a great prophet, and time
was fighting for him as he was sure it would for his ideas.
The leaders all knew that he was a devoted and effective public servant. At
times he may have seemed remote, but they also knew him as an amiable
man and a loyal friend. His sensitiveness to criticism was recognized by
some as a weakness, but, since it was accompanied by a sensitiveness to the
feelings of others, it was an asset in anv pr: circle and it had certain
political uses. It led him to be tolerant of minor differences, and, although it
mav not have fitted him to be a commander in a crisis, it made him a
sympathetic leader of kindred spirits. His industry no one could question.
Though he was not personally aggressive and did not become a field
soldier, he was a man of notable vigor among the Patriots and there was no
reason to doubt his courage. Not until much later did his political foes
question that. <>lu-
tionary contemporaries could hardly have failed to detect some flaws in his
character, for he was not impeccable, but they regarded him as a good man
— and he now appears a little too good, if anything.
There are gleams of dry humor in some of his communications as governor,
but he had not learned to banter as pleasantly as he did after he went to
France, and he does not appear to have told many "tall tales" as yet. Even
in intimate personal letters he used stilted language — though that bothered
nobody then; it was in the manner of the time. If it was almost impossible
for him to be familiar, he was exceedingly domestic, concentrating on his
little family an intensity of devotion which is unusual among mem In his
rural society it was natural to center interests and activities in the home,
which was also the heart of the plantation village, but this was specially
true of him. He was uniformly generous in financial matters, solicitous of
his mother while she lived, and always of his brother and sisters. He had
already begun to be a collector of books and a patron of promising young
men. He cultivated as best he could the arts and sciences, laid long-range
plans for the advancement of society, and, even after he had suffered
undeserved disasters as governor and had lost his wife, believed that
goodness lay at the heart of things. Part of his inveterate optimism was
owing to physical causes. He was strong and, except for periodic
headaches, very healthy; his admirable digestion helped him attain theserenity he sought. He had no desire to be the master of others but he
applied the most rigorous discipline to himself. That in itself must have
made him seem rather formidable as a human being. He was a hard man to
know intimately, and still is, but it must have seemed a privilege to know
him then, as it does now.
For the privilege of living with him in his age and becoming as well
acquainted with him as I have, I am indebted to many persons and
institutions. Acknowledgments of special services in connection with this
volume are made in a later section, but I cannot fail to say here that it never
could have been prepared without the full co-operation of the University of
Virginia and the generous financial support of the Rockefeller Foundation.
Dumas Malone NewYvrkCO
Jeffersons and Randolphs 1679-1745
THOMAS JEFFERSON was born in a simple wooden house, in what is
now Albemarle County, Virginia. At that time the district was in the
County of Goochland, and Virginia was a province of King George II of
Great Britain. By the calendar then in effect the birthday was April 2, 1743,
but according to the New Style, which was adopted when Jefferson was
still a boy, it wa s April 13, and thus it has been celebrated through the
years. This was a delicious season, for the air of the Virginia Piedmont is
soft in April, the dogwood soon opens in the woods, and the wild
honeysuckle begins to bloom. The house has long since vanished, but the
site is marked and anybody who goes there now can see that it was well
chosen. To the southward it overlooks the Rivanna River, often referred to
then as the North River or North Branch of the James. This is now a muddy
and unimpressive stream but it once was purer. The prospect to the west is
finer, for on any clear day the distant Blue Ridge can be seen through a gap
in the Southwest Mountains.
The place was called Shadwell. Peter Jefferson, who owned it, had named it
for the parish in London where his wife, Jane Randolph, had been
christened twenty-three years before. The setting did not suggest the
Thames Basin or Hanoverian England, however. This was not a rainy but
generally a sunny land, and it had no antiquity or mellowness, for as a seat
of settlement it was almost wholly new. The hardwood forests which
covered the bottom lands and steep hillsides were broken by only a few
clearings where the red soil glowed, and the first wails of this newborn
infant could have been echoed by the howling of the wolves. The earliest
surroundings of this natural philosopher were beautiful but they were wild.
Jefferson was born on the fringe
of western settlement, and some will say that he thus became a child of the
American frontier. V*
No influence upon him was more abiding than that of Nature , ] and
throughout life he deeply loved this region of wooded hills and/ lavender-
tinted mountains. But Shadwell was not the home of his earliest memories.
When he was two or three years old he was taken from it to Tuckahoe onthe James, to an older and better house in a more thickly settled district. At
that time no parts of Virginia were thickly settled; with a few exceptions
the entire Province was a vast forest. Tobacco plantations and their seats
were strung loosely along the rivers, but to all European observers the
clearings seemed small and the country looked uninhabited. The vastness
of this physical setting was not lost upon Thomas Jefferson; it was reflected
in the largeness of his mind. Furthermore, this society as a whole was
closer to the frontier than later generations might at first realize. But
Jefferson was in Albemarle only intermittently during his boyhood, and he
knew the region best after the fringe of settlement had stretched well
beyond it. He was used to sparsely settled country, but he did not know the
frontier by experience; and though he was always aware of the wilderness,
he was not in the physical sense an explorer.
Peter Jefferson, a man of huge stature and legendary strength, was in his
mid-thirties in 174 3. He performed memorable deeds as a surveyor in
uncharted country in later years, but at no time was he a typical
frontiersman. He was not yet at the height of his fortunes, though he was a
slaveowner and he had other lands below the James thirty miles or so to the
southeast, where he had previously lived. He was no landless pioneer but
an enterprising young planter who may have ventured a bit too far to the
westward in this instance. He had been there several years, however; he
had intended to stay; and he may already have planned the extensive group
of plantation buildings he eventually erected. He built only a modest unit at
first, and it was to this plain house that he had brought his wife and two
little daughters the year before his third child and first son was born. 1 Jane
Randolph may not have liked the extreme remoteness of Shadwell, and
probably was glad that her first stay there was short.
The most important early fact about Thomas Jefferson is not that
1 Fiske Kimball, "In Search of Jefferson's Birthplace," Virginia Magazine
of History and Biography (cited hereafter as" Va. Mag.), LI, 313-325 (Oct.
1943).
Nose. Explanation of the abbreviations used in the footnotes and further
details concerning the works referred to may be found in "Symbols and
Short Titles" and "Select Critical Bibliography," following the Appendices.
he appe ared on the edge of settlement^Jmt that he was born in theProvince or* Virginia and that, from his first days, he was numbered*""
among its gentry ./ He was not born to physical hardship as Abraham
"Lincoln was; he did not know town life from boyhood as Benjamin
Franklin did; in the ordinary meaning of the term he was no self-made man.
He grew up in the generous society which had been created in a new
country and a warm climate by a group of planters, cultivating tobacco and
relying on slave labor. From his earliest memories his financial position
was assured, and the best educational opportunities which the Colony
afforded were later available to him ^He gave chief thanks to his father for
all this, and he himself would have made Peter Jefferson the dominant
character in his early history. But this plantation society centered in
families, and Thomas Jefferson's history necessarily begins as the story of a
family — or rather of two families, and how they merged.
Jefferson's connections stood him in good stead while he was growing up
and he always valued them on personal grounds, but he never spent much
of his precious time on the remote subject of genealogy. As a young man
he was not wholly indifferent to his ancestry, but in the ripeness of age he
made light of it and there are a number of people now living who know
more about it than he did. To him the degree of their interest would seem
surprising, for he was more interested in the origins of laws and institutions
than in the beginnings of any parf ticular family ^ and he belonged to the
school of thought which mag m j^ fied the influence of environment and
minimized heredity — too mucrp probably, ^ he progenitor in whom he
took greatest pride was his * father, and this because of what Peter
Jefferson did rather than what he inherited.
His father was a man of deeds, not words, but there is indication that this
inarticulate squire set considerable store by family traditions. The naming
of Shadwell showed that, although Jane Randolph may have made the
original suggestion. Furthermore, he afterwards had a place on the
Fluvanna River which he called Snowdon after a mountain in Wales near
which the Jeffersons were supposed once to have lived. 2 Whether they
ever did seems to be beyond the possibility of historical verification and the
matter is of no real importance. If they were originally Welsh, they had
become predominantly English after they had lived for several generations
in Virginia.
Thomas Jefferson's own knowledge of his paternal ancestry went
2 "Autobiography," in P. L. Ford, cd., Writings of Thomas Jefferson(hereafter cited as Ford), I, 1.
back only to his grandfather, after whom he was named. The line can be
traced with certainty only one step further —to an obscure man whom we
shall call Thomas Jefferson I for the purposes of this story. He was a
farmer, naturally enough, and by the year 1679 he was living in Henrico
County (which was then much larger than it now is), considerably below
the present location of Richmond. 8 He was in the Curls region — so called
because of the eccentricities of the James River, which in one stretch of six
miles managed to meander through sixteen. This was in the low and level
Tidewater country, overspread with heavy forests and flowering shrubs,
where practically all of the Virginians then were.
As far to the west as settlers dared go lived an exceedingly enterprising
man named William Byrd. From the falls of the James he dispatched
traders into the Carolinas to barter with the Indians. 4 In 1682 Thomas
Jefferson I, who himself had moved farther westward, had a small business
transaction with this magnate. He bought from him a "parcel" of land,
consisting of about one hundred and sixty-seven acres. Technically he was
then a squatter on this very piece of property, though the presumption is
that nobody thought his conduct at all reprehensible. The Governor, finding
that the land had escheated to the King, had granted it to another —who
had assigned it to the acquisitive Byrd, and the latter at length sold it to the
occupant for a "valuable consideration." 6 The real moral of the tale is that
neither in financial power nor worldly wisdom were the early Jeffersons a
match for the early Byrds. On the other hand, this ancestor of a President
must have had some capital, and apparently he was not the sort of farmer
who could be easily evicted by a richer man. Presumably this was the place
where his son lived afterwards; if so, it was on the south bank of the river
some twenty miles below the falls and strategically situated for a landing.
At this time there were land barons in Virginia to whom such hold-
8 In 1679 he was taxed for the first time for "maintenance of the soldiers"
being obligated to pay for two tithables. Records, Henrico County Court, in
Virginia State Library, Richmond (hereafter cited as Henrico Records, and
VSL) 1677-1692, Pt. 1, p. 116; W. G. Stanard, compiler, Extracts from the
Records of Henrico County, Va., 1677-1771 (VSL), pp. 38, 46. (Hereafter
cited as Stanard, Extracts.) See Appendix I, A.4 J. S. Bassett, ed., Writings of "Colonel William Byrd of Westover Esqr,"
pp. xxixff.
6 April, 1682; Henrico Records, 1677-1692, p. 214. Presumably he had not
been in possession for two years or he would have been able to take
advantage of the law regarding composition of escheats; W. W. Hening,
ed., The Statutes at Large, Being a Collection of All the Laws of Virginia,
II, 136-137. (Hereafter cited as Hening.)
ings seemed small and such a man inconsequential, but the heyday of the
plantation aristocracy had not yet arrived. Though the economic and social
structure of the Colony was taking form it had not attained rigidity. Life
was dispersed and fluid in this spacious country, and here, for many years
yet, vigorous and ambitious men had an excellent chance to rise. This was
an unequal society in an age of recognized inequality but, except for the
lowest group, the slaves, it was not one of rigid caste. The road to riches
and power lay open to those who acquired land while it was still easy to
get, and who somehow found labor with which to exploit it. 6 The distinct
advantage lay with those who had influence and capital. Labor wa s always
scarcer than land T and slaves rather than acreage came to he the rmjnr
rrifrrinn nf prorpnjry,^ But no one had many slaves or much ready money
in the late seven- i teenth century, and the status of a small landholder who
tilled a virgin/ soil was far from degraded. His life was undoubtedly crude,
but naturej was prodigal and the future beckoned. '
The first Thomas Jefferson probably had little capital or influence but he
went forward on the road to fortune and a genteel station. Besides bearing
and transmitting a good name, he increased his holdings and became a man
of respectable estate. He acquired no military title but, judging from the
nurnber of wolf bounties he collected, he. had some prowess as a hunter.
He became one of "ye surveyours of ye highways," thus establishing a
tradition in the family ; he frequently ^did jury duty, and as a man of
recognized integrity he served several times as an executor of wills. His
wife, Alary Branch, brought him some property, and when he died in 1697
he had several slaves. Besides his widow, Mary, he left a son Thomas and a
daughter Martha/ These three names kept reappearing in the family with
unfailing regularity; they were all present at Monticello.
It would be easy to make too much of the fact that Mary Branch Jefferson,
three years after she became a widow, married a man who could sign thewedding contract only by making his mark, for her second husband, Joseph
Mattocks, had property and she herself could write her name. 8 There is no
reason to suppose, however, that either she or her first husband was a
cultivated person. Probably there was no
6 J. S. Bassett, in American Historical Association Report for 1901, I, 563,
states the matter well. The relative fluidity of this society is admirably
described in L. B. Wright, The First Gentlemen of Virginia.
7 Henrico Order Book, 1694-1701, p. 169; Henrico Deeds, etc., 1697-1704,
pp. 113-119; Va. Mag., I, 208-212. His inheritance on behalf of his wife
from Christopher Branch is referred to in Henrico Records, 1677-1692, p.
219; Stanard, Extracts, p. 70.
•Henrico Deeds, etc., 1697-1704, p. 213.
time in the history of this Province when it was more difficult to become
one. Before the establishment of the College of William and Mary,
practically the only educational opportunities were those that England
provided a few of the very rich. The result was a generation of men who, if
they had the good fortune to read and write, "had no further commerce with
the Muses, or learned sciences; but spent their life ignobly at the hoe and
spade, and other employments of an uncultivated and unpolished country."
9 Not until the greatest of the name appeared did any of the Jeffersons have
much learning, but the lack of it was too general at this time to constitute
an insuperable bar to admission into the lesser gentry.
Whether or not the first Thomas Jefferson should be called a yeoman is a
question of definition and a matter of no real consequence. The second of
the name was officially a gentleman. Before the end of the century Thomas
II owned a racing mare, and racing was generally a prerogative of the
gentry. More significant than this is the fact that he became one of the
"gentlemen justices" of Henrico County before he was thirty, and that he
continued to be one for almost twenty years. 10 Among his " honorable"
associates were the second William Randolph ana an early Francis Kppes .
'1 rtese highly reputable names reappear in the story of his descendants.
Besides being a local magistrate he was a captain of the militia. The
officers generally dined together after muster, and upon one of these
occasions Colonel William Byrd, second of the name and the elegant
master of Westover, ate roast beef at Jefferson's house. 11 For at least twoyears the Captain held the important post of sheriff of Henrico, as a justice
might have been expected to do, and he was once recompensed for
extraordinary services. He is said to have built a church in Bristol Parish
which was called "Jefferson's Church" for half a century. There is no clue
to his personality but he must have been vigorous; and there can be no
question of his official standing or sense of public responsibility. In this
society the two were inseparable. 12
9 "Preface to the Statutes of the College;* William and Mary College
Quarterly Historical Magazine (hereafter cited as W. & M.), 1 ser., XVI,
242.
10 He was last on the list in 1706, but was senior justice by 1720 and
served at least four years longer; Henrico Records, 1706-1709, p. 8;
Henrico County Minute Book, 1719-1724, p. 39; and other references. For
the horserace in which he participated on July 1, 1697, see Henrico Order
Book, 1694-1701, p. 181.
11 L. B. Wright and M. Tinling, eds., Secret Diary of William Byrd of
Westover, 1109-1112 (hereafter referred to as Byrd, Diary, 1109-1112),
entries for Sept. 23, Oct. 21, 1711; see also Feb. 16, 1712.
12 Executive Journals of the Council of Colonial Virginia, III (1928), 470,
500 (hereafter cited as Council Journals, Colonial Va.)\ Henrico Minutes,
1719-1724,
Soon after his father's death and shortly before he attained his majority, he
married Mary Field, daughter of Major Peter Field of New Kent County
and his wife Judith, who was the widow of Henry Randolph and the
daughter of a former speaker of the House of Burgesses. From both the
financial and social point of view this was an advantageous alliance. 13 He
received grants of land on several occasions for the importation of persons
into the Colony; and he engaged in numerous land transactions after the
manner of the enterprising planters of his day, though not on the vast scale
of the Byrds, the Randolphs, and the Carters. The grant of fifteen hundred
acres on Fine Creek, south of the James, and well above the falls, which
was made to him and three others by Governor Spotswood in 1718,
anticipated the westward movement in which his son took part. 14 He
himself had his house at what was repeatedly referred to as Jefferson's
Landing, later described as Osborne's.Here, on the last day of February, 1707/1708, his son Peter was born. There
were three children already — Judith, Thomas, and Field — and later there
were two more daughters, bearing the inevitable names Mary and Martha.
When Peter was eight he lost his mother, and his father appears to have
remarried later, though the Captain was again a widower when he died. 15
Long years afterward, writing his autobiography at Monticello, Thomas
Jefferson said that his father's mind was naturally strong but that his
education had been neglected. In comparison with Thomas's superior
opportunities, Peter's were unquestionably limited, as were those of so
many others in that dispersed societv. He did not grow up in such
ignorance as to be seriously handicapped in practical affairs, but the
accident of his position within the family may have caused him to be
relatively neglected. He lost his mother while he was still a child, and as
the youngest of three sons he had only modest expectations in his youth.
Attention was probably centered in the heir apparent, the third Thomas,
who was born in 1700 and died twenty-three years later on a ship
commanded by Captain Isham Randolph. Peter Jefferson himself
afterwards married this Captain Randolph's daughter.
Though there can be no question of the honorable standing of Peter's
p. 361; W. Meade, Old Churches, Ministers and Families of Virginia
(hereafter cited as Meade), I, 125, 137, 440.
13 Va. Mag., XXIII, 173-175 n. Date of marriage license, Oct. 20, 1697.
14 Va. State Land Office, Patent No. 10, 1710-1719, p. 378; Henrico
Minutes, 1719-1724, p. 342.
15 Details from Tyler's Quarterly Historical Magazine (hereafter cited as
Tyler's Mag.), VII, 121-122. For these and for the remarriage, sec
Appendix I, A.
father, the second Thomas Jefferson, there is considerable doubt about the
degree of his prosperity in the last decade of his life. He suffered a heavy
loss from fire which occasioned him to petition the House of Burgesses for
relief; and a few years later, when he failed to contest a suit against him for
6,480 pounds of tobacco, the court ordered an attachment of his property
sufficient to satisfy the debt. 16 The will which he drew six years before his
death in 1731, and the inventory which ultimately went with it, show thathe had considerably more household goods, livestock, and servants than
Thomas Jefferson I had had, but they leave many unanswered questions
about his land. 17
Neither Peter nor his elder brother Field lived on the ancestral acres after
their father died. As a justice of the peace in Lunenburg, Field maintained
the connection of the family with the county gentry. Peter, who was named
his father's executor, got the holdings on Fine and "Manikin" Creeks in
Goochland County, and if he did not already live on them he soon began to.
18 His inheritance of land was probably fair-sized, though certainly not
princely. Besides this he received the bulk of his father's personal
possessions, including half of the livestock, a couple of horses, and two
slaves, presumably body servants. To a modest extent he was a slaveowner,
and by birth and association he was a member of the county gentry. He
cannot be described as a completely self-made man, but the enhancement
of his fortunes, like the improvement of his mind, must be chiefly attributed
to his own exertions.
Soon after he presented his father's will and had it approved in the county
court he removed, or returned, to Fine Creek. He was then about twenty-
five years old and at the peak of his great physical strength. The County of
Goochland, to which he went, had recently been set off from Henrico; it lay
above the fall line and straddled the James. Peter's place was on a minor
tributary to the south of the river. Here he lived some ten years, until about
1741, developing his plantation, acquiring claims and titles elsewhere, and
gaining for himself a recognized standing in the district. The date of his
definite establishment as a local leader was 1734, when he followed in his
father's footsteps by becoming a justice of the peace; three years later,
when he was
18 Journals of the House of Burgesses of Virginia (hereafter cited as
Burgesses, Journals), 1712-1726, Dec. 8, 9, 12, 13, 1720, pp. 293, 295,
298, without a definite indication of the outcome of the petition; Henrico
Minutes, 1719-1724, p. 367.
17 Henrico County, Miscellaneous Court Records, 1650-1807, p. 849. Will
dated Mar. 15, 1725, and proved in April. 1731.
18 Peter's later relations were close with his sister Mary, who married
Thomas Turpin; M. Dickore, ed., Two Unpublished Letters from Thomas
Jefferson to His Relatives the Turpins; A. Brown, The Cabells and TheirKin, p. 50.thirty, he became sheriff; later still, after he had wandered far and gained
laurels elsewhere, he was county surveyor. 19 ~. When Peter first came to
Goochland, the strategic post of surveyor was held by one of his near
neighbors, William Mayo, probably the foremost Virginia surveyor of his
time. 20 Mayo had helped run the dividing line between Virginia and North
Carolina, immortalized by the second William Byrd. Peter Jefferson, who
afterwards helped extend this dividing line, appears to have accompanied
his neighbor on some of his later trips and from him he probably acquired
the elements of surveying. Such knowledge was immensely useful to any
planter and it played an important part in Peter's successful career, as it did
in that of George Washington. He engaged in surveying throughout the rest
of his life and by means of it won for himself an honorable if minor place
in the history of American exploration.
On the other side of the James from Fine Creek, and fifteen miles or more
to the eastward, was Tuckahoe. The house had been built by Thomas
Randolph, now dead, who had been the foremost citizen of the new
County. He was one of the seven sons of William Randolph of Turkey
Island and is generally known as "Thomas of Tuckahoe." The custom of
designating individuals by their plantation seats arose naturally in a society
which made a practice of repeating Christian names from generation to
generation, and it has proved a boon to confused antiquarians ever since. It
became a virtual necessity among the innumerable Randolphs. Not
inappropriately have William of Turkey Island and his wife Mary Isham
been termed "the Adam and Eve of Virginia." 21 Bearers of the Randolph
name sprouted like so many pine trees in an abandoned field and many of
them became monarchs of the forest. If descendants through maternal lines
are counted, the long roll of this remarkable clan falls little short of
comprising the entire body of the gentry. It includes the names of Thomas
Jefferson, John Marshall, and Robert E. Lee, and if viewed
comprehensively it defies comparison with any other American family.
19 Justice of the Peace, Nov. 1, 1734 (Council Journals, Colonial Virginia,
IV, 339); Sheriff, Sept. 20, 1737 (Goochland County Order Book, No. 4, p.
237); County Surveyor, Aug. 20, 1751 (Ibid., No. 7, p. 73). He may have
served earlier in both of the latter positions but these are the earliest dates I
have found.
20 There is fresh information in a master's thesis on Mayo by Rosalind S.
Parker, Alderman Library, University of Virginia (hereafter cited as UVA).H. S. Randall, Life of Thomas Jefferson, I, 6, says that Peter first
commended himself to the Randolphs by his usefulness as a surveyor. I
have found no record to support this tradition, but it may be correct. (This
invaluable work will henceforth be cited as Randall.)
21 Va. Mag., XLV, 67. On the Randolph family see Appendix, I, B.
Peter Jefferson's first close contact with the Randolphs came through the
young master of Tuckahoe, the son of Thomas, who was named William
like his grandfather and one of his uncles, thus adding to the genealogical
confusion. According to the second William Byrd, this William Randolph
was "a pretty young man" who had the misfortune to become his own
master too soon. Perhaps he was not sufficiently deferential to the Colonel.
That urbane gentleman remarked that he had a strange conceit of his own
sufficiency which was accentuated by a small smattering of learning. 22
William of Tuckahoe was five or six years younger than Peter Jefferson,
who by all accounts was modest. The friendship of these county neighbors
may have been a case of the attraction of opposites, or merely the result of
propinquity in a fluid and friendly society. The two young men became
magistrates in the same year, and their names were linked from that time
forward. They were intimate for more than a decade, and almost a half-
century later their lines were joined by the marriage of their grandchildren.
There was instability in this branch of the Randolphs and, beginning with
Peter, the Jeffersons served to offset it.
On the same side of the river as Tuckahoe and somewhat west of Fine
Creek was a place called Dungeness, belonging to Isham Randolph, uncle
of young William. The eldest of the many children there was a girl named
Jane. She was nineteen and Peter Jefferson was thirty-two when he married
her in October, 1739. 23 Perhaps the courtship began a couple of years
earlier, for her father and William of Tuckahoe had shared Peter's bond for
one thousand pounds sterling when he became sheriff. 24 Isham probably
knew and trusted him even before that, but he himself had not yet settled
down at Dungeness when Peter first came to Goochland. Isham's daughter
had been born in England, and he was no man of the back country. He had
had greater opportunities and a more colorful life than Peter's father.
Isham Randolph and five of his brothers attended the College of William
and Mary. His grandson observed afterwards that in this family they never
hesitated to employ their considerable means for the purposes of education.It is not necessary to add that their social connections were of the best.
While Isham was in his twenties, yet unmarried and still living at Turkey
Island, he frequently visited West-
22 Va. Mag., XXXII, 393.
23 Marriage bond, dated Oct. 3, 1739, in records of Goochland County,
reproduced in part in W. <b M., 1st ser., VII, 98. The date is wrongly given
as 1738 in Randall, I, 7.
24 Sept. 20, 1737 (Goochland Deed Book No. 3, Pt. I, p. 58). The reference
to Peter's taking the oath as sheriff is in Goochland Order Book No. 4, p.
237.
over and was on intimate terms with Captain Jefferson's superior officer in
the militia, the second and most famous William Byrd, who was twelve
years older than young Randolph. For some weeks in the winter of 1710,
after the Colonel had indiscreetly offered to teach him French, Isham was
almost continuously at Westover and had lessons from his host, making
some progress. But his chief yearning was for the sea, and Byrd helped him
satisfy it by recommending him for the command of a ship. By the fall of
that year he was referring to Isham as "Captain" and putting tobacco aboard
his vessel. Intimate social relations between the two men were maintained
during Byrd's later residence in London. 25
It was probably in 1718 that Captain Randolph found a wife in England.
His marriage to Jane, daughter of Charles and Jane Lilburne Rogers, took
place in the "parish of White Chapel," London. 26 She appears to have
been living with her widowed mother, a distant relative of "Freeborn John"
Lilburne. For his times and circumstances Isham had married late, but his
wife proved to be as prolific as the other Randolph matrons; they had nine
children who survived infancy. The first of these, Jane, was baptized at St.
Paul's, Shad well, on February 20, 1720, when her future husband was
about thirteen. Her father was referred to as "Isham Randolph, in
Shakespeare's Walk, merchant"; but he was known as "Captain" for almost
twenty years longer, and not until the last decade of his life did he wholly
abandon the sea. Thus there was a nautical strain in the ancestry of
President Jefferson which the critics of his commercial policy quite
overlooked; he himself employed nautical terms in figures of speech
though he was not a good sailor.Captain Randolph probably made lengthy sojourns in England after his
marriage, and upon at least one important occasion he acted there as agent
for his native Province. 27 Sometime before the spring of 1736, he made
his last voyage. William Byrd, then back in Virginia, wrote to an agent in
England: "Sir John Randolph is dead, and unless his brother Isham return
to his own element the sea, I fear he won't survive him many years." 28
Captain Randolph and his family were estab-
25 There are more than forty references to him in Byrd, Diary, 1109-1712,
beginning Feb. 15, 1709. The references to French begin on Jan. 31, 1710.
The more important entries about Isham's ship fall between Mar. 14 and
Oct. 20, 1710. Other references begin in April 1712. For later relations, see
Another Secret Diary of William Byrd of Westover, 1739-1741, ed. by
Maude H. Woodfin, p. xxii, citing unpublished diary Apr. 17, 29, 1719, and
p. 323 n. (Cited hereafter as Byrd, Diary, 1139-1141.)
26 Va. Mag., XXVI, 324.
27 In 1732 he acted for the Council in opposing two bills then pending in
Parliament; Council Journals, Colonial Va., IV, 267, 272.
28 March 20, 1736; Va. Mag., XXXVI, 215. Isham's brother John, living in
Virginia, had been knighted.
lished at Dungeness before this time and had become acquainted with Peter
Jefferson.
By inheritance and grant Isham had become a large landholder in
Goochland. In the year that Peter Jefferson became a magistrate Randolph
got a patent for three thousand acres, and in connection with it he certified
to the importation of forty-nine persons into the Colony. Two years later he
entered into agreements whereby two bond servants, in return for the time
of servitude due him, should make for him respectively one hundred
thousand bricks and two hundred and fifty pairs of shoes. He was carrying
on extensive building operations and supporting a large establishment. In
the year of his daughter's marriage he shared a consignment of three
hundred and eighty Negroes. His son-in-law had preceded him as a pioneer
but had not been in a position to conduct affairs on such a scale. 29
His circle of friends was wider than that of the Jeffersons. To Dungeness in1738 came John Bartram the Pennsylvania botanist, at the suggestion of
Peter Collinson, who had become acquainted with Isham in London. The
correspondent of Benjamin Franklin had recommended to Friend Bartram
that on one leg of his projected journev to Virginia he stop to see Colonel
Byrd at Westover and Colonel John Custis, Junior, at Williamsburg, "both
curious men," and that he then proceed to Isham's place, where he would
receive a warm welcome. 30 Of Bartram's comments on his visit to
Dungeness, and on the botanical excursions which he centered there, the
following would probably have been of greatest interest to Jane Randolph's
plant-loving son. "There grows on the other side of James River," said
Bartram to Colonel Custis, "a little above Isham Randolph's, a tree, the
kind of which is known in Europe by the name of Tlmyja, or Arbor Vitae,
which if thee could procure some seed thereof, if it growed, would be a
curious ornament in thy garden. I doubt not, if thee was to write or speak to
Isham, he would procure thee some." His description of his host to
Collinson as "a generous, good-natured gentleman, and well-respected by
most who are acquainted with him," may sound like faint praise, but at
least it reveals that Isham had the characteristic social virtues of his class.
This friendly man afterwards regretted that he could not entertain his
former guest by sending him the account of some new discovery, and
confessed "the want of a penetrating genius in the curious beauties of
nature." Perhaps he was unduly modest, but
29 Council Journals, Colonial Va., IV, lv, 323, 349; see Appendix I, B, 2;
W. & M., 1st ser., V, 109-110; Byrd, Diary, 1739-1741, p. 14*.
90 Collinson to Bartram, Feb. 17, 1736, in \V. Darlington, Memorials of
]o)m Bartram and Humphrey Marshall, p. B9.
unquestionably his scientific curiosity fell short of that of his grandson. 31
Public service was expected of one with Isham Randolph's family
connections and landed possessions, and he would probably have been
drafted sooner had he settled earlier upon the land. About a year before his
daughter's marriage he was elected a burgess for Goochland County, but
his entire legislative career actually extended to only a few weeks. 32 His
military service was more conspicuous. In the same month that he was
chosen a burgess he was appointed adjutant general of the Colony, and he
held this office until his death four years later. He was expected to go into
the various counties and give instruction in the "form of exercise" that had
been prepared for the soldiers. The Council which appointed him describedhim as a well-known gentleman and universally acceptable in the country.
33 Greater military responsibilities soon fell to his lot. In the year 1740, a
contingent of Virginia troops was raised to serve with the British on the
expedition against the Spanish at Carthagena. Governor Gooch took charge
of these and left the Colony for a year. During his absence Isham Randolph
acted as chief officer of the local militia, and for this reason it has
sometimes been said that he was designated as lieutenant general of the
Colony. 34 There were plenty o f military titles in Thomas Jefferson's anc
estral record . His maternal grandfather may not have been a conspicuously
martial hgure, but at least Isham was a link in a highly honorable military
tradition. His successor as adjutant general was Lawrence Washington, and
when the latter died three years later, the Colony was divided into districts
and four adjutants were appointed. Among these was Lawrence's brother
George. 35
It is difficult to recover the personality of a man from his portrait or his
epitaph. It may be reported, however, that Isham Randolph appeared in a
picture frame as a gentleman in conventional costume, wearing a wig, and
with ruffles at his wrists. His full face implied good living, but it was also
long, and some people might see in it a resemblance to Thomas Jefferson,
even though the latter's nose was rather more uptilted. The epitaph on his
tombstone at Turkey Island says that he possessed the distinguishing
qualities of a gentleman to an eminent
81 Bartram to Custis, Nov. 19, 1738, Ibid., p. 312; Bartram to Collinson,
Dec. 1738, Ibid., pp. 120-122; Isham Randolph to Bartram, May 24, 1739,
Ibid., p. 317.
32 Burgesses, Journals, 1727-1734, 1736-1740, pp. ix, 323, 352. He took
his seat by Nov. 25, 1738, and his last session ended on Aug. 28, 1740.
33 Nov. 9, 1738, Council Journals, Colonial Va., IV, 429; Va. Mag., XIV,
225.
34 June 14, 1740, Council Journals, Colonial Va., V, 20; Byrd, Diary,
1139-1141, June 14, 1740; see also p. 14 72. Byrd was a member of the
Council. For further details see Appendix I, B, 2.
85 Va. Mag., XXXI, 272.degree, and gives further testimony to his good nature. "By an easy
compliance and obliging deportment he knew no enemy, but gained many
friends, thus in his life meriting an universal esteem." He died at the age of
fifty-seven, in November, 1742 —three years after the marriage of his
daughter to Peter Jefferson, and only a few months before the birth of their
first son. 36
Peter was older than the average when he married, just as his father-in-law
had been. His wife had been promised a dowry of two hundred pounds
sterling, but Isham had not paid it by the time he made his will. Jane
Randolph probably took a body servant or so with her but she seems to
have brought her husband no land. That was generally left to sons if there
were any. The rising young planter acquired no fortune\ by his marriage,
but he gained for his unborn children a far more\ extensive and influential
famtfy connection than he himself had enjoyed. J It is likely that the couple
began their married life comfortably bu// modestly at Fine Creek and that
their first two children were born there.
Four or five years before his marriage Peter had staked out a claim on the
Rivanna below the gap in the Southwest Mountains. The date of his earliest
known grant in this remote region was June 14, 1734, when his future wife
was only fourteen. He may have made his surveys before the leaves fell,
and he certainly received a patent for one thousand acres before the passing
of another summer. His tract extended southward from Secretary's Ford
just above the mountains and included the later site of Monticello and a
body of bottom land below the little river. 37 Within a year he began to
look for a more suitable homesite than his own lands afforded. His friend
William Randolph of Tuckahoe, who had probably interested him in this
region in the first place, had acquired lands north of the Rivanna which
were still undeveloped. Peter made a deal whereby he acquired two
hundred acres of these in return for a bowl of arrack punch concocted by
Henry Wetherburn of the Raleigh Tavern in Williamsburg. Not until two
years after his marriage, however, did Peter round out the home tract. He
then acquired two hundred acres more from his friend and made a cash
payment for the whole. Meanwhile, he had patented another small body of
land south of the river. It was probably in the year 1741 that he began
building on a spot whence he could look downward at
86 Portrait, Ibid., XXXIV, opp. p. 183; epitaph, Ibid., XIV, 226 n. For
descendants, see Appendix I, B, 2.37 For details about grants, patents, and other land transactions, see
Appendix II, A.
a stream or upward toward the mountains; and it was here that Thomas was
born two years later.
The domain in this district to which the boy became heir apparent was
modest. The acreage to which Peter had title was not extensive by Virginia
standards and was not immediately increased. In that era of land-grabbing
he received large grants elsewhere but there is no certain way of knowing
how many of these he was ever able to perfect; and on one occasion the all-
powerful Council administered a distinct rebuff by rejecting one of his
petitions as unreasonable. 38 He may have overreached himself, but in
view of the success of others it seems more probable that, despite his
connection with the Randolphs, he lacked influence at the seat of power.
On the whole, he was a modest speculator in land, in comparison with his
mighty contemporaries in the Province, and even with certain of his near
neighbors.
In the Rivanna region, however, he had the distinction of being one of the
first settlers, and this was always a matter of pride to his son. 89 Though
unexpected events interrupted his stay, Peter played an important part in
the organization of a County which boasts many distinguished sons but has
been most glorified by the name of Jefferson. In September, 1744, because
of the inconvenience attending the upper inhabitants of Goochland, the
Assembly provided that after the last day of December the existing County
should be divided and a new one bearing the euphonious name of
Albemarle be formed. Peter Jefferson, who had been a magistrate in the old
County, attended the first meeting for organization in February, 1745, and
took oath as a justice of the peace and a judge of the court of chancery, thus
becoming one of the first magistrates and first gentlemen of the new one.
40 Associated with him on this occasion was Joshua Fry, a former teacher
of mathematics at the College of William and Mary, who was now living
on Hardware River, near Carter's Bridge. 41 In March, Fry became county
surveyor and county lieutenant — that is, the chief officer — while Peter
Jefferson became lieutenant colonel. After a few weeks, however, he
practically ceased attending meetings of the county court in Albemarle, and
he
88 May 15, 1741, Va. Mag., XV, 120-121.3 * Jefferson's statement (Ford, I, 3) that his father was one of the three or
four earliest settlers is approximately correct if applied to the Rivanna
district; but the date which he gives, about 1737, seems too early.
^ *° Hening, V, 266; E. Woods, Albemarle County in Virginia, p. 8
(hereafter cited as Woods, Albemarle). See also M. Rawlings, The
Albemarle of Other Days. The Order Book of the County, 1744-1748, is
preserved in the clerk's office in Charlottesville, but the records from 1748
to 1783 were lost or destroyed during the Revolution.
41 On Fry, see P. Slaughter, Memoir of Joshua Fry.
soon returned to the Goochland side, taking his young family with him. 42
His return was at the request of his friend William Randolph, now also
referred to as "Colonel," who had suffered other misfortunes than that of
becoming his own master too soon. He had married early and well, but by
the age of thirty had become a widower. His wife was the daughter of
Mann Page, whose house at Rosewell in Gloucester County is said to have
contained thirty-five rooms. John Page, the companion of Thomas
Jefferson's youth and young manhood, was her nephew. She had borne
William Randolph two daughters and a son, who was given the names of
his two grandfathers. Thomas Mann Randolph was a couple of years older
than Thomas Jefferson, who could say afterwards that he had known him
all his life. After his wife died, William of Tuckahoe made a will wherein
he named Peter as one of his executors. Three years later, foreseeing his
approaching death, he added a codicil in which he included the request that
his "dear and loving friend" should move down with his own family to the
Tuckahoe house and remain there until Randolph's son was grown. 48
In the technical sense Peter Jefferson was not the guardian of Thomas
Mann Randolph, but the children remained at Tuckahoe with the Jefferson
family. Large monetary bequests had been made to the girls and the
balance of the estate was to go to the son. As the resident executor Peter
was the custodian of the land, and in the practical sense he was far more
than a guardian. 44 His economic status was considerably more modest
than that of William Randolph, but in view of his standing as magistrate
and friend it seems impossible that he could have been asked to assume an
undignified position. In general he did such things at Tuckahoe as the
master himself would have done had he been there, doubtless doing most ofthem a good deal better. It is surprising, however, that he should have been
willing to leave his own lands in order to care for those of another. Besides
being an act of loyal friendship, his move must have seemed advantageous
to both families.
42 He attended on July 25, 1745, but was absent thereafter until July 10,
1746, and was not among the newly commissioned justices who met on
Nov. 13, 1746 (Albemarle County Order Book).
"Will dated Mar. 2, 1742; codicil, July 20, 1745; recorded Nov. 19, 1745,
William Randolph being then dead; proved May 20, 1746 (Goochland
County Will & Deed Book, No. 5, p. 73; attested copy UVA; summarized
in Va. Mag., XXXII, 394-395).
44 His Account Book, 1728-1755 in Henry E. Huntington Library, San
Marino, California (HEH), photostat UVA, shows transactions on behalf of
the estate but does not lend itself to ready summary.
He directed the activities of at least seven overseers at Tuckahoe and
reported the production of far more tobacco on Colonel Randolph's quarters
than he could have expected from his own fields in Albemarle. 45 His
smaller holdings there were still largely forested and he probably thought it
desirable to leave the task of pioneering to an overseer and his gang.
Planters often did that before moving their families into new lands in the
Piedmont. 46 While at Tuckahoe he could keep his eye on his Fine Creek
property, which lay near one of the Randolph quarters. Peter Jefferson kept
his accounts methodically, as his son did afterwards, but those which
remain do not reveal how much he received for his services to the estate.
The traditional report that he got only his living expenses is probably
correct, 47 but the food and lodging of his growing family constituted a
considerable item and he was unquestionably a more prosperous man after
this period than he had been before. P* Though he did not stay as long as
William of Tuckahoe had desired, /he guarded the land and the heir for six
or seven years altogether. 48 Thus it came about that the home of Thomas
Jefferson's earliest remembrance was a Randolph place. The Colonel
achieved his reputation as an explorer while they were all living there.
Then, during the few \ years that remained to him after their return to
Albemarle, he gained 1 greater local prominence and developed the estate
which his son I inherited.45 In the years 1745-1751 the eight "quarters" produced 629 hhds. and
667,336 lbs. of tobacco.
46 T. J. Wertenbaker, Old South, p. 118, citing the example of the
Reverend Robert Rose; T. P. Abernethy, Three Virginia Frontiers, p. 46.
47 Randail, I, 11; S. N. Randolph, Domestic Life of Thomas Jefferson
(cited hereafter as Domestic Life), p. 23.
48 Various entries in his Account Book show that he maintained a
connection with the estate even after he had returned to Albemarle.
M
The Services of Peter Jefferson 1745-1757
THE EARLIEST recollection of Thomas Jefferson was of being carried on
a pillow by a mounted slave on the journey from Shadwell to Tuckahoe.
The circumstances must have been specially/ impressive, for he was only
two or three years old at the time. 1 He* had now ceased to be the youngest
member of the family but he was still the only boy. At the age of twenty
months he had acquired a. third sist er, and a fourth was born shortly after
he turned three . Two more boys were born at Tuckahoe, but one lived only
a few weeks and the other did not survive a day. The five young Jeffersons
and the three young Randolphs comprised a good-sized group of children,
and doubtless a lively one. 2
If the house was then completed in its historic external form, as seems
probable, they could have lived almost as two separate families, thereby
diminishing domestic confusion to some degree. It had two distinct wings
which were connected by a large room or salon, and thus it assumed the
shape of the letter "H." One of the wings had brick ends, but otherwise it
was a frame structure, painted white. At that time it may not have contained
the fine paneling and rich stairways which were seen in it later, but the
rooms had high ceilings and were airy. Jefferson was there as a little boy
and he often stopped with Thomas Mann Randolph after he grew up, but he
saw no reason to describe such a familiar house in letters. Architecture of
this sort did not impress him after he was attracted to classic columns and
had1 Family tradition as given by Randall, I, 11; Domestic Life, p. 6.
2 Peter JefTetson's tecords of tobacco at Tuckahoe begin with the year
1745, and the family probably left Shadwell before the birth of Martha on
May 29, 1746. They had undoubtedly moved before Sept. 12, 1746, when
the Colonel set out on a surveying expedition. On the children, sec
Appendix I, C.
begun to dream of stateliness; but this home of his first memories, set
above a greater stream than the Rivanna, always must have seemed an
exceedingly pleasant place. 8
Colonel Jefferson was directly charged to carry out William Randolph's
instructions about the education of his son. The heir was not to be sent to
the College of William and Mary or to England on any account whatever,
but private tutors were to be employed for his instruction. Thus the credible
tradition arose that young Tom Jefferson first studied u nder young Tom
Randolph's teacher in a little house 'still standing in the yard. This part of
his education he afterwards described as "the English school," without
giving any details. Presumably, the tutor taught the boys and girls together,
as Philip Fithian did in the household of Councillor Robert Carter at
Nomini Hall; but even in that case this class, like all the others he was ever
a member of, was small. 4 In the absence of authentic information, his
boyhood and schooldays at Tuckahoe must be left to the imagination. It is
said that once, when desperate with hunger, he fervently repeated the
Lord's .Prayer in the hope of hastening a meal. 8 The implication is clear
that he received conventional religious instruction, but there is certainly no
suggestion that there was any shortage of food. In this and in other respects
his father was a good provider.
— Peter Jefferson was more than that. He was not merely providing a
comfortable home for his family while doing a service to a dead friend. He
was also venturing far from the tobacco fields upon occasion and carving a
reputation for himself out of the wilderness. If his career is at all
memorable for its own sake, and not solely as a brief prologue to one that
was illustrious, it is because of what he did as a surveyor of boundaries and
a maker of maps during the years that he I had headquarters at Tuckahoe.
This record of exploits and achieve-1 ments constituted, also, the most
distinctive part of the heritage that he /transmitted to his descendants.>We have a detailed account of one of the expeditions he went on. His son
was not yet four years old when Peter helped mark what was
8 On the Tuckahoe Randolphs see Appendix I, B, 1. An admirable recent
description of the place, with abundant illustrations, is in T. T. Waterman,
The Mansions of Virginia, pp. 85-92.
4 Peter Jefferson's Account Book, Aug. 30, 1750, and May 11, 1752, shows
payments to John Staples for teaching Thomas Mann Randolph. No
mention is made of any other pupil but, since these financial records are
incomplete, this need not argue against the credibility of the tradition.
Staples appears elsewhere as an assistant surveyor.
•Randall, I, 17; Domestic Life, p. 8. The story is slightly different in the
two versions.
known afterwards as the Fairfax Line. It is a pity that the boy was not old
enough to hear the story of this hazardous adventure while the father's
memory of it was fresh. The Colonel was never much of y a talker,
however; h e was a man of action.
Between the Potomac and the Rappahannock lay the vast domain of Lord
Fairfax known as the Northern Neck. It was a part of the Province of
Virginia so far as government was concerned, but title to the soil lay with
the Proprietor. The western limits of this princely estate were long the
subject of dispute; but finally, by order of the Privy Council, the boundary
was drawn for seventy-six miles between the headspring of the
Rappahannock, that is, the source of the Conway or Rapidan, across
mountain ranges and primeval wilderness to the headspring of the Potomac,
which was already marked. This was the Fairfax Line. 6
The members of the expedition who assembled below the Blue Ridge in
September, 1746, comprised some forty men, and at the start they had
about that many horses. There were commissioners for the Crown and for
Lord Fairfax, the former including Joshua Fry of Albemarle County, and
there were surveyors who had been deputed by these gentlemen. Colonel
Jefferson and Robert Brooke had been named for the Crown, Captain
Benjamin Winslow and Thomas Lewis for the Proprietor. It was Lewis
who recorded in crude but graphic language the story of the journey. The
journey out, from the head of the Conway (Rapidan) to the headspring ofthe Potomac, where they drank the King's health and set up the Fairfax
stone, required four weeks. The trip back to the starting point, where they
drank healths even more lustily and set up another stone, took three. 7
The preparations had been elaborate but this was no pleasure trip even for
the commissioners, who generally went with the baggage by the easiest
route. Colonel Jefferson and the other surveyors had to follow the direct
line wherever it went, though they always remained mounted as long as
they could. It took them over successive ranges of mountains that were
"prodigiously full of fallen timber and ivey," up and down precipices where
the horses slipped and fell, and through swamps of laurel which appeared
impenetrable. One dreadful place they called Purgatory and one stream,
dismal enough "to strike terror in any human creature," they named the
Styx. 8 Several of the unfor-
• Fairfax Harrison, "The Northern Neck Maps of 1737-1747," XV. & M., 2
ser., IV, 1-15 (Jan. 1924).
7 The Fairfax Line: Thomas Lewis's Journal of 1746, with footnotes and
index by J- W. Wavland, a minor classic of American exploration.
8 Ibid., p. 29, a particularly graphic passage.
tunate horses were killed, and all of them nearly starved. The surveyors
suffered repeated falls and were in constant danger. One of them fainted in
a swamp, which almost became his tomb. Colonel Jefferson and Captain
Winslow were older than the other two and they generally went together
when the group worked in pairs. For Peter at thirty-nine the expedition was
a feat of endurance, but the only sign of weakness he gave was that once he
was "much indisposed."
Thomas Jefferson never stood on the top of the Alleghanies where his
father crossed, nor saw the initials "P. J." carved on a beech near the
Fairfax Stone. The information about the topography of his native region
which he incorporated in his Notes on Virginia was gained from several
sources, but from his father he could have learned that the mountains are
"not solitary and scattered confusedly over the face of the country," but are
"disposed in ridges one behind another." 9 He appears not to have referred
in writing to his father's connection with the Fairfax Line, but undoubtedly
he knew of Peter's victories over the wilderness and was heartened bythem, though he himself was an explorer and a pioneer of another sort.
On November 15,1746, after the senior surveyor for the Crown had carved
his initials on a birch tree near the head of Conway, he set out for home.
The other surveyors joined him at Tuckahoe early in the new year, and by
the last week in February their joint labors were completed. At a greater
age Tom would have been deeply interested in their doings. The map of the
Northern Neck that was sent to England was described as drawn by Peter
Jefferson and Robert Brooke. For the region east of the Blue Ridge they
followed the earlier map of Mayo but they incorporated enough new
material about the Valley of Virginia to give their own map the value of a
source record. Needless to say, this map showed for the first time the
Fairfax Line. 10
The name of Joshua Fry is linked with that of Peter Jefferson in the most
important of the latter's activities as a surveyor. In effect if not in fact the
two men constituted a partnership. Somewhat more than three years after
they helped set up the Fairfax Stone, they surveyed the dividing line
between Virginia and North Carolina for ninety miles beyond the point
where William Byrd and his fellow commissioners had left it a score of
years before. Unfortunately, no chronicler was present to record their
exploits, and, except for his "plan," such docu-
9 Ford, III, 101.
10 Fairfax Harrison in W. & M., 2 ser., IV, 10-11; "Documents Relating to
the Boundary of the Northern Neck," Va. Mag., XXVIII, 297-299:
Calendar Va. State Papers, I (1875), 239-240.
ments as the junior surveyor left appear to have been destroyed. 11 The
Byrd party had carried the line to Peter's Creek. In the fall of 1749 Colonel
Fry and Colonel Jefferson extended it to Steep Rock Creek, in what is now
Washington County. The plan itself shows that they crossed New River and
many small streams and several ranges of mountains. The hardships and
perils that they met must have been talked about in Tom's presence, for
they became a tradition in his family. Years later his grandchildren
repeated stories which must have come through him: that these men had to
defend themselves against wild beasts by day, and to sleep in the trees at
night; that their provisions ran low and they had to live on raw flesh; that
Peter's courage did not fail when his companions fainted from exhaustionbeside him. 12 He and Fry went further than they had gone when drawing
the Fairfax Line and both of them were now older. For their extraordinary
trouble and painful service, however, they did not go unrewarded. Before
the end of the year they reported their proceedings to the Council, produced
an account of their expenses, and presented their maps. 13 Then the
members of that body unanimously agreed that each of them was deserving
of three hundred pounds sterling beyond all expenses. Nor were their
abilities forgotten. Some months later the Acting Governor, following a
directive from the Lords of Trade, selected them as the best qualified
persons to draw a map of the inhabited part of Virginia. In October, 1751,
the Honorable Lewis Bur-well, whose daughter was wooed unsuccessfully
by the son of Peter Jefferson, asked the opinion of the Council in regard to
their compensation. Each was thought deserving of one hundred and fifty
pounds sterling for his expense and trouble. 14
Their map was done by that time, and, unlike the original materials on
which it was based, it has withstood the ravages of fire and time for the
simple reason that it was printed. It appeared in London in 1751; and a
second edition, containing improvements by John Dalrvmplc, chiefly in the
form of wagon roads, was issued four years later. 1 ' This
11 The "plan," showing the part of the line drawn in 1728 as well as that
drawn in 1749, is at UVA. The expedition appears to have been authorized
by the Governor and Council, hence there need have been no Legislative
act. None has been found, at any rate.
12 Domestic Life, pp. 19-20.
13 Dec. 13, 1749; Council Journals, Colonial l'a., V, 310.
14 Oct. 15, 1751; Ibid., V, 354.
15 Copy of first edition, UVA. In later editions it appears as a map of the
"most" inhabited part of Virginia. Some copies have the erroneous dare
1775. I'Of comments see E. G. Swem, "Maps relating to Virginia," etc..
Bulletin, l'S7., VII. \
3, April, July, 1914; P. L. Phillips, "Virginia Cartography," Smithsonian
MtSCtU laneous Collections, XXXVII (Washington, 1896;; Vj. Mj^..
XXX, 205. I he mapsecond map was reproduced in successive atlases, and its superiority to all
others up to the time that Thomas Jefferson compiled his Notes on Virginia
was generally recognized. For geographical knowledge of his
fl native country, therefore, he and his contemporaries were deeply
indebted to his father. John Henry, father of Patrick, published a map in
1770, but this was not based on original surveys and it has generally been
regarded as an inaccurate compilation. 16 Jefferson subscribed for it, but he
probably had no more respect for it than he had for the legal
\J training of John Henry's son. 17
Soon after his map was published, Peter returned to Shadwell from
Tuckahoe. His record of the tobacco crops on Colonel Randolph's quarters
ends with 1751; thenceforth he farmed his own lands and rounded out his
own estate. He drew no more major boundary lines, but he was county
surveyor in Goochland that year; he was again a magistrate of Albemarle
by the following spring, and a couple of years after that he became county
surveyor there in succession to Joshua Fry, who had just died at Fort
Cumberland while commanding the Virginia forces on the frontier. 18
George Washington was his lieutenant. Fry has been credited with being
the chief constructive influence in the life of Peter Jefferson, and not
improperly. His good will continued to manifest itself after he was dead.
He named his associate an executor of his will, left him the surveying
instruments which they had used together, and in effect bequeathed him his
major public offices. 19
Colonel Jefferson had been made the second military officer of Albemarle
when the County was formed. He now succeeded Fry as county lieutenant
and also as a member of the House of Burgesses. He served during two
sessions of the Assembly in 1754 and 1755 but presumably he did not stand
for re-election. 20 His legislative career was
appeared in Thomas Jefferys, A General Topography of North America and
the West Indies (1768) and American Atlas (1775 and 1782); in W. Faden,
North American Atlas (1777); in Thomas Jefferson's Notes on Virginia,
and elsewhere.
16 Phillips, p. 56. For an ironical contemporary comment, see William
Rind, Va. Gazette, Sept. 27, 1770, communication signed "Geographicus."17 Account Book, Apr. 6, 1768.
18 Peter Jefferson took the oath as county surveyor in Goochland on Aug.
20, 1751 (Goochland Order Book No. 7, p. 73). On the list of justices in
Albemarle, in Council Journals, Colonial Va., Apr. 30, 1752, his name was
second, being just below that of Fry. Beginning in May, 1754, the surveys
in this county were made by him and his assistants (Albemarle Surveyor's
Book No. 1, Sect. 2, p. 288). The assistants, Thomas Turpin, John Smith,
and John Staples, did most of the work, but surveyor's fees were owing him
at the time of his death.
19 Fairfax Harrison, in W. & M., 2 ser., IV, 15; Slaughter, pp. 35-37.
20 Burgesses, Journals, 1752-1755, 1756-1758, pp. vii, 211, 214, 235, 484.
There is an order from him as county lieutenant in Va. Mag., XXTI1,
173-175; see also The Cabells and Their Kin, p. 77; and, on the functions
of a county lieutenant, Calendar of Virginia State Papers, I, xxi-xxv.
Details of his local activities in these years
approximately as brief and unimportant as that of his father-in-law Isham
Randolph, but his service as county lieutenant appears to have lasted until
the end of his life. He did nothing in particular in the French and Indian
War, but he was the chief officer and the first citizen of the County. During
much of this time Tom was away from home, at school in Goochland, but
when the boy returned to look at the mountains and flourish in the sunshine
of Albemarle there could be no doubt of his established position in the
community.
Tom was about nine years old when the family moved back to .ShadwelL /
Not until after his fathers death five years later did he ^observe the full
procession of the seasons in Albemarle; but he was here _during vacations
at least, and henceforth this place was home . It provided the domestic
background of his life until he was twenty-seven. No mansion ever stood
on this homesite but his father erected a sub-stantial group of plantation
buildings before he died. 21 He either enlarged the little house in which the
boy had been born or built another wooden structure for the central unit;
and he added a dairy, smokehouse, and other outbuildings of the sort until
he had a frontage of more than two hundred feet above the river. To the
southward the land sloped for several hundred yards to the Rivanna, where
he had a water mill. This occupied a good deal of his son's attention, lateron. The Three Notched Road passed the place on the north much as the
highway does today and, proceeding westward through the gap, crossed the
stream at the Secretary's Ford.
The ridge of the Southwest Mountains, which is broken at this gap, enters
the present County in the extreme northeast and there it reaches its greatest
height, fifteen hundred feet, in a knob which came to be called Peter's
Mountain for Colonel Jefferson. As his son said, all the Virginia mountains
run in the same direction, from northeast to southwest, but these, being the
first discovered, appropriated the hitter name to themselves. 22 The range
roughly parallels the Blue Ridge, about twenty miles away. On its sl op^ T
n m hunted, and beneath them many of the first plantation houses
nestled,,There may have been better sites
are scanty because of the gap in the Albemarle County records, but his
prominence is unquestionable.
21 The accounts of Fiske Kimball, Va. Mag., I.I, 313-325, and M.iric
Kimball, Jefferson: The Road to Glory, pp. 20-23, replace the hitherto
iccepced description in Randall, I, 2. On the basis of excavations, Mrs.
Kimball believes that the line of buildings ran east and west and that the
main house faced south. Eutlllivc building operations were carried on in
17> 3 and thereafter.
22 To Chastellux, Sept. 2, 1785, Bixby. p. 13. See also E. C Mead, Historic
Homes of the South-West Mountains, Virginia.
on the western side, whence the eye could command the Blue Ridge, but
settlers had been attracted first to the eastern, which faced the sunrise.
Properties ran in generous strips from the wooded summits to the lowlands.
The largest of these dated back to a grant of more than thirteen thousand
acres to Nicholas Meriwether which was referred to as "the Grant" because
it was so early and so huge. This included the site of Castle Hill, some eight
miles from Shadwell, though no plantation house had been erected there as
yet. A considerable part of this lordly estate eventually came into the
possession of Dr. Thomas Walker. 23 Wherever he may have been living
when the Jeffersons came back, he soon served Peter as a friend and his son
John afterwards, became intimate with Tom. Closer at hand was John
Harvie, who had, bought lands adjoining the William Randolph property. It
is uncertain just when he built Belmont but from an early time he was anear neighbor — as nearness was understood in Albemarle.
The Shadwell tract proper consisted of only four hundred acres but Colonel
Jefferson soon purchased the place on the same side of the river that was
later known as Pantops. His son always liked this because of its
magnificent view. South of the river Peter's lands stretched toward Carter's
Mountai n and included not only the site o f Monticello but also a small
tract which he had patented in 1740 and wnich was known as Portobello.y
ro this he now added another of the same size called ~ Tufton. He also
patented a body of woodland which is identified on Thomas Jefferson's
land roll as "Pouncey's." Approximately two thousand six hundred and fifty
acres that the latter afterwards held in this part of the County were acquired
by his father. 24 Peter Jefferson was also increasing his holdings and
developing his lands in another part of Albemarle. Three more children
joined the family after the removal from Tuckahoe, including the twins,
one of whom was a boy named Randolph. Peter built up for his sons two
estates of practically the same size, one centering at Shadwell and the other
on the South Fork of the James, sometimes called the Fluvanna.
Soon after the County was formed the Assembly had empowered him,
Joshua Fry, and others to expend one hundred pounds in clearing the latter
stream of rocks, which in several places obstructed navigation. 25 It was
broader than the North Branch or Rivanna and, unlike it, served an
important function in starting the money crop on the way to market. While
the Jeffersons were still at Tuckahoe there had been
23 Natalie J. Disbrow, "Thomas Walker of Albemarle," in Papers of
Albemarle Historical Society, I (Charlottesville, 1941), 5-18, with abundant
references.
24 See Appendix II, A, and B, 1.
25 February, 1745, Hening, V, 377-378.
a notable advance in the use of canoes above the fall line. This was owing
to the ingenuity of the Reverend Robert Rose, a large planter, who lashed
two of these "tottering vehicles" together and thus enabled them to carry
eight or nine hogsheads of tobacco at a time without tipping. 26 Peter's
tobacco from the Rivanna district had to go by land, either by wagon or by
the crude method of rolling in specially constructed hogsheads, but he wasable to employ water transportation on the Fluvanna. His main place there
he named Snowdon after the mountain in Wales near the reputed home of
his ancestors. In his lifetime the Fluvanna district was the more important
part of the County. The courthouse was there, near the present town of
Scottsville. He was one of the persons who had determined the location,
and he owned houses at the ferry crossing which he leased to the keeper of
an ordinary. 27 This was about twenty-five miles from Shadwell. _Not until
the reg ion, hplnw rhp Fluvanna had heen separ ated from _Albemarle T
after Thomas TerTerson went to college, was the town of^ rharWrp<;vi11p
established by law and the courthouse located there. 28 It was built on its
present site, about four miles west of Shadwell. This was too late to do
Peter Jefferson any good but it was a convenience to his son as a practising
lawyer. Even during the Revolution the county seat contained little besides
a courthouse, a tavern, and a dozen houses. A traveler then observed that
the region, when viewed from one of its many eminences, appeared as a
vast forest, interspersed with plantations four or five miles apart and
resembling small villages. 29 This was no land of bustling towns, nor
predominantly of small, 4 farms. As a rule holdings were larger than in the
Shenandoah Valley, though smaller than in Tidewater. When Peter
Jefferson knew the region and his son was a boy, this was a silent country
of far-flung patriarchal seats, though these were without architectural
pretension. Afterwards, plain farmhouses on smaller clearings increased in
number.
In the bottoms and on the lower slopes the red soil was rich in its virginal
state, before it was exhausted by tobacco or ravaged by ero-
26 T. J. Wertenbaker, Old South, p. 129, citing diary of Robert Rose, Mar.
16, June 27, 1749; James Maury, letter of Jan. 10, 1756, in Ann Maury, cd.,
.\Jc?noirs of a Huguenot Family, p. 388.
2T John Harvie's Account Book, HEH., photostat UYA., pp. 12, 49.
28 November, 1762, Hening, VII, 597. The act dividing the County and
forming Buckingham and Amherst was in March, 1761; Ibid., VII, 419.
Part of it had been added to Bedford in 1754, Ibid., VI 441.
29 Thomas Anburey, Travels (1923), II, 184, 187. On the region generally,
see Abernethy, Three Virginia Frontiers, ch. 2. Charles W. Warts, after
careful study of the holdings, concludes that they declined in size in the
generation before Revolution, and that in 1781 they stood approximatelyhalfway between a comparable Tidewater county (James City) and
Augusta, in the Valley.
sion. The temperate climate was favorable to Virginia's historic crop, and
also to the fruit trees and grains which Peter Jefferson's son afterwards
encouraged, while the dogwood, the redbud, and the shadbush made this a
sylvan Paradise in spring. By all prevailing standards the district was
healthful. The inhabitants often spoke of themselves as mountaineers and
congratulated themselves on their freedom from agues and fevers. Before
Thomas Jefferson was grown one of them said: "The descent of our lands is
so quick, that morasses are scarcely known among us, and the rapidity of
our waters so great that none of them has leisure to stagnate." 30 But the
very rapidity of these waters increased the difficulties of transportation —
which, more than any other single factor, distinguished the Piedmont from
the region of the lower James. The large planters had slaves to perform the
cruder tasks of pioneering, and they brought with them the agricultural
economy and the social traditions of Tidewater; but in this isolated region
they could not reproduce precisely the life of Westover or Turkey Island, or
even of Tuckahoe. Styles were simpler here, self-sufficiency was more
imperative, and one might expect an even more notable spirit of personal
independence to be engendered.
For years after Peter Jefferson became a magistrate wolf bounties were
listed at sessions of the county court — seventy pounds of tobacco for a
young wolf and twice that much for an old one. There were no Indians here
when the first settlers came, and during the French an( Indian War this was
not among the frontier counties but in the tier just before them. Fears ot
raids were v oiced at that time but thisT TacT Jceased to be a frontier
region in tne p recise sense. Despite its vast body of uncleared lands it had
an ordered, it dispersed, society. Nevertheless, residents of Albemarle
remembered that Joshua Fry and Peter Jefferson had penetrated uncharted
country, and men associated with the County followed their example.
Thomas Walker of Castle Hill carried on the dividing line from the point
where they had left it; and George Rogers Clark, who was born across the
Southwest Mountains from Shadwell just about the time that Peter
returned, conquered the Northwest during the Revolution. His younger and
equally redheaded hrnt-hpr y^' 11 ' 0 ™ r1 flrfri y* c born in another county
after his family had left this one, but Meriwether Lewis, w hose name is
linked with his in the history of exploration, was a native. Under thedirection of P resident Jefferson they crossed a continent. T he tradition ot
the wilderness persisted in Albemarle.
30 James Maury, June 15, 1760, in Memoirs of a Huguenot Family, p. 414.
Many references to the healthfulness of the region can be found in
Jefferson's own writings.
In this congenial locality Peter Je fferson kept on surveying lands and
developing his farms until his great strength began to fail. Despite his
reputed ability to "head up" two hogsheads of tobacco at the same time, he
died when he was still less than fifty. 31 His elder son, then lanlfy a t
fourteen, was never to be quite that strong but was destined to live much
longer.y Perhaps the sire had given too freely of a strength that had seemed
so abundant; perhaps he had exposed himself to too many hardships. Or it
may be that the unknown malady which assailed him in the summer of
1757 could have been cured at a later stage in
j:he progress of medicine. ^ There were only two physicians in the County"
at the time and their practice was incidental. Dr. Walker, who attended him,
is best known to history as an explorer and land-speculator. His
professional visits to his friend were numerous and his services were as
skillful as could have been expected. 82 They were unavailing, how-
_ever 7 for the patient died on August 17.
i He had become a man o f substantial propert y, though it would be an
exaggeration to call him a land baron, ihe kivanna and riuvanna tracts
together comprised not far from five thousand acres and he had at least half
that many more, chiefly in the County as then constituted.* 8 He also had
certain speculative claims, including an interest in the Loyal Land
Company with Dr. Walker and others. For his time he was not much of a
speculator, however, and his son was never one at all. The list of his slaves
is impressive; he had more than sixty of them, along with twenty-five
horses, seventy head of cattle, and two hundred hogs. These and other
material details were revealed by the inventory of his considerable estate;
and the will which he drew a few months before he died discloses the
careful provisions he made for the future welfare of his wife, his two sons,
and his six daughters. 84
He pre scribed an eminently fair distribution. He provided for his wire byleaving her tor her lifetime the house and plantation at Shad-well, together
with a sufficient portion of the slaves, stock, and horses. He left to each of
his children a body servant, and to each of his daughters a carefully
safeguarded portion of two hundred pounds to be paid within a year of her
marriage or twenty-first birthday. He fully maintained the standard of
Isham Randolph and lie was determined that future husbands should not be
kept waiting. He did not
81 The family traditions are given by Randall, I, 13.
32 Archibald Henderson, in Proceedings American Antiquarian Society,
n.s.. XII (1932), 84-85.
83 See Appendix II, A.
84 Will dated July 13, 1757; proved Oct. 13, 1757. It and the inventory arc
in Will Book, No. 2, Albemarle County, pp. 32-34, 41-47; copies at L'VA.
weigh the scales heavily in favor of the elder son, and none of the pr operty
was entailed. That son did not forget the lesson.
when he became twentyone Thomas was to have either the lands, on the
Kivanna or the Fluvanna a s he should rhnose, along wjth a proper share of
the livestock, half of the slaves not otherwise disposed of, and the residue
of the estate. T he lands that he did not choose were to go ultimately to his
brother Randolph, along with a similar portion of the slaves and stock. As
the residuary legatee he got the larger share, but the distribution of property
between him and his young brother was certainly far more equitable than
the distribution of talents. Thomas. also got his father's books,
mathematical instruments, cherry-tree desk and bookcase; and his
designated servant, the "mulatto fellow Sawney," was the most valuable
slave.
The estate was a going concern during the remaining years of his minority
and provided for the family comfortably. John Harvie was the working
executor. There were fewer overseers than there had been at Tuckahoe —
generally there were three; and the tobacco crop was only about half of
what had come from Colonel Randolph's quarters, though much corn was
raised and sold. Food, fuel, and some clothing came from the place, and the
actual monetary requirements were slight by any modern standard. Eve nafter his death, Peter Jefferson continued to be a grood provider^ He had
selected men of substance as his executors. Young Thomas Jefferson
consulted John Harvie and Colonel Peter Randolph occasionally and he
maintained affectionate relations with Thomas Turpin, who was his uncle
by marriage; but the one with whom he had most to do in later years was
Thomas Walker. 35
f Not until he was grown could Thomas Jefferson do anything about / the
land and the slaves his father left him. It is uncertain just when he / began
to use the mathematical instruments that he inherited, but he was interested
in surveying throughout his maturity. In spirit at least he could follow the
trail across untrodden mountains; and as a draftsman, drawing plats and
house plans, he was also his father's son. He probably used the cherry-tree
desk in posting early accounts, as he had so often seen the Colonel do. One
reason for leaving him the bookcase was that he had gone to it very
frequently already. The forty volumes he is
Lknown to have inherited constituted an insignificant library in the light of
his mature standards, but they formed the nucleus of his first collection.
85 For details about the executors and later operations, see Appendix, II, A.
One can assume nothing in particular about the first master of Shad-well
from the inventory list. 30 Bible and prayer book were there, as in almost
every planter's library, along with books useful to a magistrate. There were
several volumes of Addison and of English history, a work in astronomy,
some books of a geographical nature, and six or eight maps. Thomas
Jefferson's statement in old age abou t his father's neglected education must
be coupled with the further comment that ne had strong native intelligence
and impro ved himself. This is certainly not to say, however, that this
practical and mathematical man ever became an inveterate reader. There
were reputable planters who had fewer books than he, but he did not have
many. His major acquisitions were of another sort and his achievements
were out of doors. _ Upon the face of the record r his rhief legacy to
Thomas was "an established position in society and the means to maintain
it, but ior^ that alone he would never have been honored in his son's
memory as * /he was. Thomas Jefferson did not set that much store on
inherited privilege.Jr le may have imbibed certain democratic attitudes
from his L father, for the Colonel had associated with crude men on the
frontier and in the wilderness and the tradition is that he understood andvalued them. This surveyor of boundaries may have been critical of the
group within which he had established himself more firmly than any of his
ancestors had done. His son, in thoughtful maturity, was not at all
displeased by memories of his indifference to social trappings. But Peter
Jefferson exemplified the qualities of the ruling group which were really
vital. From his career his heir might have observed that the aristocracy of
Virginia had not yet grown old, that it was still close to the soil from which
it sprang, that it continued to maintain a high sense of public responsibility.
This st rong and vi gorous man may ha* T e , b^ pn — Hff[rjpnr jn the
^fm^nrrrmr, Mr E5 flmhnrlir d the tnndamental qualities [lieh enabled this
society to endure^ '
For all his lack of book learning he deeply appreciated it, and it was \ : m
ore than anyone else w h o caused his son to be well schooled. The idinon
is that his dy ing instruction was that the boy should receive thorough
classical education^ a nd Thomas himself said that he was more grateful for
this than for all the other privileges whic h his father's care ha d placed
within his reach/ ' If he had to choose between his estate and a liberal
education he would have taken the latter, but n hoice was necessary, for he
was given both.
86 Reproduced in Va. Mag., X, 391. The works of Shakespeare were not
included, despite the tradition.
37 Randall, I, 18; to Joseph Priesdey, Jan. 27, 1800 (L. & B., X, 147).
C"0
Schooldays in Albemarle 1757-1760
T ]QM had no masculine companionship within the family after the death
of his father. H e had been separated from the Colonel much of the time
during the past five years and he said relatively little about him afterwards,
but undoubtedly he missed him. Latein life he said that from the age of
fourteen his whole care and direction were thrown _qji himself, since he
had no relative or friend who was qualified to advise or guide him. 1 This
was an overstatement^ The loss of his father created a chasm in his life
which remained unfilled until his years in Williamsburg, when he found
mature counselors whom he honored unreservedly; but in the meantime heconsulted the executors occasionally, and he probably did not intend to
reflect upon them or upon his mother.
He said much less about Jane Randolph Jefferson, however, than about his
father. He acknowledged that she had an ancient pedigree — probably
regarding this as a more important fact in his early manhood than he did
later on. 2 Various entries in his financial records after he became a man
reveal his solicitude for her welfare, and his almost complete failure to
mention her name elsewhere may be attributed to his characteristic
reticence about the women of his family - Nevertheless^ the only remark he
is known to have made about her influence was negative, and he probably
did not value her counsel very highly. time in his life did he t urn towomen
for serious advice, anyw ay. She" may nave remembered and sometimes
mentioned to him the parish in London for which their place had been
named. Perhaps she talked occasionally of her father's friends William
Byrd and Peter Collinson, thus serving to link her son with the worlds of
polite learning and scientific
1 To T. J. Randolph, Nov. 24, 1808 (Ford, IX, 231). 2 "Autobiography,"
Ford, I, 2.
curiosity. As a man of science and learning, however, he gained his
(/chief inspiration elsewhere. He must have inherited some of his diverse J
talent from his mother, but there is no positive testimony about her I
personality, and she remains a shadowy figure. S- The family tradition was
that she was affectionate, cheerful, humox -ous, and a ready wr iter. 3 It has
also been supposed that she was of more delicate moid tnan her husband,
but almos t the only thing about her that we can be sure or is that she had
ph y sical endurance beyond the average. She suffered inevitable hardships
m connection with successive moves; she bore ten children altogether and
brought up eight of them; and she survived her husband. He was
considerably older than she, but in those days of incessant childbearing
women were often worn out a great deal sooner. She was thirty-seven when
Peter died and she lived ni neteen years mo re, remai ning a widow longer
than she_ had been a wil e. .He x death happened to occur in the year that
her elder son wrote the De claration of Independence and the youngest of
her children, the twins, attained their majority; but she did not l ive quite
long enough to rejoice in either of these events.Because of the death of two infant boys at Tuckahoe, daughters
predominated in the household and there was a distinct gap between the
five older children and the three younger, who were born after the return to
Shadwefl. 4 Of the younger group, Lucy was less than five when her father
died and Anna Scott and Randolph were under two. In his teens Tom
probably had little to do with these babies, and he never found real
congeniality with Randolph. The five older children, Jane, Mary, Thomas,
Elizabeth, and Martha, were born within a period of six years and it is no
wonder that their mother did not do so well thereafter. In this group there
was one case of obvious inequality. Whether she exhausted herself in
bearing Thomas, or there was some mishap in the next delivery, the child
she bore just after him was subnormal. The later story of this unfortunate
girl can wait, but at least it can be said here that Elizabeth Jefferson
afforded little companionship to her well-endowed brother.
Less than three years after her father's death the second daughter, "Mary,
married and left home, the dowry of two hundred pounds being duly paid
to John Boiling. In a history of his family, printed a century later,* it is said
that he was six feet high and very large, and that he cared little for the
ladies until he saw "his lady." Says this quaint record: "After many sighs,
&c, he married Miss Jefferson, daughter of that Jefferson who, with Mr.
Fry, made a map of Virginia." A footnote
8 Randall, I, 15-17.
4 For detailed information see Appendix I. C.
adds that she was a sister of the late President of the United States. 8 At the
time of his marriage John Boiling was living in Goochland, which he
afterwards represented in the House of Burgesses, and served as sheriff. He
had a place called Fairfield, where his young brother-in-law appears to
have stopped on his way to and from Williamsburg in student days. The
roof was leaky and the young visitor was plagued with rats, but John
Boiling was of the gentry and ultimately was called "Colonel," after he had
moved to Chesterfield. Alary Jefferson had married well, and bore children
profusely. Like her mother, she had ten. 6
Thomas's sisters Jane and Martha meant more than the othe rs in his life. J
ane, nearly three years older than he, was his first favorite. Ferhaps it was
she who first showed him the Virginia bluebells in the lowlands along theRivanna, and who wandered with him through the woods when the wild
violets were open. It is said that she, more than any other member of the
family, stimulated his boyish ambitions and encouraged him in his reading
and his cultivation of music. He told his grandchildren of psalm tunes she
used to sing to him. By that time he
Lwas remembering scenes long past, for he was only twenty-two when she
died unmarried and he wrote for her a Latin epitaph. 7
In the little building in the yard at Tuckahoe the older Jefferson girls
probably shared their brother's early schooling. When the family returned
to Shadwell, however, there was a separation, for Tom was either left
behind in Goochland or was sent back soon thereafter. In 1752, when he
was nine, his father placed him in the Latin school of the Reverend William
Douglas, minister of St. James Parish, Northam. He boarded at the
clergyman's house during the school term and remained under his
instruction until the year that Colonel Jefferson died. 8 There were
probably other pupils but not many. Because of the dispersed population
and the lack of towns in Virginia, education was on an individual rather
than a civic basis, and opportunity was largely
5 A Memoir of a Portion of the Boiling Tamnly: Wynne's Historical
Documents from the Old Dominion, No. IV (privately printed, Richmond,
186H).
6 On Boiling, see Va. Mag., XXII, 331; on Fairfield, see Calendar Va. State
Papers, II, 78. In Jefferson's ietter to Page, Dec. 25, 1762, in Ford, I,
341-346, he speaks of the place as being within an easy day's ride of
ShadwelL
7 Randall, I, 40-41; Domestic Life, pp. 38-39. This begins: "Ah, Joanna,
pucllarum optima."
8 Ford, I, 3. Peter Jefferson's Account Book shows a payment for two
years* schooling and board at the rate of JT 16 a year, presumably for the
years 1752-1754. Thomas himself is authority for the statement that he
stayed until 1757. On Douglas, see Meade, pp. 457^*5°; W. S. Fcrrv, cd..
Hist. Colls. Relating to the American Colonial Church, Vol. I, Virginia
(1870), 365, 377, 411-413.restricted to the gentry. The sons of the greater landowners had all
/the advantages and disadvantages that go with private instruction. The
I quality of this instruction was often high, but it naturally varied with
I the tutors who were available. More often than not they were clergy-
\ I men.
\v Some of these teachers of little groups of gentlemen's sons, like Donald
Robertson who taught James Madison, have become moderately famous
through the grateful comments of their distinguished pupils. 9 In this
respect William Douglas was unfortunate, for Jefferson did not speak well
of him. He was a Scotchman who had come to Goochland a couple of years
before 1752, soon after his ordination. The ecclesiastical authorities
preferred graduates of Oxford or Cambridge to men who had been bred in
Presbyterianism, and some of the planters, like Robert Carter of Nomini
Hall, objected to the Scottish accent in a tutor. James Madison jokingly
remarked that the Scottish French he learned from Robertson proved an
embarrassment. 10 Thomas Jefferson started out with the same sort of
French and may have had the same thought when he first went to Paris, but
his surviving comments relate to Latin and Greek, which were his major
subjects. In his mature opinion, Douglas knew little of the one and less of
the other. Much nearer home a competent classicist was awaiting him, and
he probably became aware of the limitations of the Reverend William
Douglas after he had begun to study under the Reverend James Maury.
Early in 1758, when he was fourteen, he began to attend Maury's little
school. The clergyman was then forty years old and for six years had been
officiating in Fredericksville Parish, which now included the part of
Albemarle lying north and west of the Rivanna. 11 Maury regarded it as the
most extensive and inconvenient parish in the Colony that was regularly
served. Even after he established himself strategically on a pleasant
plantation beneath the Southwest Mountains, a couple of miles from his
wife's uncle, Dr. Thomas Walker, he spoke of himself as leading a
postboy's life. He had three churches and a chapel, and was trying to
support a family of eight children. Young Thomas Jefferson was soon
called upon to be one of the baptismal sponsors for the ninth child, a boy
named Abraham. There were to be others later.
It was partly for the instruction of his sons and partly to supplement hisincome that this man of piety and learning set up a small school in
9 Irving Brant, James Madison, p. 60.
10 Randall, II, 192 n.
11 Excellent account of Maury by Helen D. Bullock in Papers Albemarle
Historical Society, II (1942), 36-39, based on the fresh materials in the
Maury Deposit, UVA, and citing other sources.a log house on his place. Tom boarded with the family but went home on
Saturdays, often taking with him young James Maury, who was three years
his junior, rather than Matthew, a prospective clergyman nearer his age.
These two were members of what he afterwards called his "class." This was
said to have numbered only five, and it included a promising boy from
Louisa named Dabney Carr. The younger James Maury pointed out, many
years later, the place designated for a race between Tom Jefferson's slow
pony and Dabney Carr's swift horse. Tom had suggested that this should
occur on February 30, and not until the last day of the month did the others
discover that they had been taken in. 12 This early Jeffersonian hoax
produced no lasting ill will, however; the disappointed rider of the swift
horse was, for a dozen years, the closest friend that the owner of the slow
pony had. The fifth member of the class was probably John Walker, and
James Madison, afterwards president of the College of William and Mary,
and the first Episcopal Bishop of Virginia, came to Maury's before long.
Their teacher once described these two as being in good order and well
conditioned, like so many hogsheads of tobacco. The school was a small
but important fount of friendship. For a score of years Thomas Jefferson
was intimate with his county neighbor, John Walker; and, though the future
Bishop of Virginia was six years younger than he and may not have been
actually a classmate, they had Maury's school in common and always liked
each other.
The teacher of these boys had been brought to Virginia by his Huguenot
parents, an intelligent and deeply religious couple. In due course James
Maury had attended the College of William and Mary, had served there
briefly as an usher in the grammar school, had gone to England for Holy
Orders, and had come to Fredericksville Parish after a rectorship elsewhere.
He was to be unfortunate in many ways, but clearly he was no ordinary
schoolmaster. His greatest pupil attested to the correctness of his classical
scholarship, while his clerical contemporary, the Reverend Jonathan
Boucher, commented particularly on his fine English style. 13 It is easier
for us to judge the latter accomplishment than to realize the former, for
some sermons and letters of Maury's remain. 14 These reveal him as a
spiritual, intelligent, cultivated,
12 Diary of Ann Maury, Oct. 28, 1831. Maury Deposit, UVA. Other
references on the "class" are Anne Fontaine Maury, Intimate Virginiana, A
Century of Maury Travels by Land and Sea, p. 12; Jefferson to James
Maury, Apr. 25, 1812 (L. & B. XIII, 144-149); the Reverend James Mauryto John Madison, Nov. 24, 1764, in Maury Deposit; Jefferson to Thomas
Stone, Mar. 16, 1782, Jefferson Papers, Library of Congress (hereafter LC),
8:1226, about Dabney Carr.
13 Ford, I, 3; Boucher, Reminiscences of an American Loyalist, p. 61.
14 Maury Deposit.
find observant man, who wrote with vigor generally, with vividness at
times, and too often with prolixity.
By the time that Thomas Jefferson began to attend his school Maury was in
bad health, worn down by his labors, burdened with the care of his large
and growing family. He was already a harassed if not an unhappy man. 15
For boarding and teaching a young gentleman he received twenty pounds a
year in 1758 and 1759,^when John Harvie paid him on behalf of the
Jefferson estate. 16 A decade later, when the price of food had risen and his
own children had increased in number, he concluded that this was small
compensation for the additional expense to his table, the extraordinary
trouble to his family, and his own labor and fatigue from this "toilsome
business." Accordingly, he then increased his charge to twenty-five pounds
over the protests of certain patrons. Some of the planters, in his opinion, set
a higher value on instruction in dancing than on the intellectual and
spiritual sen-ices that he performed. 17 He had no complaints against the
Jeffersons, however, and he was not so embittered when Thomas went to
school. He had not yet participated unsuccessfully in the Parsons' Cause.
During the boy's first year in the log schoolhouse, the Assembly passed
what was called the Two Penny Act, and against this he heard his teacher
inveigh in the household. 18 Like an earlier act, which Maury had accepted
as a temporary necessity, it provided that the clergy and certain public
officials be paid, not in tobacco, but in money at a specified rate. Owing to
the shortness of the crop, this rate was considerably below the market price
of the season and the clergy could anticipate a loss. The second act they
opposed on legal grounds which seemed unassailable, and upon one
important occasion Maury was their standard-bearer. Supported by an
Order in Council, he brought suit against his vestry for the balance that
appeared to be due him, and but for Patrick Henry he might have been
successful. The Hanover County Court had no choice but to rule in his
favor, but the jury, under Henry's spell, awarded him damages of only onepenny.
This historic controversy culminated after Jefferson had left Maury's and he
did not remember much about it afterwards. I low ever, he must
15 His letter of May 31, 1758, to the Reverend William Douglas, Maury
Deposit,
is particularly depressed; his letters in Memoirs of a Huguenot Family
speak more of general conditions.
16 Harvie's Account Book.
"Letter to Col. John Boiling, Dec. 1767; to Thomas Boiling, Jan. 23, V)
Letter Book, 1763-1768, Maury Deposit.
18 To William Wirt, Aug. 14, 1814 (Ford, IX. 4<T). On the Persons'
Cause, see H. J. Eckenrode, Separation of Church and State in Va. (1910),
ch. 2; G. C. Smith in Tyler's Mag., XXI (1939), 140-171, 193-206.
have regretted the unpopularity with the laity which his teacher gained.
Technically, Maury was right, for the Virginia lawmakers had been
overruled by the supreme British authorities. On the other hand, he
appeared to be opposing the general interest and the judgment of the
Assembly, in his own behalf and in the interest of his class. J^ater issues
were thus foreshadowed and on these TefTerson was to take a stand ^gainst
the cler^y., lt is obvious that he did not get from Maury his ideas about the
relations between church and state. Nor did the future advocate of religious
freedom get from this teacher any germinal ideas about the just treatment
of dissenters. The boy must have observed that the Rector of
Fredericksville was bitterly intolerant. 19 Maury was often critical of the
British government, but Jefferson, unlike his friend John Page, never
regarded his tutor as the fountainhead of his Whig-gish principles. 20
From h is fir st notable teacher, Jefferson gained none of his characteristic
political principles or religious ideas. He was indebted to him^ however T
more, than tn ^p y other man, for his training in the classics. After two
years in this school he was able to read Greek and Roman luthors in the
original, and this he continued to do throughout his long life. Gratefully
and properly he recognized his inadequately educated father as the firstcause, but he also said that the acquisition of ancient languages should be
the occupation of only the early years. The "deep and lasting impressions"
on his own memory must have come from days at Maury's school. 21
Years later he told John Adams that the idea occurred to him in early life
that the best clues to the proper pronunciation of the ancient languages
were to be obtained from modern Greeks and Italians. 22 There is no
authority for crediting this idea to Maury, and it is known that Jefferson
became acquainted with Italians shortly before the Revolution. 23 As for
Greek, which he regarded as the most perfect language, the pursuance of
his idea had to be left until he went to Paris. This lifelong student had a
natural linguistic gift and he found teachers
19 Maury's intolerance was clearly shown in his posthumous pamphlet, To
Christians of every Denomination among us, especially those of the
Established Church . . . (Annapolis, 1771), directed particularly against the
Anabaptists.
20 John Page on William Price, Va. Hist. Register, July 1850, p. 146.
21 To Joseph Priestley, Jan. 27, 1800, A. A. Lipscomb and A. E. Bergh,
Writings of Thomas Jefferson (hereafter cited as L. & B.), X, 146-147; to
John Brazier, Aug. 24, 1819, Ibid., XV, 207-211. An excellent recent
discussion is L. B. Wright, "Thomas Jefferson and the Classics," Procs.
Am. Philos. Soc, Vol. 87, No. 3, July 1943, pp. 223-233.
"Mar. 21, 1819 (L. & B., XV, 181-182).
23 Memoirs of . . . Philip Mazzei, pp. 186, 193, 203.
everywhere, but Maury was the first important one. In a log house below
the Southwest Mountains he received at an impressionable age personal
instruction from a sound scholar who was aware of the niceties of language
and the beauties of literature.
However rigid James Maury may have been as a churchman, his
enthusiasm for the classics was discriminating, just as that of his most
famous pupil was. He could hardly have doubted the indispensability of
classical training for such a pupil as Thomas Jefferson, who was clearly
marked for a profession and the "exalted spheres of life." But he seriouslyquestioned its utility for most of the sons of the gentry, who had tried him
no little and whose customary life he had carefully observed. Very few of
them prosecuted their studies as long as their twentieth year, he said; they
commonly married very young and were soon encumbered with families;
they had to give constant attention to the management of their large estates,
regardless of inherited fortune. It could not be expected, therefore, that they
would have the necessary leisure and repose "for a pleasurable or
successful engagement in such parts of literature as the languages,
criticism, and curious and deep researches into antiquity." 24
This was no prophecy of Tefferson's career, but Maury probably
encouraged him to delve into modern literature as well as anci ent, in the
spirit of the Enlightenment, and he probably made a distinctive" *
contribution to the boy's education in his emphasis on the Mother Tongue.
T he minister described English as "a language as copious and nervous, as
significant and expressive, as numerous and musical, nay, to my own ears
as enchanting as any that was ever spoken by any of the different families
of the earth." 25 For his time and place he had a large library and he must
sometimes have given his pupil advice similar to that he gave his own son.
"I would recommend it to you to reflect, and remark on, and digest what
you read; to enter into the spirit and design of your author; to observe every
step he takes to accomplish his end; and to dwell on any remarkable
beauties of diction, justness or sublimity of sentiment, or masterly strokes
of true wit which may occur in the course of your reading.""'' Jefferson's
emphasis was to be more severely practical but he himself afterwards made
recommendations not dissimilar to these. Upon occ asion hp H^cd np" rl ^ r
24 "A Dissertation on Education, in the form of a Letter from James Maury
to Robert Jackson, July 17, 1762," ed. by Helen D. Bullock, Vapers
Albemarle County Hist, Soc, II, 43.
25 Ibid., II, 47.
26 To his son James, Feb. 17, 1762 (Maury Deposit). On his library, see
Va. Mag., VII, 302.
which he could hardly have got here, namely, that two words should not b e
used when one will do. /
From the story of the projected horse race it must not be assumed that TomJefferson was restricted to a slow pony. Perhaps he did not begin riding as
soon as his younger kinsman, John Randolph of Roanoke, who is said to
have been foaled, not born; but his father doubtless started him early.
Thomas regarded George Washington as
//the best horseman of the age, but he himself was described in later life
// as an "uncommonly fine rider" and the family remembered him as a
[ If earless one. 27
\ In a country without large settlements and where plantation seats were far
apart, riding was not a matter of occasional diversion but of daily necessity,
and good horsemanship was taken for granted among the gentry. Over the
red roads of Albemarle, which wandered so capriciously through the
growing trees and the fallen timber, Tom took many a ride, not for
purposes of health as in his later life, but simply to go from one place to
another. However, he was not one of those Virginians, described by
Revolutionary travelers, who would go five miles to catch a horse in order
to ride one mile afterwards. On the contrary, he came to be lieve that the
taming of the horse had resulted in the degeneracy or the human body, and
he commended ^wal^r f or fvrrnnr frnm thr rimr trnr hr Kp gin t o advise
the young. 28 He must have begun his walking early, tramping through the
woods and hunting. The family preserved a story about his first adventures
as a huntsman. When he was ten he was given a gun by his father and sent
into the forest alone in order to develop self-reliance. The inexperienced
boy was wholly unsuccessful at first in his quest of quarry; but at length he
found a wild turkey caught in a pen, tied it to a tree with his garter, shot it,
and brought it home in triumph. 29 This may have been at Tuckahoe, but
boyish hunting was in the Albemarle tradition. His grandson, who claims
never to have worn hat or shoe until he was ten, used to arise at dawn and
tramp barefoot through the snow in quest of wild turkeys; 30 and long
years after Jefferson himself shot his first bird, he reported with obvious
approval an instance of even greater intrepidity . He had this to say of
Meriwether Lewis, who grew up here and whom he sen f across a
mntinenr:
27 Comment of his chief overseer, Edmund Bacon, in H. W. Pierson,
Jefferson at Monticello, p. 74; Randall, I, 68, quoting his grandson, T. J.
Randolph.23 To Peter Carr, Aug. 19, 1785 (L. & B., V, 85-86). For comments on the
Virginians' love of horses, see J. F. D. Smyth, A Tour in the U. S. of
America (1784), I, 20-23.
29 Memoirs of T. J. Randolph, p. 3, Edgehill Randolph Papers, UVA.
so Ibid., p. 6.
He . . . was remarkable even in his infancy for enterprise, / boldness and
discretion. When only eight years of age, he habitually went out, in the
dead of night, alone with his dogs, into the forest to hunt the raccoon and
opossum, which, seeking their food in the night, can then only be taken. In
this exercise no season or circumstance could obstruct his purpose,
plunging through the \ winter's snows and frozen streams in pursuit of his
object. 81 <^
He himself may not have showed such zeal as this at any age, but from his
youth he was familiar with the habits of the coons and possums.
Observation of plants and animals, rather than stalking prey, was
characteristic of him in his maturity; and, though he continued to
recommend hunting as an admirable form of youthful exercise and appears
to have engaged in it himself to some degree, there is no reliable evidence
that he was an ardent sportsman. 3 2 His father had started him in the
school of self-reliance, but when he first began to think he > may ha ve
concluded th at nature should be explored and not exploited"^
Accomplishments were expected of him as a young gentleman. Dancing,
which was proverbially popular, was little short of a social necessity.
"Virginians are of genuine blood," said Philip Fithian. "Thev will dance or
die." M During his second year at Maury's, his father's executor John
Harvie made a payment to Mr. IngLjs "for teaching 5 children 6 mo. to
dance." 34 This instruction Tom shared with four of his sisters. We do not
know whether or not the dancing class went from house to house, as in
Westmoreland, thus permitting a better balance of the sexes; but before he
entered the Raleigh Tavern he was probably familiar with the minuets,
reels, and country dances which were so often mentioned by the pre-
Revolutionary diarists. Two years . before the Declaration of
Independence, one of these said: "Any young gentleman, travelling through
the Colony ... is presumed to be acquainted with dancing, boxing, playing
the fiddle, and small sword, and cards." 85 Somewhat less may have beenrequired in the Sixties, frut, young Thomas Jefferson had another of these
acc omplish-_ments besi des dancing before he went away to college. It
i^sam trTaT^ , while he was still at Maury's his favorite indoor amusement
was playing on the violin T and that he was already proficient for his years.
30
We have no information about his first music teacher, but it must
81 L. & B., XVITI, 142.
82 Comments on his hunting by an old slave may be seen in the ms. Life of
Isaac Jefferson, UVA.
"Philip Vickers Fithian, Journal and Letters, 1767-1714, ed. by J. R.
Williams, Aug. 25, 1774 (referred to hereafter as Fithian, by date;.
84 Oct. 24, 1759; Account Book of John Harvie.
"Fithian, Aug. 17, 1774.
"Randall, I, 18.
have been before he went to Williamsburg and found new opportunities
there that he learned to play. In the musical language of his time this was
not by "rote or ear," but "by book according to the gamut." 8T / On one of
his first trips toward the colonial capital he met Patrick ( Henry, who
fiddled by ear. This might be said to sum up the differ-^\ ence between
them as statesmen, also, though the younger man's political ear afterwards
became sensitive. Jefferson knew the country fiddle tunes, which were
played at balls as well as at countless informal rustic gatherings, and he
copied them in his music books. Also, at some time he wrote, in a copy of
Daniel PurcelFs Psalms set full for the Organ or Harpsichord (1727), the
words of the new version, from the metrical translations of Tate and Brady
which were gradually superseding the older psalter. These were the tunes,
presumably, that his sister Jane sang so often and that he played with her.
He always preferred them to hymns and they always recalled her presence.
What Thomas looked like as he neared seventeen we can only conjecture
from the descriptions given of him long afterwards, when observations
seemed to be worth recording. He had large hands and feet and by this time
must have gro wn tall; he towered well over six teet everirUallv ana was ypry strong pypn th ough never quite up to his father's standard. 3 ^ His
movements are said to have been rather awkward; his hair was reddish in
youth, and he freckled quickly. His eyes were hazel, though often described
in later years as blue, and, judging by how long he kept them, his teeth
must have been magnificent. He had^ good health throughout most of his
life, along with comparable vitality. Nobody ever claimed that he was
handsome, but it was often said afterwards that he looked benevolent, and
he al ways prized the quality of good nature. 3 " He was thin-skinned, h
owever, and for many years had to_ overcome his n ative shyness. He may
nave been rather indifferent to clothes during his rustic period, as he was
when he started to grow old, but he became fastidious enough after he
began to notice the girls in Williamsburg. The colonial capital was his
finishing school of manners, and he did not become a "compleat
gentleman" until after he had •begun to go to the Governor's Palace there.
87 John Playford, An Introduction to the Skill of Musick (ed. of 1718), pp.
81-82. He afterwards had this book in his library. For this and other
musical items, I am indebted to Mrs. Helen D. Bullock.
38 On his strength, see Pierson, Jefferson at Monticello, p. 70.
39 Chastellux, whose description of him before he was forty is one of the
earliest on record, speaks of his countenance as being "mild and pleasing,"
while strongly intimating that he lacked "exterior grace"; quoted by
Randall, I, 373.
DO
At the College
1760-1762
IN the year 1760 Thomas Jefferson emerged from the hills and entered the
College of William and Mary in Williamsburg. His future friend and rival
John Adams was then five years out of Harvard; but Alexander Hamilton,
in the British West Indies, was little beyond the toddling stage. George
Washington, whose advanced schooling was gained in Indian warfare, had
married Martha Custis and was farming at Mount Vernon, hoping that his
days of campaigning were over. Sagacious Benjamin Franklin, who had
picked up most of his youthful learning in a printing shop, was in England,high in scientific favor and having the time of his life. In this same year
King George III ascended the English throne, unaware that in the village
capital of the royal Province of Virginia there was a stripling who would
one day denounce him in immortal language.
Up to this time, so far as we know, the future author of the Declaration of
Independence had written nothing suggesting the cadences of that historic
document or anticipating his later grace, but he had drafted one letter which
has survived. This was an eager but stilted note to John Harvie, proposing
that he leave the mountains for the College. After talking things over with
another executor, Colonel Peter Randolph, he had soberly marshaled his
arguments to justify an important step. 1 He could continue his study of the
classics at the College, he believed; he could learn something of
mathematics, and he could gain "a more universal acquaintance" there. If
these reasons were insufficient, others could have been easily adduced. I
laving outgrown Maury's, this promising boy deserved other opportunities
and it seemed highly unlikely that he would waste them. He himself
remarked that the coming of company was causing him to lose a fourth of
his time
Man. 14, 1760 (Ford, I, 340).
at home. He was already impatient with encroachment on his precious
hours, and any hindrance to his pursuit of knowledge.
After a while he talked a good deal about going to England, but this
possibility seems not to have been considered seriously at first, if it ever
was. His advisers were doubtless aware that there was confusion in the
College. This was to continue until the Revolution and to cause some of the
gentry to question the propriety of sending their sons there for moral
improvement and the acquisition of sound learning. 2 On the other hand,
there were those who said that education was a good deal worse in
England, and with them the mature Jefferson would have heartily agreed.
Several Virginians, among them Robert Carter of Nomini Hall (who
afterwards fully redeemed himself), had returned "so inconceivably
illiterate, and also corrupted and vicious," that Mann Page of Rosewell
swore that no son of his should go to school in England. Accordingly, this
wealthy planter sent his son John to the grammar school of William and
Mary at the age of thirteen and put him to lodge and board with President
Thomas Dawson, who was also commissary of the Bishop of London andminister of Bruton Church. 8 Peter Jefferson's son, who entered at a higher
level as he was nearing seventeen, likewise escaped foreign contamination,
though he gained no high impression of the learning and morals of the
clergymen on the faculty during his student days in Williamsburg.
Lodging and eating in the College were not compulsory for "paying
scholars," but the surviving records imply that he did not avail himself of
the privilege of living in town. He began to pay board on March 25, 1760,
and continued to do so for two years and one month. Then, so far as the
records show, his college career was over. 4 About this time the faculty
were forced to enjoin the housekeeper to serve both fresh and salt meat for
dinner, to provide puddings and pies on Sunday and two weekdays, and to
see that the suppers were not made up of different sorts of scraps but were
the same for every table. The chief complaint came after Jefferson had left
the College, but, like the other boys, he probably suffered from the
negligence of a housekeeper who was away too often. A year or more after
his departure she was away for good. 5
2 J. C. Ballagh, ed., Letters of Richard Henry Lee, I, 70-71; Fithian, Feb.
12, 1774.
8 Va. Hist. Register, July 1850, p. 146.
4 "Notes Relating to Some of the Students Who Attended the College of
William and Mary," W. & M., 2 ser., I, 27-42; A Provisional List of
Alumni . . . of the College of William and 'Mary in Virginia, from 1693 to
1888.
*W. & M., 1 ser. Ill, 196, 262-264. The offending housekeeper, Mrs.
Isabella Cocke, was there 1761-1763.
The main building, then more than sixty years old, was generally termed
the College, though there was also the Brafferton, where a handful of
Indians stayed. Opposite this stood the President's House. Some twenty
years after his student days Jefferson described the College and the hospital
in Williamsburg as "rude, mis-shapen piles, which, but that they have
roofs, would be taken for brick-kilns." 6 This, however, was after he had
fallen under the spell of Palladio; his architectural judgment could hardly
have been that severe when he was a youth, fresh from the frame buildings
of Albemarle. At a later time he also condemned the educationalorganization of the College and tried to improve it. The statutes had been
revised a couple of years before he entered, but in framework the College
was essentially unchanged from 1729 until he became governor of Virginia
half a century later. 7 It consisted of the grammar school, which was
preparatory; the Indian school, which a few redskins still attended; the
philosophy school, in which he himself was enrolled; and the divinity
school, which he afterwards helped to abolish. Two professors were
assigned to each of the two latter; and each of the former had a single
master. With the president, the entire faculty consisted of seven men, and
there were probably not more than a hundred scholars and students
altogether.
With the single but important exception of William Small, professor of
natural philosophy, the members of the William and Mary faculty were
Anglican clergymen, and for half a dozen years they had been embroiled in
controversy with the local political authorities. 8 Two years before
Jefferson enrolled there had been an upheaval, and it was as a result of this
that Small had come to the College. Because of their activities against the
Two Penny Act, which as we have seen affected the pay of the clergy
unfavorably, three of the professors had been dismissed by the local
governing body, the Board of Visitors. One of these men died but the two
others appealed to England for reinstatement and, after Jefferson had left
the College, won their fight. This proved bad for Small. When Jefferson
arrived on the scene, how ever, he was there, teaching physics,
metaphysics, and mathematics, and through force of circumstances was
soon teaching practically everything else.
6 In his Notes on Virginia (Ford, III, 258).
7 Statutes of 1758, W. & M., 1 ser., XVI, 241-256. Sec also Jefferson's
later bill for amending the constitution, Sect. I (Ford, II, 229-232).
8 The account of the faculty is based largely on "Journal of the Meetings of
the President and Masters of William and Mary College," H\ £ U., 1 scr.,
Ill, 60-64, 128-132, 195-197, 262-265; IV, 43-46, 130-132, 187-192; V,
224-229. See also Ibid., 1 ser., IX, 153-154; XIX, 20; R. Goodwin, A Brief
& True Report concerning Williamsburg in Virginia, pp. 38-43.
Jefferson's other teacher at first was the Reverend Jacob Rowe, professor of
moral philosophy, whose field comprised rhetoric, logic, and ethics. In theAugust of Jefferson's first year (which had begun in late March and was
interrupted by no long summer vacation), Rowe and the Master of the
grammar school became far too merry and led the college boys in a row
with the boys of the town. Consequently, one of these clergymen was
summarily dismissed and the other resigned. The immediate results were
favorable to Jefferson. Almost a year passed before a successor to the
deposed professor of moral philosophy was installed, and in the interim
Small added all or many of Rowe's subjects to his own. He was already
giving Jefferson his first views of the "expansion of science," and,
according to this eminent pupil, he gave the first lectures ever delivered in
the College in ethics, rhetoric, and belles-lettres. 9 Either these subjects had
been previously sacrificed to logic, or they had been taught more
mechanically by men who lacked Small's happy talent of communication.
For nearly half of Jefferson's course Small appears to have been the only
regular teacher that he had. Whatever may be thought about the
organization, administration, and discipline of the College, here was one of
those rare personal influences which prove unforgettable and elicit
immortal tribute. He afterwards said that Small probably fixed the destinies
of his life.
""""But for Small, the first year must have been deeply disillusioning to
him. In the midst of all the woes created by convivial and riotous members
of the faculty, President Dawson himself began to drink notoriously, and,
when arraigned before the Board of Visitors on the charge of habitual
drunkenness, confessed the fact. His friend, Lieutenant Governor Fauquier,
defended him, saying that "he had been teased by contrariety of opinions
between him and the clergy into the loss of his spirits, and it was no
wonder that he should apply for consolation to spirituous liquors." 10 He
was granted a pardon on the promise of future sobriety, but the unfortunate
man became quite irresponsible. He died in December. Not until spring did
the Reverend William Yates, from whose arid teaching John Page had
suffered elsewhere,- qualify as his successor. He also became minister of
Bruton Church, which Jefferson attended, sitting near the pulpit in the half
of the south gallery which was assigned to the College. 11
The scandals and confusion which the youth observed in his first
9 "Autobiography," Ford, I, 4; to L. H. Girardin, Jan. 15, 1815 (L. & B.,
XIV, 231).
10 W. S. Perry, ed., Historical Collections Relating to the AmericanColonial Church (hereafter cited as Perry, Hist. Colls.), I, 517.
11 W. A. R. Goodwin, Historical Sketch of Bruton Church, o. 44.
year must have made a deep impression on so sensitive a mind, but at this
immature age he was not deeply interested in the continuing struggle
between the clerical faculty and the local governing board. 12 The
fundamental question was whether the Bishop of London or the gentlemen
of Virginia should have final authority over the College and the Church,
and the gentry would have given the same answer to this if Thomas
Jefferson had never gone to school in Williamsburg. His later distinction
among his fellows was owing to his championship," not merely of local
self-government, but of complete religious liberty . The seeds of
anticlericalism, however, were probably sown in his mind while he was in
college or soon afterwards, when he became intimate with Francis
Fauquier. He could hardly have failed to learn that the relations between
the brilliant Governor and the local representatives of English
ecclesiasticism were far from amicable, and on personal grounds his
sympathies may have been enlisted against the clergy. 18 It is a highly
significant fact, also, that the early teache r whn HiH most to fix the
destinies of his life was the only layman in rh^ far plty °f tn _c College,
The surviving record of this influential layman is all too brief. 14 He was a
Scotchman, designated as "Mr. William Small" when he was appointed in
1758. He remained in Williamsburg six years, returned to England where
he is said to have been the friend of James Watt and Erasmus Darwin, and
died at Birmingham in 1775, listed as "William Small, M.D." He had
assumed the title after he left Virginia. The circumstances of his going were
unpleasant. 15 His predecessor as professor of natural philosophy was
successful in his appeal to England and had to be restored. Small had been
sent over by the Bishop of London in the first place, but he had less reason
than his clerical colleagues to rely on English ecclesiastical authority and
during his stay in the Colony he was on more friendly terms than the others
with the local political group. It was a sign of the approval of the Board of
Visitors that they proceeded to elect him to the chair of moral philosophy,
which was again vacant, after he had lost the professorship of natural
philosophy. At the same time, however, the Board passed a statute
affirming the
12 J. E. Kirkpatrick, "Constitutional Development of the College ofWilliam and Mary," W. & M., 2 ser., VI, 95-108.
"Perry, Hist. Colls., I, 464, 470-472, 517.
"Besides references to faculty meetings, see W. & M., 1 ser., XVI,
164-168; Va. Mag., XVI, 209-210; Gentleman's Magazine and Historical
Chronicle, XLV, 151 (London, 1775); Burk, History of Virginia, III,
399-400. His salary was paid until Sept. 15, 1764, but he probably left
earlier.
"The most dependable source is a letter from Stephen to Edward Hawtrey,
Mar. 26, 1765 (W. & M. Coll. Papers, Folder 12). This is based on a
conversation with Small.
right to remove any member of the faculty at will. Small balked at agreeing
to that, went to England to look into the matter further, and declined to
return. There were some other matters of disagreement and in the end he
aroused the strong displeasure of the presiding officer of the Board, who
wrote him a sarcastic letter. 16 At some time Jefferson probably learned
about all this and he may have reflected that local authority itself is likely
to become tyrannical. What he learned from his favorite teacher was not
obedience to authority but delight in J:he ' exercise of his mind. J "7
John Page, in the last year of his own life, referred to this same teacher as
"illustrious," and credited to him the beginnings of his own abiding interest
in all branches of mathematics. 17 Shortly after Small left the College,
Jefferson was probably thinking of him when he described the study of
mathematics and natural philosophy as "peculiarly engaging and
delightful." He certainly was, when he took up mathematics again long
afterwards, in order to guide his grandson's course, and endeavored to rub
off the dust of fifty years. It was always his favorite subject, he said. "We
have no theories there, no uncertainties remain on the mind; all is
demonstration and satisfaction. I have forgotten much, and recover it with
more difficulty than when in the vigor of my mind I originally acquired it."
But, as he soon wrote to another, "thanks to the good foundation laid at
college by my old master and friend Small, I am doing it with a delight and
success beyond my expectation." 18
Jefferson observed that Small pursued an "even and dignified line" of
conduct, like others whom he particularly emulated in those crucial days.19 This layman was not one to be involved in student brawls. On the other
hand, in an era of disorder, he alone of the faculty denied the arbitrary
power of a master to inflict punishment on an offending scholar. John Page
called him his "ever to be beloved professor," and Jefferson said that he
gave to his studies enlightened and affectionate guidance and was like a
father to him. Actually, this unmarried teacher, whose chief complaint
about his position was its loneliness, made a daily companion of young
Jefferson, and taught him no less through informal talk than by his
memorable lectures. As a mature man Jeffer-
16 MS. copy of letter from the Rector of the College, unsigned and without
address but obviously to Small, June 25, 1767, Edgehill Randolph Papers,
UVA. This copy was doubtless sent to Jefferson, who was thus familiar
with the unpleasant episode.
17 Va. Hist. Register, July 1850, pp. 150-151.
18 To Benjamin Rush, Aug. 17, 1811 (Ford, DC, 328); to the Reverend
James Madison, Dec. 29, 1811 (L. & B., XIX, 183). Earlier comment in
Randall, I, 53.
19 To T. J. Randolph, Nov. 24, 1808 (Ford, IX, 231).
AT THE COLLEGE $$
son did not forget him. Just when the Revolution was beginning, and public
dissension threatened to divide him from his friend as the ocean had
already done, he sent him by a reluctant captain what he described as half
of a little present that he had laid by. It consisted of three dozen bottles of
Madeira which he had kept for eight years in his own cellar, and he
promised to dispatch that many more as soon as possible by another ship.
He did not know that his old teacher was in the last year of life. 20
— There is some testimony that Small's influence persisted in the' College.
It has been said that he, more than any other teacher, was responsible for
the liberality of spirit which came to characterize William and Mary. 21
Some people called it "skepticism" and thought it dangerous, but Jefferson
and his kindred spirits regarded it as the first step towards true knowledge.
Historically, William Small was a minor torchbearer of the Enlightenment,
and by any reckoning he was one of those rare men who point the way,who show new paths, who open doors before the mind.
^ To Jefferson he also opened the door of George Wythe's law office, and
he and Wythe ushered this inquiring young man into the Governor's Palace.
Thus were the benefits of enlightened conversation increased rather than
diminished after Jefferson left the College. He was as intimate with Small
for two more years as one of his age could be. His life and associations in
Williamsburg before he was admitted to the bar cannot be divided into
sharply defined segments; but if his college course can be described
separately it is best summed up by saying that he continued to be taught
privately, and that his tutor was William Small. The same sort of statement
can be made about the five years after that, when he studied law under
George Wythe. He gained clear title to fame in later years as a prophet and
architect of publ i c education, but his own training was pre-e minently
personal and priv ate.^
Self-imposed, rather than external, discipline shaped his education from his
youth onward. In his last decade he wrote: "I was a hard student until I
entered on the business of life, the duties of which leave no idle time to
those disposed to fulfill them; and now, retired, and at the age of seventy-
six, I am again a hard student." " The first period of his amazing life
differed in many ways from the important and exacting era of public
service which followed, but the habit of
20 To Small, May 7, 1775, LC, 1:140, partly printed in Ford, I, 453-455. 21
1. A. Coles to Henry St. George Tucker, July 20, 1799 (W. & M., 1 ser.,
IV, 105-108).
"To Dr. Vine Utley, Mar. 21. 1819 (Ford, X, 126).
study persisted. Drafting state papers brought him no such joy as the free
pursuit of knowledge, and he could not approach all public problems with
the zeal of the explorer; but in all his tasks he could and did manifest the
seriousness and the industry of the scholar.
His characteristic habits of study may have been formed even before he
went to Williamsburg. Said one of his young admirers who observed him
when he was ripe in years and honors:
/ ci< / ccI be
His mind must have been by nature one of uncommon capaciousness and
retention, of wonderful clearness and as rapid as is consistent with accurate
thoughts. His application from very early youth has not only been intense
but unremitted. When young he adopted a system, perhaps an entire plan of
life from which neither the exigencies of business nor the allurements of
pleasure could drive or seduce him. Much of his success is to be ascribed to
methodical industry. Even when at school he used to be seen with his
Greek Grammar in his hand while his comrades
ere enjoying relaxation in the interval of school hours. 23
The family tradition is that during his college days he studied fifteen hours
of twenty-four and habitually until long past midnight, only to rise at dawn.
This sounds like too severe a program even for him. In vacations he is said
to have devoted almost three fourths of his time to his books . Next only to
tyranny he hated indolence, w hich he regarded as the besetting sin of his
hospitable Virginia countrymen, and about which he wrote with appalling
frequency to his children in later years. "It is while we are young that the
habit of industry is formed," he reflected. "If not then, it never is
afterwards." If this is true he himself formed the habit early. "Determine
never to be idle," he admonished his growing daughter. "No person will
have occasion to complain of the want of time who never loses any." Then
he made an observation which aptly sums up his own intellectual history:
"It is wonderful how much may be done if we are always doing ." 24 ^
Such a regimen and such a philosophy would impose a strain on any but
the strongest physique. He learned to guard his unusual natural gifts by
physical regularity and systematic exercise, though we cannot be sure just
when he became so wise. He ran and walked when in college, and, if the
testimony of his grandson can be accepted, he once swam thirteen times
across a millpond that was a quarter of a mile
23 F. W. Gilmer, c. 1816, in R. B. Davis, Francis Walker Gilmer (hereafter
cited as Davis, Gilmer), p. 350; quoted by courtesy of the author and the
Dietz Press.
24 Randall, I, 24; Domestic Life, pp. 31, 115, 121. The letters to his
daughter Martha were written in 1787.wide. 25 This seems too much for a boy fresh from the little Rivanna, but
the physical endurance of Peter Jefferson's heir was remarkable in his youth
and prime. It was probably in Williamsburg that he established the habit of
bathing his feet in cold water every morning. This practice he continued for
upwards of sixty years and to it he attributed his lifelong freedom from
colds. At seventy-six, he reported that only two or three times in his life
had he had a fever of more than twenty-four hours; and he then could boast
that he had been blessed with "organs of digestion which accept and
concoct, without ever murmuring, whatever the palate chooses to consign
to them," and that he had not lost a tooth by age. 26
The severe perfection of this portrait is somewhat relieved by his own
statement that during his early years in Williamsburg he was extravagant,
by occasional remarks of his about youthful temptations, and by other
indications of gaiety and frivolity. The most frivolous period probably
coincided with the first years that he studied law, when he grumbled about
his law books and indulged in much silly chatter about the girls. He
participated in the annual battles between town and gown, but there is no
suggestion that he was ever disciplined for his part in student scrapes as
was his friend John Walker, who was rusticated in the fall of 1763, along
with a couple of other boys who afterwards gained considerable renown. 27
He had left the College then and was living in town, but he reported the
episode with some zest. He was a member of a student organization known
as the Flat Hat Club, which is notable for its primacy as a secret college
society but wholly lacked seriousness of purpose. It is not to be confused
with Phi Beta Kappa, of which Jefferson knew nothing. It was primarily
convivial and its certificates of membership were couched in humorous
Latin phraseology. One of its expressed desires was that each member
should be "a great ornament and pillar of things general and particular."
John Walker was a fellow member and the fact that there were only six
altogether may or may not imply that Jefferson was numbered among the
socially elite. He continued to attend meetings after he left college and
wrote about one of them in frivolous Latin vein.* 3
25 Memoirs of Thomas Jefferson Randolph, Edgehill Randolph Papers,
UVA., p. 3.
26 To Dr. Vine Utley, Mar. 21, 1819 (Ford, X, 125); to James Maury, June
16, 1815 (L. & B., XIV, 319).
27 To John Page, Oct. 7, 1763 (Ford, I, 353); to J. C. Cabell, Jan. 24, 1816(L. & B., XIV, 413); W. & Af., 1 ser., IV, 44-45.
28 G. P. Coleman, ed., The Flat Hat Club and the Phi Beta Kappa Society,
reproducing letters; Jefferson to John Walker, Sept. 3, 1769, UVA
photostat from Yale Univ.; printed in Kimball, Road to Glory, p. 141.
John Page said that Jefferson "could tear himself away from his dearest
friends, to fly to his studies." 29 It seems likely that he did not cultivate the
fine art of friendship consciously and assiduously until after he became
somewhat discouraged about the girls. But there is no reason to suppose
that he flouted the dominant tradition of sociability or that he failed to avail
himself of the great opportunities for friendship which this small academic
community afforded. Some of his most enduring associations started there.
One of the distinguishing characteristics of colonial Williamsburg was the
seasonal occasion for friendly intercourse which it offered to residents of
isolated plantations. In the midst of this sociable village, which teemed
periodically, the College was set. Its junior members were drawn from the
sons of the gentry and these constituted a close-knit group. There were
gradations of rank among them, with the families of the Councillors at the
top of the social scale, but there was no such invidious distinction here as
John Adams found at Harvard College, where seats in class were assigned
according to parental rank or standing. The son of a rugged squire from the
Piedmont did not have to take a lower place than John Page of Rosewell.
With this particular scion of a highly influential family Jefferson was
intimate from the start, and through him became friends with the equally
aristocratic Nelsons.
His old schoolmate at Maury's, Dabney Carr, may not have entered until
the year after he did. With this single exception, Page was Jefferson's
closest college friend. The two were almost exactly the same age and they
were to be like brothers for almost half a century. Page had the more
impressive economic and social background. Through his grandmother he
was a descendant of "King" Carter, and his grandfather, Mann Page, had
been a much larger landholder than the second Thomas Jefferson or even
Isham Randolph, besides being a member of the Council. It was this Mann
Page who had built Rosewell in Gloucester County and left the fabulous
house to a son of the same name who spent most of his strength bearing the
heavy burden. In this huge, three-storied mansion John had grown up.
Jefferson was often to look at its mahogany wainscoting and climb itsmarble stairways, probably reflecting that his own forebears had been wise
in not cultivating magnificence so extravagantly. 30
To a greater degree than Jefferson's immediate ancestors, the Pages
29 Va. Hist. Register, July 1850, p. 151.
80 Incomplete autobiography of Page in Va. Hist. Register, July 1850, pp.
142-151; Meade, I, 147-148 w., 331-333, especially for Rosewell and
churchmanship. The extensive correspondence between him and Jefferson
will be cited frequently hereafter.
were devoted to the Church and associated with the College, but John may
have been removed from the President's House at the time that poor
Dawson got into so much trouble and before the Reverend William Yates
came in. He appears to have lodged in the College during the second year
that his friend from Albemarle was there, and he may have been with him
from the first. He had secured a firm grounding in the classics from his
revered tutor, William Price; and, like Jefferson, he enjoyed the special
attentions of William Small. Both Small and President Dawson
commended him to Governor Fauquier. In religious matters he was more
conventional than Jefferson, and, being especially sociable, he was more
willing to leave his books. There was no touch of genius on him but he was
every inch a gentleman. He was a fellow in philosophical inquiry until his
boon companion probed more deeply, and he was an intimate confidant in
early matters of the heart.
Since Jefferson remained so long in Williamsburg as a student, it may be
safely assumed that he knew practically everybody who attended the
College from 1760 to 1767. Among his near contemporaries were these:
John Walker, who was destined to be a fellow burgess from Albemarle;
William Fleming, to whom some of his earliest known letters were
directed; Francis Eppes, to whom he was to be closely bound by marriage;
a couple of Harrisons, for one of whom he may later have designed
Brandon; John Tyler, with whom he was to be associated as a law student;
Austin and Bernard Moore, to one of whom he was to address a memorable
letter about the study of law; Jacquelin Ambler, who was to win a girl he
dreamed of; and Bathurst Skelton, whose widow he was to marry later on.
31 Some of these names are now remembered chiefly because of their
association with his. He overtopped his own college generation, but evenamong its members he met future leaders of the Colony and State. Thomas
Nelson, Junior, who was to succeed him as governor in perilous times, had
gone to school abroad but was much in Williamsburg in this period. A
more noted group came to the College somewhat later: Edmund Randolph,
John Taylor of Caroline, and that James Mad ison who became a bishop;
and early in the next decade appeared John Marshall , briefly, and James
Monroe, The James Madison who was to succeed Jefferson as President
manifested a degree of unconventionality by attending the College of New
Jersey at Princeton, but even without him this is an exceedingly
distinguished list.
To those who heard of the recurrent disorders among the students at
William and Mary, and of the dissensions within the faculty or between the
faculty and the Board, the affairs of this historic college
31 Provisional List of Alunmi; W. & M., 2 ser., I, 27-42.
may well have seemed chaotic during the period that Jefferson knew it best.
The successor to President Dawson as commissary of the Bishop of
London, the Reverend William Robinson, thought that it had failed to
answer the high ends of its institution and doubted if, under existing
conditions, learning and religion would strike deep root in the Colony. 32
He proposed that the College be really put under the care of the
ecclesiastical authorities in England, and be entirely divorced from local
control. There can be no doubt that the situation was anomalous, but the
school was more successful than he realized. The secret of its success lay,
not in its organization, not in its identification with the English Church, not
even in its faculty, but in its intimate association with the community in
which it was placed.
The College could be no mere training school for clergymen, though
actually it produced better ministers for the Colony than those who were
imported directly from abroad. The gentry had no strong desire that it
cultivate learning for its own sake, for their ideal was the well-rounded
man. It was pre-eminently a school for statesmen and as such, on the North
American continent, its product has never been excelled. 33 The
extraordinary distinction of its alumni is chiefly owing to the fact that its
students were by birth and station the potential leaders of the Colony, and
that their college days were spent at the center of provincial life. The most
important fact about it was not that it was relatively old, or that it hadconsiderable resources, but that it was located in Williamsburg.In this distinctive community Jefferson as a young man met the leading
gentlemen of the country, and there before he was grown he saw visitors of
quite a different sort. The Indians were in the habit of coming to the capital,
often in great numbers, and he reports that he was much with them. One
historic visit occurred in the spring of 1762, and with brief mention of it we
can end the story of his college days. It was that of a Cherokee chief whom
he had seen before, as the guest of his father at Shad well on previous
journeys, and he called him "Ontassete," though there were other names for
the same man — Ostenaco, Oconasta, Judd's Friend, and, best of all
perhaps, Outacity. 8 *
82 Robinson to Bishop of London, Oct. 16, 1767, in Perry, Hist.
Collections, I, 529, and other letters there.
88 For good comments, see H. B. Adams, College of William and Mary,
pp. 26-29.
84 Jefferson to John Adams, June 11, 1812 (L. & B., XIII, 160); S. C.
Williams, ed., Lieut. Henry Timberlake's Memoirs (Johnson City, Term.,
1927) esp. pp. 129-131, 170; Burgesses, Journals, 1761-1765, pp. xvii-
xviii; art. on Outacity by K. E. Crane in Dictionary of Amer. Biography
(hereafter cited as D.A.B.).
A party of at least 165 Indians had set out from the Holston country in what
is now East Tennessee, and an embarrassingly large number eventually
arrived in Williamsburg. The students must have talked about them, and
they may have observed Outacity when he was dined at the College. They
doubtless heard that he was received by the Governor and Council and
granted permission to visit the Great King, his Father, in England. They
could hardly have anticipated the sensation which the Cherokee created in
London, where he was visited by Oliver Goldsmith and painted by Sir
Joshua Reynolds; but before his departure he made a profound impression
on a youth who was nearing nineteen and who had not yet crossed the sea.
Jefferson was in Outa-city's camp when he delivered a farewell oration to
his people the evening before he sailed, and as an old man he remembered
the splendor of the moon. The college student understood no word of the
Chief's prayer for his own safety on the voyage and for that of his people
until his return; but Outacity's resounding voice and the solemn silence of
his followers around their campfires filled him with awe and veneration.Years afterward, as governor and President, he was to receive visits from
Indians, to address them as a Father, and to smoke with them the pipe of
peace. He was to observe this race as a philosopher and to inquire into its
languages; as a responsible statesman he was to grapple with the problem
of depredations and massacres on the frontier. But he was not soon, if ever,
to escape from these early emotions. At this time, unquestionably, he was
moved not by fear but by curiosity and compassion. Nonetheless, these
warriors must have reminded him that the wilderness was not far away
from the college halls he was quitting, from the Capitol where decorous
statesmen deliberated, from the Palace ballroom where ladies and
gentlemen danced the gay reel and the stately minuet. Of such contrasts
was provincial life compounded.^
CO
Williamsburg: Introduction to the Law 1762-1765
WHEN Jefferson first went to Williamsburg as a student it is most unlikely
that he had ever seen that large a town. In Virginia both Norfolk and
Petersburg were larger, though neither of these was impressive in its size.
The major reason for the failure to develop commercial centers in Virginia
he himself set forth a good many years after he left college: "Our country
being much intersected with navigable waters, and trade brought generally
to our doors, instead of our being obliged to go in quest of it, has probably
been one of the causes why we have no towns of any consequence." 1
Important business was transacted in Williamsburg but the place would
never have become famous because of that.
Legally it was a city and had been laid out on a pleasing plan, but it
covered only a square mile and had fewer than two thousand people except
during "public times." In the fall and spring, when the courts sat and the
Assembly was generally in session, its population was doubled or trebled.
Then everybody of political consequence in the Colony was there, and the
three hundred houses, with the neighboring plantation seats, were filled to
overflowing. Sometimes there were half a dozen guests in a single room. 2
1 In Notes on Virginia; Ford, III, 213.
2 Publications of Colonial Williamsburg, Inc., especially Rutherfoord
Goodwin, A Brief & True Report concerning Williamsburg in Virginia,containing copious extracts from sources; the various handbooks and
guides to exhibition buildings, which have been prepared with careful
scholarship; and The Restoration of Colonial Williamsburg in Virginia,
from Architectural Record, Dec. 1935. One of the best of contemporary
accounts is "J ourna l of a French Traveller in the Colonies, 1765, I," in
American Historical Review (AHR), XXVI (July 1921), 726-747.
WILLIAMSBURG: INTRODUCTION TO THE LAW 63
From the open space in front of the College, between the President's House
and the Brafferton, Jefferson and the other students must often have looked
down the "noble great street" to the Capitol, almost a mile away. Before his
father was born the width of this central thoroughfare had been fixed at six
poles, or to all practical purposes a hundred feet, and afterwards it was
named for the Duke of Gloucester. In public times an incessant train of
coaches could be seen plowing their way through the powdered oyster
shells which looked like sand — or through seas of mud, depending on the
weather.
Walking was unpleasant at certain seasons because of the dust or the mud,
and Virginians generally preferred to ride, but often in his student days
Jefferson must have stretched his long legs on the Duke of Gloucester
Street. Before he reached Bruton Church, where at times he listened to the
arid preaching of the era, he passed the home of the Honorable John Blair,
president of the Council. At an early date two daughters of this prominent
family, Anne and Betsey, became his friends. They lived in a pleasant
white house, with dormer windows, a high-pitched roof, and outside
chimneys at the ends. It was set close to the sidewalk, in conformity with
the building laws; and on summer nights the family and their guests used to
sit on the steps and sing. 8 On this street, gardens had to be behind the
houses, but greens and other open spaces had been left to permit free
circulation of the air.
The brick church was almost at the halfway point and stood at the
intersection of the Palace Green. Considerably beyond this was the printing
office of the Virginia Gazette. People often went there to insert notices
about runaways, to advertise the sale of "parcels of likely Virginia-born
wenches," or to offer to the horse-breeding public the services of stallions
in their prime. When Jefferson stopped there, however, it was generally to
purchase books and music. Farther down the street was a tavern which hadbeen named for Sir Walter Raleigh and was shaped like the letter "L." It
was to gain greatest renown in Revolutionary times, but its famous Apollo
Room was already in use. Jefferson danced in it before he ever deliberated
at the same place on affairs of state.
Having proceeded so far, one might easily go on a little farther to the
Capitol at the end of this broad street. There Peter Jefferson had done brief
service as a burgess but his son could not see the chamber where Isham
Randolph had taken oath at an earlier time, for this was a fairly new
building, erected after a fire. Jefferson later described it as
8 On the singing, W. & M., 1 ser., XVI, 178; on his friendship, letters from
and to Elizabeth (Blair) Thompson, Jan. 10, 19, 1787 (Bixby, pp. 19-22);
letter to Anne (Blair) Banister, Aug. 6, 1787 (LC, 32:5444).
"a light and airy structure, with a portico in front of two orders." * He
rather liked the Doric columns, while disapproving of the proportions of
the Ionic, and thought this the most pleasing bit of architecture in Virginia,
on the whole. It can be seen no longer, for the last part of it burned after
Jefferson was dead and it was not restored.
Near the Capitol in the 1760's, as now, was the Public Gaol, and beyond
the Capitol he could have come into still another world. Here was an open
space known as the Exchange, where planters squared accounts with one
another, consigned tobacco to factors and sea captains, and arranged to
purchase Negro fellows or some of those likely wenches. Here was the
Coffee House, which Jefferson frequented as a young man; here was the
second Williamsburg theater, where he, like George Washington,
purchased tickets for the play. The gallows, where criminals dangled after
each session of the General Court, and the racecourse, where heats of two,
three, and four miles were run, were outside the town. He doubtless
remembered the gallows afterwards, when he was drafting a bill dealing
with crimes and punishments, and the racetrack may have interested him
somewhat at first.
He had more freedom to go to that sort of place after he became a law
student at the age of nineteen and had lodgings in town. These could have
been on either of the two narrower streets that paralleled the Duke of
Gloucester, or on some cross street, but nobody knows just where they
were. He probably stayed at different places. For a time he studied in thesame room with John Tyler and a much less serious young man from
Gloucester County named Frank Willis. The latter, who delighted in
pranks, sometimes overturned the table when he came in late and found the
two others still at work. By the time that Jefferson was grown, he had his
servant Jupiter with him in Williamsburg, and during some of his years as a
law student he kept horses there, as his gay friend Willis did. 5 But,
whether he walked or rode, and whatever point he may have started from,
he went more often in the direction of the Governor's Palace than the
Capitol at first. Turning from the Duke of Gloucester Street at the Palace
Green and passing the yard of Bruton Church, he came to the home of
George Wythe. Here he stopped frequently, to be greeted by a middle-
sized, hook-nosed gentleman, who was noted for his courtly bow. This
dignified brick house became for Jefferson a sort of anteroom to the Palace,
though it had meaning in itself.
*Ford, III, 257. It has been suggested, though not proved, that the portico
was added after his student days and was his idea; Waterman, Mansions of
Virginia, p. 397.
5 L. G. Tyler, Letters and Times of the Tylers, I, 55; references to Jupiter in
Day Books of Va. Gazette, in possession of Prof. J. S. Wilson, University
of Virginia, such as Feb. 20, 1764; Apr. 3, 1765.
It had been built and was owned by Richard Taliaferro, who has been
described as the leading architect or builder of the Colony and whose
daughter Elizabeth had married Wythe. 6 Taliaferro had a plantation a few
miles out of town, but he probably visited the childless couple and from
him Jefferson may have heard something about architecture. Wythe was not
interested in that subject; he was to be Jefferson's teacher in the law. For
considerable stretches during the next five years the younger man was at
Shadwell, but he spent most of the time reading and he got his directions in
Williamsburg.
In the year 1762, when Thomas Jefferson finished college and began to
study law, George Wythe was about thirty-five years old. 7 If not yet the
first at the bar of the General Court he was already one of its most
distinguished members. Among those who shared leadership with him were
Peyton Randolph, then King's Attorney as his father and grandfather had
been before him, and the latter's brother John, who was to succeed him in
that family office four years later. Both of these prominent relatives ofJefferson were legal products of the Inne£ Temple. In Virginia in the
eighteenth century, as in Maryland and South Carolina, the quality of the
bar had been much improved by the influence of men who had been trained
in England. 8
It was after Jefferson had turned twenty that he wrote with apparent
seriousness to John Page about going abroad. He may have thought of
accompanying William Small and of making the Grand Tour, but he did
not mention the Inns of Court. If he had gone to the Inner Temple he would
doubtless have met Charles Carroll of Carrollton, and at the Middle Temple
he could have found Charles Cotesworth Pinckney of South Carolina; there
would still have been time for him to hear William Pitt in the Commons
and David Garrick at the play; at some table he might even have caught
snatches of the conversation of Samuel Johnson, though there is little
reason to suppose that he would have liked it. 9 He would have formed
intercolonial friendships and become a citizen of the world sooner if he had
gone to England, but
6 Will of Taliaferro, W. & M., 1 ser., XII, 124-125. The name is
pronounced so as to rhyme with "Oliver." Waterman reproduces his will in
Mansions of Virginia, p.'217, and refers to him elsewhere, crediting him
with considerable architectural influence on Jefferson, pp. 342, 345.
7 Jefferson gave a statement about Wythe (rhymes with Smith) to John
Saun-derson, Aug. 31, 1820 (L. & B., I, 165-170; for use in connection
with the latter*! Biography of the Signers to the Declaration of
Independence \\ . I . Hemphill, George Wythe the Colonial Briton
(Doctoral Dissertation I'VA, 1937), which I have been privileged to see,
covers the period to the Revolution.
8 Charles Warren, History of the American Bar, pp. 18, 46,
9 Charles Carroll had a low opinion of the educational value of the Inns of
Court, but Warren points out the compensating advant ;'., p. 193.
er
3
it is doubtful if he would have learned any more law or qualified himselfany better for his historical role than he actually did by private study in his
own Colony.
There can be no possible question about his mature judgment of foreign
education for Americans, for he said that a volume would be necessary to
enumerate all its disadvantages. He saw no need whatever for anybody
except a student of medicine to go abroad. Among the many advantages of
being educated at home was one very practical one, and this he mentioned
to one of his young friends. "Cast your eye over America," he said; "who
are the men of most learning, of most eloquence, most beloved by their
countrymen and most trusted and promoted by them? They are those who
have been educated among them, and whose manners, morals, and habits,
are perfectly homogeneous with those of the country." 10 He made these
patriotic observations more than twenty years after he began to study with
Wythe, but if he had had to start all over again it is extremely unlikely that
he would have changed his plan.
Other leaders of the growing Virginia bar, like Robert Carter Nicholas,
Edmund Pendleton, and Wythe himself, had been educated locally, and the
approved method was that of reading in some lawyer's office. 11 Several
years before Jefferson entered the College, John Adams, facing a similar
problem of legal education in Massachusetts, had made an agreement with
James Putnam of Worcester to study for two years ''under his inspection,"
while carrying on his own teaching in the local school. 12 Formal legal
instruction was not to begin until after
f colonies had become states. Toward the end of the Revolution, ^r the
inspiration of Jefferson himself, Wythe was to assume a r of law at the
College of William and Mary; and a few years later ping Reeve was to set
up his famous school at Litchfield, Con-icut. In deciding to study law,
Jefferson had no such scruples to overcome as had troubled Adams, for the
profession was in better odor in Virginia and he had no craving for the
Church. In the narrow sense it was not a profitable calling in this Colony.
Because of the jealousy of the dominant planters and their desire to
discourage petty practitioners the fees of attorneys had been sharply
restricted by statute. 13 But land-
10 To John Banister, Jr., whose name Jefferson generally misspelled, Oct.
15, 1785 (L. & B., V, 188).
11 Warren discusses, pp. 164-169, the methods which prevailed in thecolonies generally. Some students had to content themselves with studying
in a clerk's office and with reading on their own.
12 Adams, Works, I, 32; see also I, 34, 42-44; II, 30-32. The important fact
is that he, like Jefferson, kept on studying.
18 Jefferson could have read about these restrictions in his copy of John
Mercer,
WILLIAMSBURG: INTRODUCTION TO THE LAW 67
holders who followed the law could continue to draw upon their acres for
support, and the heir of Peter Jefferson doubtless expected to do just that,
realizing that it was one of his many privileges. He was to pursue the law
as a learned and useful profession with notable devotion until great public
events deflected his course. His choice of Wythe as a guide instead of one
of the Randolphs or somebody else, and Wythe's agreement to receive him,
were probably owing to their mutual friend, William Small. He was
eternally grateful for these good offices and always convinced of the
wisdom of his decision, not merely because his mentor was the most
learned and possibly the most effective of the local group, but also because
of the greater range and liberality of his mind.
Jefferson did not have a high opinion of the apprentice system as such, for
he recognized the temptation of a practising lawyer to throw too great a
burden of office business on a student. About two years after his admission
to the bar he wrote to his uncle by marriage, Thomas Turpin, in regard to
the latter's son Philip: "The only help a youth wants is to be directed what
books to read and in what order to read them." 14 He himself probably
looked up cases for his senior in the law library at the Capitol; he
undoubtedly attended sessions of the General Court and may have done
some clerical service there; and he probably was set to drawing papers in
Wythe's office. 15 From the date of his earliest records Jefferson was a
careful draftsman and a # good penman, with a clear engrossing hand, and
he must have had immediate exercise in paper work. It is unlikely, though,
that he was ever an apprentice in any strict sense or that Wythe ever wanted
him to be one. There is no existing record that he paid any fee, and it is
impossible to say just how long he was physically present in Wythe's
office. During his second year he studied for months after Christmas at
Shadwell, returning to Williamsburg in the fall of his third; after that heprobably read wherever he liked and on his own schedule.
He followed an appallingly rigorous program most of the time, unless the
sincerity of his advice to others and the entries in his own notebooks are to
be doubted. He had a mild fling as a privileged young gentleman during the
first two years, and gave himself some time for
An Exact Abridgement of all the Public Acts of Assembly of Va., in force
and Use, Jan. 1, 1158 (1759), annotated copy at UVA. The successive acts
can now be traced in Hening.
14 Feb. 5, 1769, in Dickorc, Two Unpublished Letters from Thomas
Jeflerson.
"The exact location of the office has not been determined, but then reason
to suppose that it was on the place, where there were plenty of
outbuildings.
such frivolities as are common between the ages of nineteen and twenty-
one. But though the social gaieties of the provincial capital and of the
plantation houses allured him at first, it must have been before he entered
upon what he called the "business of life" and while he was still primarily a
student that he copied into his literary notebook a sobering extract about
the shortage of time.
Youth is not rich in time; it may be poor;
Part with it as with money, sparing; pay
No moment but in purchase of it's worth;
And what it's worth, ask death-bells; they can tell.
Part with it as with life, reluctant; big
With holy hope of nobler time to come. 16
( He never found hours enough to accomplish his intellectual pur-
\ poses.U^ In all that he said afterwards about the education of a lawyer, he made it
clear that the foundations must be both deep and broad. 17 Knowledge of
Latin and French he regarded as absolutely necessary. The first book that
he used involved both of these languages, though the French was not such
as he was to hear later at the court of Ver-sailles.j He thought of
mathematics and natural philosophy as studies
I too useful and delightful for anyone to miss, and regarded them, par-
J^ticularly mathematics, as invaluable in exercising the mind. He continued
to make scientific observations with Small until this teacher and friend left
for England, and if he needed any guidance in his continued reading of the
classics, Wythe was abundantly qualified to supply it.
Wythe's early education had been handicapped by poverty, though he
inherited an estate after he became a man. That he was largely self-taught,
with his mother's help, and that until the age of thirty he had devoted
himself almost exclusively to the law, did not prevent his becoming a noted
classical scholar — the best in Virginia, Jefferson said. An English traveler,
who had met Wythe even earlier, said that he had a "perfect knowledge" of
Greek and of ancient philosophy, particularly the Platonic. 18 He never
lured Jefferson into Platonic paths
x * Literary Bible of Thomas Jefferson (hereafter cited as Literary Bible),
ed. by Gilbert Chinard, p. 141, quoting from Young's Night Thoughts. On
July 13, 1764, he purchased a copy of Young's works, as shown by the Day
Books of the Va. Gazette.
17 Throughout life he gave advice on request about the study of law. The
letter of Aug. 30, 1814, to John Minor, enclosing copy of a paper written
nearly fifty years earlier, is most useful here because of its completeness
and also because it reflects his early opinions. See Randall, I, 53-57.
18 Andrew Burnaby, Travels Through North America, p. 53; he met Wythe
in 1759. Jefferson's nephew Peter Carr, whose course Wythe directed,
studied the
WILLIAMSBURG: INTRODUCTION TO THE LAW 69
but he led him to improve his Greek, at which he was not so good as atLatin. Wythe later injected classical quotations into his judicial opinions in
a way that was little short of pedantic, but early in his career he imbibed the
spirit of ancient civilization at its best. The aforesaid traveler, who was
generally critical of Virginians, said that to his classical learning he "had
joined such a profound reverence for the Supreme Being, such respect for
the divine laws, such philanthropy for mankind, such simplicity of
manners, and such inflexible rectitude and integrity of principle, as would
have dignified a Roman senator, even in the most virtuous times of the
republic." Jefferson, to whom the heroes of antiquity were more real than
either the Christian saints or modern historical figures, described him as his
country's Cato without the Roman's avarice, while someone else called him
the American Aristides, thus showing that he was also an Athenian.
Despite his deserved reputation, Wythe's intellectual interests were not so
broad as his distinguished pupil's afterwards were, and his apprehension
was not so quick. This moderate man may not have been disposed to attack
learning on quite so wide a front. Probably he never drew up so long and
formidable a list of subjects kindred to the law as Jefferson afterwards
commended to the young; probably he did not expect his protege, along
with the law, to study physics, ethics, religion, natural philosophy, belles-
lettres, criticism, rhetoric, politics, and history. Jefferson's
recommendations suggest that the diet at Wythe's board was generous and
well-balanced, but they also show the insatiable appetite of his own
omnivorous mind. Wythe was a systematic man and probably encouraged
him to work out a regular schedule, without requiring him to fill every
moment from dawn to bedtime. If we may judge from Jefferson's own
recommendations, the hours from eight to twelve in the morning, when his
mental vigor was greatest, were devoted exclusively to the law. The rest of
the time, except for a period of afternoon exercise, was given to allied
subjects. He relegated literature and oratory to the evening hours, but there
is plenty of evidence that he did not neglect them. He would hardly have
recommended such a comprehensive and exacting schedule if he had not
tried it out himself, and he probably approximated his ideal after a year or
two.
The technical study of the law was then "a dreary ramble," as John Adams
said, for books that smoothed the student's path did not exist. Textbooks of
the modern sort were unknown, and Blackstone's famous
classics as well as the law with him; Carr to Jefferson, Mar. 18, 1788, Carrand Cary Papers, UVA.
Commentaries had not yet appeared. All lawbooks had to be imported and
there was a sad shortage of them in the colonies generally. There were no
American reports of cases, English reports were scarce, and in most
colonies collections of their own statutes were hard to get. 19 Few people
in Virginia could ever boast a complete set, and the collection which
Jefferson eventually amassed was notable in its time. 20 At the beginning
an abridgment of the Acts of Assembly was available to him; this extended
to January 1, 1758, and by his annotations he brought and kept it up to date.
As colonial conditions went, Williamsburg was rich in legal resources, and,
like John Adams, he became a systematic purchaser of such books as were
obtainable. He never lacked food though it must often have seemed
unpalatable.
Wythe started him on Coke upon Littleton, which constituted the first of
four parts of the Institutes of the Lawes of England. He would probably
have been directed to the same book if he had gone to one of the Inns of
Court, for it had been the lawyers' primer in its homeland for more than a
century and a dozen editions of it had appeared. 21 In the course of time
this student was to gain a conception of the law, not as an immutable
system, but as something that lives and moves. He had no immediate
reason to expect that, however, when he began to struggle with the "black
letter text and uncouth but cunning learn-ning" of Sir Edward Coke.
Coke had reprinted in the Norman French the classic treatise of Littleton on
tenures, which he regarded as "the most perfect and absolute work that was
ever written in any humane science," had added an English translation, and
had heaped around the text in bewildering mass his own definitions and
learned notes. To the beginner this folio must have seemed heavy and
formidable, but if he did not wander too far afield he might learn here just
how land was held. In Virginia as in the Mother Country this was a matter
of the first importance.
This primer of legal learning was more than a book to Jefferson; it was a
person. He packed him in a trunk before leaving Williamsburg for a stay at
Shadwell, possibly hoping to smother him; he called him an old, dull
scoundrel; and he consigned him to the Devil.
19 Adams, Works, Ul, 50 n.\ Warren, Hist. Am. Bar, ch. VIII; R. S. Morris,"Jefferson as a Lawyer," Procs. Am. Philos. Soc, Vol. 87, No. 3, July 14,
1943, pp. 212-213.
20 St. George Tucker, in editor's preface to Blackstone's Commentaries
(Philadelphia, 1803), I, iv. Tucker had been unable to get one for himself.
21 The edition cited here is the 11th (1719); Jefferson could have used this
or the I2th (1738), which was severely criticized. For discussion see art. on
Coke in Dictionary of National Biogra'phy; Sir William Holdsworth, Hist,
of Eng. Law, V (2 ed., 1937), 466-468.
WILLIAMSBURG: INTRODUCTION TO THE LAW 71
Other eminent men expressed themselves even more strongly: the old jurist
profoundly discouraged John Quincy Adams and Daniel Webster, and he
drove Joseph Story actually to tears. But these were younger men not bred
in so stern a school. Jefferson learned from Wythe, as John Adams did from
Jeremiah Gridley, that there was no choice but to conquer Coke. He gained
deep respect for him, as young Story did, and in long retrospect he
preferred Coke's crabbed text and uncouth learning to the "honeyed" words
of Blackstone, which were so much easier to understand. 22
Old Coke was not unsympathetic; indeed, he counseled the beginner
wisely:
Mine advice to the Student is, That before he read any part of our
Commentaries upon any Section, that first he read again and again our
Author himself in that Section, and do his best Endeavours, first of himself,
and then by Conference with others, (which is the Life of Study) to
understand it, and then to read our Commentary thereupon, and no more at
any one Time than he is able with a Delight to bear away, and after to
meditate thereon, which is the Life of Reading. 23
If George Wythe's student followed Coke's excellent advice, this is the
passage, in the English translation of the text, which he read first:
Tenant in Fee-simple is he which hath Lands or Tenements to hold to him
and his heirs for ever. And it is called in Latin, Feodum simplex, for
Feodum is the same that Inheritance is, and Simplex is as much as to say,
lawful or pure; and so Feodum simplex signifies a lawful or pureinheritance.
Then, if his eye happened to stray to the notes in the adjoining column, he
could have observed that tenant is derived of the verb teneo, "and hath in
the law five significations." Coke's definitions, word by word and phrase by
phrase, were there for him to read and ponder over.
He probably did not share Coke's reverence for the text vcrv long, and in
the end the notes must have seemed minute. They even extended to
Littleton's use of an "etc." This was not the best place to discover broad
legal principles. But when Jefferson, in the next decade, moved in the
Virginia House of Delegates that tenants in fee tail should hold their lands
in fee simple and thus acquire a pure inheritance, he could have reflected
that he first learned the meaning of these cru-
22 Warren cites numerous comments, pp. 173-177. The reference to John
Adams is from Works, II, 46-47, when he was aged 23.
cial terms from Littleton and Coke. Even the physical form of this old
commentary, unusual in its own day in England, left a lasting impression.
The manuscript of one of the best-known bills that he ever drafted for his
native Commonwealth reveals Coke's unmistakable influence, in the notes
which first accompany and then invade the columned text. 24
In the course of time he studied the three other parts of the famous
Institutes. One contained the texts of English statutes from Magna Carta to
the time of James I, another dealt with criminal law, and the last was a
treatise on jurisdiction. For long years he considered this work the basis of
legal study and he commended it again and again. He soon became aware,
however, that the law had developed since Coke's day, that new laws had
been added by legislatures, and that new developments of old laws had
been brought about by judges. He was quite willing to use later digests and
treatises, and specifically recommended Matthew Bacon's abridgment,
Lord Karnes on equity, and other books of the sort. The modernity of his
legal training is most striking in the study and the emphasis he gave to the
actual cases that were argued and adjudged in the courts of England. John
Adams was equally interested in pursuing the law back to its historic
fountains, and he also talked of Bracton and other men of ancient learning,
but neither he nor any other of Jefferson's contemporaries has left a
comparable record of attention to "the Reporters." 25It was in connection with these reports of cases that Jefferson began, after a
few years, to keep commonplace books. His notes of his reading contain
more detailed information about his legal studies than is generally available
for the great lawyers of his or any other American generation. These old
notes are important documents in the history of the case system. They may
now seem wearisome except to legal antiquarians, but there is freshness
and timelessness in the advice he gave a young contemporary toward the
end of his own training.
In reading the Reporters, enter in a commonplace book every case of value,
condensed into the narrowest compass possible, which will admit of
presenting distinctly the principles of the case. This operation is doubly
useful, insomuch as it obliges the student to seek out the pith of the case,
and habituates him to a condensation of thought, and to an acquisition of
the most valu-
24 A Bill for proportioning crimes and punishments, LC 232:42052-42058.
These physical qualities do not appear in the published versions.
25 Jefferson said much about Bracton in his much-quoted letter to Thomas
Cooper, Jan. 16, 1814 (L. & B., XIV, 54-59); but in his letter to Bernard
Moore, written almost half a century earlier, he minimized the usefulness
of De legibus Angliae; see Randall, I, 54.
WILLIAMSBURG: INTRODUCTION TO THE LAW 73
able of all talents, that of never using two words where one will do. It fixes
the case, too, more indelibly in the mind. 20
Under Wythe he started with Coke, whose lore could not be abstracted, and
he proceeded step by step until he finally reached maturity from his study
of the cases. During his unhurried period of legal tutelage he formed
enduring habits of study while, under the influence of men as well as
books, ideas germinated within his fertile mind.
His law teacher, besides being a classicist and a courtly gentleman, was a
successful practitioner at the bar of the General Court and an esteemed
member of the House of Burgesses. Jefferson, soon seeing him in action in
both places, noted his easy elocution and chaste language and his urbanity
in debate. He himself was to be more precipitate in politics and eventuallyhe took the lead, but there was never a rift between him and his old friend.
Always, there was mutual respect and affection.
In Jefferson's early history the name of George Wythe is inseparable from
those of William Small and Francis Fauquier. His intimate association with
this trio as a trio must have begun before 1764, when Small went back to
England and Jefferson himself became twenty-one. It may have dated from
his college days, but it probably took form soon after he began to study
law. He was not yet grown when, by happy chance, he was regularly
admitted as a fourth member of the party which had been dining frequently
at the Palace since the Governor's family had returned home. At these
dinners, Jefferson said long afterward, he heard "more good sense, more
rational and philosophical conversations," than at anv other time in his life.
His much-quoted statement may reflect the imperfect memory of an old
man and the exaggerated emphasis of age on youthful experience, but
unquestionably it contains a nugget of important truth.7
He was to know Wythe much the longest of the three and to love him most.
This learned, temperate, and kindly gentleman, not quick to
26 Randall, I, 55. The Coimnonplace Book of Thomas JefJerso?j, cd. by (
Chinard (1926) from the ms., LC, includes only the titles of the exclusively
legal articles, hence it is most valuable in connection with ideas of
government. I nough has been printed, however, to show the scope and
carefulness of Jefferson's method. Another commonplace book of his I I
111 h deals with equity cases and authorities. .Most of the entries in both of
these notebooks seem to date from a later time than these years in
Williamsburg. Presumably both of them will be published in full in the
Papers now being edited at Princeton. A study of Jefferson as a lawyer,
including his professional training, is now being made under the auspices
of the American Philosophical Societv bv Edward Dnmbaold.
apprehend but profound in penetration, may have lacked the contagious
enthusiasm of the Professor or the sophisticated charm of the Governor, but
he was doubtless the wisest counselor and the safest exemplar of the three.
Indeed, it is hard to see how a better could have been found.
MThe School of Manners 1762-1765
A SQUARE beyond the Wythe house in Williamsburg stood the
Governor's Palace, commanding the green. A generation before Jefferson
went there it was described as a magnificent structure, "finished and
beautified" with gates and gardens, offices and walks, orchards and a fine
canal. 1 The ballroom wing had been added in the meantime but little had
been spent on the estate in the last decade. In his maturity Jefferson did not
regard the large brick mansion as handsome but, since he had measured it,
he spoke advisedly about the spaciousness of its interior. He liked the
situation and thought that if the grounds were developed it might be made
an "elegant seat." 2 One can only guess what his opinion of it would be in
its present restored perfection, but in his student days, when he dined and
performed in amateur musicals at the Palace, he undoubtedly found more
elegance there than he had ever before observed.
His host was Francis Fauquier, who continued to be the chief resident
official of the Province until a year after Jefferson was admitted to the bar.
He afterwards described Fauquier as the ablest man who ever filled the
chair of government in Williamsburg. 3 Though he may have been thinking
of only the colonial period and not of the two first executives of the
Commonwealth who sat in the same chair, Par-rick Henry and himself, he
probably would have made the generali/.i-
1 Hugh Jones, Present State of Virginia (1724), p. 31. On the Palace,
besides the publications of Colonial Williamsburg, Inc., cited in the
previous chapter, see Waterman, Mansions of Virginia, pp. 30-61.
2 Ford, III, 258. A detailed floor plan of the Palace, drawn by Jefferson, is
in MHS. This is reproduced by Waterman, p. J96, along with another study
from the same hand.
tion in any case. When he first met this governor, however, his own mind
was not yet turned to affairs of state; and he knew his predecessor chiefly as
a gentleman, as a patron of learning, and as a friend of the arts.
Fauquier had come to Virginia at the age of fifty-four, two years before
Jefferson entered college. He was the son of a Huguenot physician who
took refuge in England, found employment at the mint under Sir Isaac
Newton, married an Englishwoman, and eventually became a director ofthe Bank of England. Francis was born in London and until about the time
of his marriage into a county family he followed a military career. He then
appears to have lived the life of a country gentleman in Hertfordshire. His
uncle William, a successful merchant who was addicted to scientific
studies, made him his heir; and after the death of this uncle he became like
him a director of the South Sea Company and a Fellow of the Royal
Society. He is said to have been well regarded in the merchant group and
he had many acquaintances in philosophical circles. 4
The story, long current in Virginia, that his appointment as lieutenant
governor was owing to the compassion of Lord Anson, after the latter had
won his entire patrimony in a single night's play at cards, emphasizes one
aspect of his reputation but cannot be accepted as sober fact. 5
Appointments to colonial offices in the eighteenth century cannot always be
fully explained, but this one may be attributed in part to the reputation
which Fauquier had gained through a pamphlet published by him the year
before the death of Peter Jefferson. Dedicated to Lord Anson, it dealt with
the burning question of financial support for the war with France, and it
attracted enough attention to warrant two additional editions. 6
It was of advantage to Fauquier in Virginia that he followed an unpopular
governor, and it was to his credit there that he endeavored to maintain
harmonious relations between the Colony and the authorities at home. 7 In
the ecclesiastical controversy his sympathies were all with the local
authorities; and, both in policy and person, he was al-
4 The best account of his early life is Fairfax Harrison, "A Portrait of
Governor Fauquier," Fauquier Hist. Soc. Bulletin, No. 4 (1924), pp.
343-350.
5 Burk, History of Virginia (hereafter cited as Burk), III (1805), 333-334.
6 "An Essay on Ways and Means for raising Money for the Support of the
Present War Without Increasing the Public Debt," in J. H. Hollander, ed., A
Reprint of Economic Tracts (1915). The 1st and 2nd eds. were in 1756, the
3rd in 1757. Fauquier first recommended a tax on houses and in the 2nd ed.
he substituted for fhis a graduated capitation tax, but the chief historical
significance which has been perceived in this pamphlet by students of
economic thought lies in its argument that taxes on necessities will be
shifted to employers and ultimately paid by consumers. See editor's
introduction, p. 5.7 P. S. Flippin, The Royal Government in Virginia, pp. 133-136.
most everything that the gentlemen of Virginia could have wished their
governor to be. His great personal popularity may be attributed to the fact
that he was possessed of all the social virtues, in an eminent degree, and
that he found among the people or at least the leaders of the Colony "a
character compounded of the same elements as his own." 8 The great
landholders, whom he received at the Palace and visited during the recess
of the Assembly and the courts, found in his manners a model such as some
of them had seen in England and others had read about in books; here was
the "compleat gentleman" in living form. He had classical learning of the
kind that was associated with the names of the second Richard Lee and the
second William Byrd, and was exemplified among his contemporaries by
George Wythe. His patronage of science may have chiefly impressed
youngsters like Thomas Jefferson and John Page, but the high favor with
which William Small was regarded by leading men shows that it was far
from unwelcome at the time. In this respect as in others Fauquier was
fashionable and modern.
He was a "curious" observer of natural phenomena who discussed current
philosophical questions with his appreciative friends. Examples of his own
observations survive. During his first year in the Colony he sent to his
brother in England an account of a strange hailstorm which descended upon
Williamsburg on an unusually hot Sunday afternoon in July. When this was
communicated to the Roval Society the savants could have noted with
satisfaction that the hailstones were described with scientific precision,
both as to their shape and size. The storm broke every pane of glass on the
north side of the Palace and destroyed the garden; and the Governor cooled
his wine and froze cream with some of the ice next day. 9 Young Jefferson
must have heard this story after he came to town and he mav have gained
from Fauquier his first ideas about the regular recording of the temperature
and winds. The latter kept a diary of the weather in Williamsburg for just
the years that his young friend was there in college, and afterwards turned
this over to an English traveler who published it as an appendix to a book
10 It was precisely the sort of record that Jefferson himself kept so
religiously at Monticello and at almost every other place where he stayed
for long.
The only serious blot on Fauquier's character was his love for1 8 W. & M., 1 ser., VIII, 173; Burk, III, 333-334. 9 Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society, Vol JO, pt 2 for the year 1758 (1759),
pp. 746-747. The storm occurred on July 9, 1758. 10 Andrew Burnaby,
Travels through North America (1904 ed.), App. N pp. 215-251; reprinted
from Travels through the Middle Settle?nents of Sorth America (3 ed.,
1798), where the author described this as the most valuable part
gambling. The later statement that he introduced the "fatal propensity to
gaming" into Virginia seems extreme in view of the practices which had
been observed there before he came; but he encouraged these by his own
example and had a part in making gambling a fashionable form of vice. 11
This was a time of extravagance, and losses are said to have been
dangerously high. In his day in Williamsburg a traveler observed that in the
taverns at night there was carousing and drinking in one chamber, and a
box and dice in the other, and that this sort of thing lasted till morning. He
went so far as to say that there was not a public house in Virginia but had
its tables all battered with dice-boxes. 12 How deep-rooted such evils were
no traveler could really judge; but more sober years were coming. Just prior
to the Revolution, a young tutor observed in Westmoreland, that a new
spirit of seriousness had entered Virginia life. 13 That seriousness was
exemplified by George Washington and by Thomas Jefferson himself.
There was more recklessness in the golden decade of Fauquier when there
were fewer great things for men to do.
Jefferson said that when he was assailed by moral temptation during his
youth and young manhood he used to ask himself how Small, or Wythe, or
Peyton Randolph would act; he did not invoke the example of Fauquier. 14
At the Governor's table he heard highly stimulating conversation, and in
this court he acquired graces which adorned his life, but he found his moral
standards elsewhere. He did not pick up such vices as his elegant host
exemplified — unless generosity and love of elegance should be accounted
vices. But a certain longing for magnificence, in the spirit of the
Renaissance, could be observed among rich Virginia planters and found
early expression in the career of Thomas Jefferson. He may have got it
from his countrymen or from his reading — but he may have caught it from
Francis Fauquier.
It was probably after Jefferson had begun to study law under George Wythe
that the musical Governor, who was a good performer himself, associated
him with two or three other amateurs in the weekly concerts at the Palace.15 He may have neglected his instrument for his books while he was at the
College, but he afterwards reported that for twelve years before the
Revolution he played no fewer than three hours a day. 16 While he was still
a student in Williamsburg he
"Burk, III, 333.
12 Am. Hist. Rev., XXVI, 742-743; see also Burk, III, 402.
13 Fithian, pp. 280-281.
14 To T. J. Randolph, Nov. 24, 1808 (Ford, IX, 231).
15 To L. H. Girardin, Jan. 15, 1815 (L. & B., XIV, 232).
16 Randall, I, 24, 131.
found musical opportunities such as he had never had before, and which as
a performer he was not to know again. He had no chance to see sculpture or
fine paintings there, but traveling companies brought comic operas from
time to time and music was cultivated by amateurs. 17 The professional
authority of the place was Peter Pelham, son of a mezzotint artist of Boston
and organist of Bruton Church, who supplemented his income by taking
pupils, among them Jefferson's friend Anne Blair. At a later time he gained
a further supplement by assuming the incongruous position of keeper of the
Public Gaol. He then gave condemned criminals a chance to hear music
before their execution, taking them to the church in shackles. In later years
he often played for Jefferson, who treated him afterwards or paid him for
his pains. The auditor filled the role of generous patron; at that time and
place the status of the professional was inferior.
Jefferson was hardly proficient enough for the first violin part at the Palace;
he probably had the second part and may even have played on the cello, for
he was a passable performer on that instrument at a later time. The first
violinist was probably John Randolph, brother of Peyton. He was not only
a lawyer; he published a book on gardening which Jefferson acquired. 18
Councillor Robert Carter, a close friend of the Governor who played on the
harpsichord and the German flute, was probably a member of the group. In
his house next door to the Palace he installed an organ which had been built
for him in London, and it is likely that Jefferson heard music there. He wasunsuccessful in his later attempt to purchase this instrument. 19 It is
possible that John Page participated in the concerts. Jefferson bought
fiddle-strings regularly before visiting his friend at Rosewell, and
undoubtedly he played there. There was a musical accompaniment to many
of Jefferson's most intimate associations throughout the first half of his life,
and it was probably during these years at Williamsburg that music became
the ''favorite passion" of his soul. Afterwards he bemoaned the fate which
had cast his lot in a country where it was in a deplorable state of barbarism.
20 But this was during the Revolution, some time after Fauquier had gone.
In the setting of the Palace ball-
17 "On Music in Colonial Williamsburg," Report to Dcpt. Research and
Record, Colonial Williamsburg, by Helen D. Bullock, Mar. 21, 1938, made
available through their courtesy; unpublished ms. on "Jefferson and Music"
by Carleton S. Smith and Helen D. Bullock, made available by their
kindness.
18 A Treatise on Gardening, by a Citizen of Virginia, ed. by M F. Warner
(1924); reprinted from 3rd ed. of 1825; 1st ed. c. 1765.
19 L. Morton, Robert Carter of Nomini Hall, p. 41.
20 June 8, 1778 (Ford, II, 158-160), letter without designation, but draft in
LC, 3:419, shows it to have been addressed to John Fabroni or Fabbroni.
room, where a little group of enthusiastic amateurs performed when he was
young, barbarism seemed remote.
Jefferson's extra-legal activities during his first years as a student under
Wythe were not confined to conversations at the Governor's table and
musicals in the Palace ballroom; to a degree he played a conventional part
elsewhere as a young gentleman. His friendship with older men is one of
many signs of the essential seriousness of his nature. They perceived it and
reposed more confidence in him than might have been expected at his age,
and he in turn valued their companionship because he could learn so much
from them. In his relations with his contemporaries he soon became
discriminating; he never suffered fools gladly, and it is hard to think of him
as ever having been intellectually immature. As a recognized member of
the younger gentry, however, he participated in the customary social life,
and in the doing showed that in certain important respects he had not yetattained the full stature of a man, even though he now towered a couple of
inches beyond six feet.
His social activities were natural and innocent. He danced at the Raleigh
Tavern, visited at plantation houses, made wagers with girls, gossiped
about courtships, and as time went on served as an attendant at weddings.
He was and remained part of a close-knit social group, and he knew well
the favored sons and daughters of this fertile land. During the months that
he spent away from Williamsburg, which he sometimes called
"Devilsburg," he often bemoaned the lack of companionship. To John Page
he wrote once from Shad well: "All things here appear to me to trudge on
in one and the same round: we rise in the morning that we may eat
breakfast, dinner and supper, and go to bed again that we may get up the
next morning and do the same: so that you never saw two peas more alike
than our yesterday and today." 21 He was not interested in cultivating this
favorite vegetable as yet, and had not observed as he did later that not even
two peas are identical. During the same period he wrote to another friend:
"I do not like the ups and downs of a country life: today you are frolicking
with a fine girl and tomorrow you are moping by yourself." 22 At few
times during the course of his long life did he ever seem so bored.
There are many self-conscious passages in the few early letters of his that
remain. Had the matter been left to him, he probably would
21 Jan. 20, 1763; Ford, I, 346. Unpublished postscript to this letter, in
Franklin Collection, Yale Univ., photostat UVA, reflects equal tedium a
few weeks later. (Cited in Kimball, Road to Glory, pp. 68-69.)
22 To William Fleming, 1763 (Ford, I, 352).
have burned those youthful effusions which John Page and William
Fleming preserved and which, in the absence of other records, his
biographers have worn so bare. 23 They do not reveal half enough but they
disclose a great deal which the mature man would not have relished. They
are not without charm and cleverness, for he had already learned to turn a
happy phrase, but they are filled with learned conceits which are not at all
characteristic of one who afterwards wore the mantle of scholarship lightly,
as a gentleman was supposed to do. Their humor is often labored, for grace
did not yet compensate for the lack of striking wit. Worst of all, they are
full of references to girls. These would have horrified him in later years,when he was so reticent about personal affairs and particularly about his
relations with womankind. The dignity and restraint of middle age were
more characteristic, and also more becoming.
His earliest letters are interspersed with quotations from the classics, with
an occasional phrase in French. He referred to friends and acquaintances by
using rough Latin equivalents — "Parvus" for William Small, and "Currus"
for Dabney Carr. He wrote to William Fleming as "Will," but John Page he
addressed as "Dear Page." His use of familiar given names probably
declined from the time that he left Maury's school, and it ceased when he
and his friends attained maturity; then formality became the rule. While
still in the familiar stage he spoke of Alice Corbin, with whom he had bet a
pair of garters, of Sukey Potter whom he hoped Will Fleming would marry
—though actually he did not; of Nancy Wilton whom Page appears to have
courted briefly; of Jenny Taliaferro who played the spinet and sang well.
Most of all, he talked of Rebecca Burwell. She provided the only romantic
story of his youth, but it is not a particularly good one. He was an
indecisive suitor and emerged too rarely from the realm of thought.
This girl, whom he referred to as "R.B.," "Becca," "Belinda," "Campana in
die," and "Adnileb," on the pretense that some of these thin disguises
would deceive all but his closest friends, was an orphan with the best of
connections. Her father became a member of the Council in the year that
Thomas Jefferson was born. He was present when Joshua Fry and Peter
Jefferson reported that thev had extended the dividing line; as acting
governor, he consulted the Board about employing them to draw a map of
the inhabited part of Virginia, and soon after that he died. 24 The date of
the death of Rebecca's mother
28 Ford, I, 341-360.
24 Council Journals, Colonial Va n V, 129, 310, 345, 354, 370. He took his
seat Aug. 4. 1743, became acting governor on Nov. 21, 1750, and
continued until
is uncertain, but when Jefferson met her the orphaned girl was in the charge
of her uncle by marriage, William Nelson of York, also a Councillor and
afterwards acting governor. 25 He is generally referred to as "President
Nelson," while his brother Thomas is known as "Secretary Nelson," and his
own son Thomas is usually called "the Signer." It was the latter whosucceeded Jefferson as governor of the Commonwealth during the
Revolution. Jefferson addressed him as "Dear Nelson" and long maintained
intimate relations with this wealthy and influential family, as was natural
enough in view of his friendship with John Page. He may have met
Rebecca on a visit to York or Rosewell, but he probably saw her first in
Williamsburg, when her guardian was there attending to his official duties.
The tradition is that she was beautiful, and according to the scanty record
she was also good. Bishop Meade, "gentle annalist" of Virginia churches,
ministers, and families, approvingly quotes a passage describing her pious
resignation in the early loss of her parents and attributing to her a religious
enthusiasm which distinguished her from her giddy companions. 26
William Nelson himself was a zealous churchman, for all his interest in
racing horses, and in later life Rebecca appears to have been deeply
religious in the conventional sense. The Jefferson of history was not that,
but it is possible that an element in her attraction for him in his youth was
that she was somewhat more serious than the other girls.
He thought himself deeply in love during the winter before he was twenty
and while she was still sixteen. He was at Shadwell that winter, and his
struggles with Coke's tough primer of the law were being interrupted by
romantic thoughts. Early marriage was the rule rather than the exception in
his class, but he had also begun to dream of a trip abroad and he spoke of
this as a virtual necessity, though as a matter of fact he never made it. He
belabored his puzzled mind, trying to decide what to do, and revealed his
tortuous mental processes to his confidant, John Page.
Should he end his suspense by going down to receive his sentence, and at
the same time run the risk of being ten times more wretched than before?
Would Page join him on his travels in a vessel to be called the Rebecca, in
which they would sail to many lands, including Italy where a good fiddle
could be bought? If so, they might both be
Nov. 1, 1751. The meetings in which Joshua Fry and Peter Jefferson
figured were on Dec. 13, 1749, Oct. 15, 1751, and Nov. 1, 1751. See also
Va. Mag., II, 232-233, X, 177.
25 The most important facts about William Nelson are in the D.A.B. His
laudatory epitaph is in R. A. Brock, Virginia and Virginians (1888), I, 59.
99.>ry epitaph is 26 Meade, I,
cured of love. If Belinda would not accept his services he would never offer
them to another, but she had given him little ground for hope. He wanted to
ask her to wait until he had come back, but wondered if this would not
seem an unreasonable request. If she consented he would be happy; if not,
he would be as contented as he could. Perfect happiness was probably not
intended for human creatures, anyway, and one must learn to be resigned.
Others of their gay friends would be amused by such sober reflections, he
feared, but Page would understand.
All this was in the mood of adolescence, though the language was learned
and some of the passages show that his mind had already taken a
speculative turn. He was enjoying his reflective sadness, as well as his
recurrent hopes. A rival had appeared during his absence but, despite
Page's urging, he was not yet willing to approach Rebecca's guardian; he
must put the problem before the girl herself. President Nelson would
doubtless have chuckled had he heard him.
In the fall, back in Williamsburg, Jefferson wrote hopefully to Will
Fleming but soon sent a melancholy note to Page. Before he went to dance
with "Belinda" in the Apollo Room he had dressed up his thoughts in the
most moving language, but when the time came his actual sentences were
few and disordered, while the pauses were frequent and long. It was
unfortunate that he did not write to her instead of trusting to his stammering
speech. His pen was his strongest weapon and the stilted extravagances of
the time would not have seemed artificial to her, as they do to almost any
reader now.
Somewhat later he managed to say his piece. He talked about the necessity
of his trip to England and deliberately refrained from asking an outright
question, though he informed the young lady that such a question would be
asked at some later time. To her the remote prospect did not seem alluring
and this he must have sensed, for he made no effort to see her again. He
explained this inactivity to others on the ground that he had been
abominably lazy, but the probability is that he was now deeper in the law
than in love. His rival was more aggressive. In the spring, shortly before
Jefferson's twenty-first birthday, Rebecca became engaged to Jacquelin
Ambler, who was somewhat older than Jefferson and had really made up
his mind. 27 Years later, as a member of the Council of State, he wasclosely associated with Jefferson as governor of Virginia, and later still he
served with honor and great personal popularity as treasurer of the
Commonwealth. The Revolution seriously affected his fortunes; it also
brought him a prize son-in-law whom Jefferson afterwards disliked. At
Yorktown in 1779-1780 Alary
27 On Ambler, Ibid., I, 106-108; Va. Mag., XVIII, 378.
Ambler, daughter of Jacquelin and Rebecca, met Captain John Marshall,
and three years later in Richmond she became his wife. 28
Ambler acted more like an adult than his rival did in 1763 and 1764.
Jefferson carried on this rather absurd affair mostly in his imagination. But
there was no little wisdom at the base of his uncertainty. Before he
encumbered himself with a family he had many important things to do;
and, although he did not go to England, he did apply himself to his studies
with an intensity which a young wife could hardly have been expected to
approve. Such thoughts were doubtless in his mind when he copied into his
literary notebook the following strong passage from an eighteenth-century
playwright:
Wed her! No! were she all Desire could wish, as fair As would the vainest
of her sex be thought, With Wealth beyond what woman's pride could
waste, She should not cheat me of my Freedom. Marry! When I am old &
weary of the World, I may grow desperate, And take a Wife to mortify
withal. 29
Other entries, even more antifeminist, lead to the supposition that this
unhappy experience cured him temporarily of his hankering for girls. From
Paradise Lost he transcribed this:
O! why did God, Creator wise! that Peopl'd highest Heav'n With spirits
masculine, create at last This Novelty on Earth, this fair Defect Of Nature?
And not fill the world at once With Men, as Angels, without feminine? Or
find some other Way to generate Mankind? 30
The women of his day in Virginia had few intellectual advantages and, like
an English traveler who had recently passed that way, he may have
concluded that they were unequal to any "interesting and refined
conversation." 31 During the next few years he found satisfaction infriendship with men. When he passed philosophical evenings at Rose-well
with John Page, or talked about the law with Dabney Carr on an Albemarle
hillside, he was relatively free from disturbing thoughts
28 A. J. Beveridge, Life of John Marshall, I, 148-165. ^ 9 From Otway's
Orphan, quoted in Literary Bible, p. 158. 30 Ibid., p. 139. 31 Burnaby,
Travels, p. 57.
about the "fair defect of nature." Dabney Carr was likewise reading Coke
and Matthew Bacon, and he also set high value on "the blessings of
science." According to Jefferson, he had "every excellence which good
sense, learning, or virtue could give." 32 It was of boon companions such
as these that he thought when he copied into his notebook a passage from
Euripides:
Nothing is better than a reliable friend, not riches, not absolute sovereignty.
Nay more, the crowd is not to be reckoned with, in exchange for a noble
friend. 83
This saying did more than match a fleeting mood: it voiced a conviction
which grew deeper through the years. He was ever afterwards restrained in
his comments on individual women, but it was always easy for him to wax
sentimental about a friend. It was no accident that his life was
extraordinarily rich in friendship, for he cultivated this unceasingly and
made of it an art. In a moment of irreparable personal loss, after he had
begun to grow old, he wrote John Page: "But friends we have, if we have
merited them. Those of our earliest years stand nearest in our affections."
With regard to this first group, however, he did not regard himself as
wholly fortunate. This was chiefly because of his own longevity, for the
companions of his youth vanished from the field before he did. Some of
them, also, were eventually parted from him by political differences,
though he regarded this as an insufficient cause. It was while he was
President that he said to Page: "Of our college friends (and they are the
dearest) how few have stood with us in the great political questions which
have agitated our country; ... I did not believe the Lilliputian fetters of that
day strong enough to have bound so many." 34
When he was studying law the period of political strife was remote, but his
two best friends soon yielded to the lure of women. He was only twenty-
two when John Page married Frances, daughter of Robert Carter Burwell ofIsle of Wight County; she was to bear him twelve of his twenty children,
thus participating impressively in the divine plan for the generation of
mankind. It was in the year 1765, also, that Dabney Carr married Martha
Jefferson. The happiness of "Currus" greatly impressed Martha's brother,
and before it was cut short by untimely death he himself followed this
glowing example. Romance returned to him in maturer and less fleeting
form, and within his family he revealed as nowhere else the gentleness and
tenderness of his nature. But his own
82 To Thomas Stone, Mar. 16, 1782, in LC, 8:1226.
83 Lit. Bible, p. 94.
84 June 25, 1804 (L. & B., XI, 32).
marriage did not occur until eight or nine years after his imaginative quest
of Rebecca Burwell.
No picture of Jefferson as a young gentleman survives, but there is a good
deal of information about the general social environment in which he lived
during his student years. At that time the standards which Fauquier
personified and accentuated were already set. 35 The Governor did not
introduce them. They had been transplanted from England in the first place,
and in the unequal and dispersed society of a sunny agricultural province
they had assumed characteristic local form. The polish and elegance of
colonial society can be easily exaggerated, and unquestionably there was
much crudity behind the facade. Even in the best circles in Virginia there
was less smoothness than Jefferson afterwards observed in Paris, where the
roughness of the human mind was so rubbed off that one might glide
through life without a jostle. Nevertheless, good manners were an essential
feature of the prevailing pattern. Even in the relatively fashionable period
of Fauquier's governorship the gentleman did not need to be a dandy, and at
a later time he was proudly indifferent to the externalities of dress. Ideally,
however, the gentleman was hospitable and generous, courteous in his
relations with his peers, chivalrous toward women, and kind to inferiors.
Not everybody was mannerly; even the Governor was rude under
provocation. But there was a high standard of politeness which the gentry
recognized and generally observed. Politeness, as Jefferson afterwards
remarked, is artificial good humor, and a valuable preservative of peace and
tranquillity. 36The grandson to whom he made this observation preserved a story of the
mollifying effects of the best Virginia manners, and this probably came
from Jefferson himself. The sheriff of one of the river counties, who was
described as a self-made man though he founded a distinguished family,
had strong prejudices against the aristocrats. Approaching the seat of one of
the proudest of these, on a business errand, and seeing him before the
house, the sheriff resolved not to dismount. But, when he drew near, he was
greeted by the gentleman "with such suavity, dignity, and winning grace of
manner, that before he became aware of it he found himself standing before
him hat in hand." This grandson, struck by the common quality of
politeness in the older gentlemen of Virginia who differed in so many other
ways, asked his
85 For an excellent discussion of the ideals and standards of the gentry, see
L. B. Wright, First Gentlemen of Virginia. The comments of Burnaby in
Travels, pp. 53-54, are less favorable.
86 To T. J. Randolph, Nov. 24, 1808 (Ford, IX, 231).
grandfather for an explanation. To this Jefferson replied that they had all
been trained in Williamsburg, "the finest school of manners and morals that
ever existed in America." 37
In view of his comments on his own personal difficulties and temptations
during his youth, it is surprising that he should have commended the morals
as well as the manners of a place where students rioted periodically and
drinking and gambling were so rife. He said that he was thrown into the
society of cardplayers, horse racers, and fox hunters, and left no doubt that
he regarded such company as bad. This statement, however, must be read
side by side with other later remarks of his about the grave dangers of
dissipation which American students would face in England. In the course
of time he came to regard Williamsburg as a relatively moral place.
In this society, pleasure and conviviality were not frowned upon and
certain personal vices were condoned. The unpardonable sins were lying
and meanness of spirit. Plain speech to one's peers was not expected;
insofar as possible the gentleman was supposed to please. The educational
ideal was that of the well-rounded man, who was decently familiar with the
classics, reasonably current with philosophy, and had at least a bowing
acquaintance with the arts. Only in the fields of plantation affairs andgovernment was he expected to be a specialist.
There is no more reason to suppose that Jefferson uncritically accepted the
entire social code than that he contented himself with meeting the minimal
requirements of education. He conformed outwardly to the prevailing
social standards but he escaped the characteristic vices. Well into mature
manhood he made small wagers, but in no real sense was he a gambler after
he became grown. It is doubtful if he was ever much of a drinker, though
he acquired a well-stocked cellar in due course and eventually became a
connoisseur of wines. In these early years he dressed as fastidiously as his
companions, he enjoyed dancing, and as a matter of course he rode. At no
time, probably, was this foe of indolence and lover of books quite
conventional, but he responded quickly to refinement and he was rarely if
ever coarse. He became a penetrating critic of the society in which he was
born and bred, but socially he was in all respects a gentleman. His
distinction lies in the fact that he became a great deal more.
"Memoirs of T. J. Randolph (Edgehill Randolph Papers), UVA, pp. 9-10.
on
Listening at the Capitol 1765-1766
THE College, the Wythe house, the Palace, the Capitol — these were the
focal centers of Jefferson's life in Williamsburg during his student years.
The Capitol was last in point of time but it proved the most important in the
end, for it became a major scene of his own action. Williamsburg was more
than an academic village and a school of manners; it was the seat and
school of provincial government. He could see the political institutions of
the Colony in actual operation, all the more easily because the place was
small, and could become personally acquainted with the able men who
made them work.
The Governor, whom Jefferson knew so well and admired so much, was
the visible representative of the far-distant King, whose birthday was
regularly celebrated in the town and whose name appeared on all public
documents of any note. Around Fauquier was gathered a Council of a
dozen wealthy and influential men. Jefferson became friends with several
of these in the course of social life. He first became familiar with the
Council as an official body in its capacity as the highest provincial court oflaw. In order to learn his future business he went as a listener to the
General Court. The Capitol was built in the form of the letter H, and the
General Court was held in one wing on the first floor while the burgesses
met in the other. 1 There was little occasion for him to climb to the second
floor, where committees met and the Council sat in executive session, but
he knew the first floor well and there observed the House of Burgesses.
Knowledge of it and its members was an important part of the education of
future leaders, such as the sons of the gentry were deemed to be.
Through George Wythe, Jefferson soon became personally acquainted with
Edmund Pendleton, whose prowess as a debater he afterwards attested. At
an early time he marked Pendleton as a leader
of the conservatives, but from the beginning he regarded him as a friend.
Not until he himself went to the bar did Jefferson become intimate with his
mother's cousin, Peyton Randolph, now King's Attorney and soon to be
Speaker of the House, but he saw this large man in action. He was always
impressed with Peyton Randolph's intelligence but never by his ability as a
speaker. 2 Considerably older was another first cousin of Jane Randolph
Jefferson, a cousin whom her son regarded as the most learned of the elder
group of statesmen. Profound in constitutional lore, Richard Bland looked
something like the old parchments which he handled and studied so much.
3 More than any other single man, probably, he laid the philosophical
foundations of the resistance to the Mother Country, but Jefferson noted
that he, also, was an ungraceful speaker. It was the greatest of the Virginia
orators who gave wide currency to these doctrines, and of all the burgesses
it was he who most impressed the young man at first. From the time that he
heard Patrick Henry as a student he regarded him as pre-eminent in the
forensic field.
In his maturity Jefferson was no admirer of mere oratory, but he never
questioned the power of eloquence, and even in extreme old age he
commended the study of it to youth. He gave it a recognized place in his
own program, believing that a law student should read and analyze works
of oratory and thus become acquainted with the "elevated style." He copied
out examples of English eloquence, some of them now obscure; he found
chaste specimens in Livy, Sallust, and Tacitus; and during his evening
hours he read Demosthenes and Cicero, whom he continued to regard as
the finest models for the forum and the bar. 4 While he was still in college
he heard a Cherokee chief deliver an oration which he never forgot; andthree years later he stood at the door of the chamber of the burgesses,
listening spellbound to Patrick Henry. This memorable experience
constituted more than an introduction to vivid local eloquence; it was also a
striking example of the sort of political education which as a potential
leader he received in Williamsburg.
He had met Patrick Henry in Hanover County more than five years earlier.
This was at the hospitable home of Captain Nathaniel West Dandridge, he
said, during the Christmas holidays before he entered
2 To Joseph Delaplaine, July 26, 1816 (Ford, X, 55-56).
3 Various comments on Bland are quoted in the introduction to his Inquiry
into the Rights of the British Colonies, ed. bv E. G. Swem M922). Sec
.iK<» JeffeiBon to William Wirt, Aug. 5, 1815 (Ford, IX, 474 w.); H. J.
Eckenrodc, Revolution in Virginia, pp. 11, 22.
4 To Abraham Small, May 20, 1814 (L. & B., XIV, LJ7)j to G. W.
Summers and J. B. Garland, Feb. 27, 1822'(L. & B., XV, 353).
college. He was not yet seventeen and Henry was not yet twenty-four. The
period of their association was about two weeks, amid the festivities of the
season, and the younger of them afterwards reflected that the elder engaged
in no conversation which might have given the measure of his information
or of his mind. After Jefferson had been exposed to Small, Wythe, and
Fauquier, however, it became evident to him that Henry was no man of
science and learning. To Jefferson his passion seemed to be for fiddling,
dancing, and pleasantry, in the last of which he particularly excelled though
he was solemnity itself in public. His manners had something of the
coarseness of the poor hunters with whom he loved to pursue deer in the
piney woods and to crack jokes around the campfire. He was no
fashionable gentleman, though his lineage was reputable; he was one who
was instinctively attracted to people of the common sort. Both as a fiddler
and as a statesman he played by ear, and Jefferson himself was among the
many whom he charmed. 6
During the spring following their first meeting Henry took his examination
for the bar in Williamsburg, when after six weeks of study he was passed
by a learned board under circumstances which have led to considerable
historical dispute. The severity of Jefferson's later comments on Henry'slegal learning, when the latter's biographer asked him about the orator,
have been attributed by some writers to the alienation between the two men
which occurred toward the end of the Revolution. 6 The most serious of his
criticisms, however, can be explained on equally human but less political
grounds. He referred a number of times to Henry's laziness and lack of
precise information, while recognizing his great public services and his
imaginative genius. The contrast between his own painstaking preparation
for the bar and Henry's casual knowledge of the law when first examined
could hardly have failed to strike him. While he was favored by
circumstances at the outset of his career to a much greater degree than
Henry, he
5 See particularly the sketch he sent to Wirt, on request, Apr. 12, 1812, and
his letters of Aug. 5, 1815, and Sept. 4, 1816, to Wirt (Ford, IX, 339-45 n.,
475-76 n.\ X, 59-60). His memory may have been in error about the exact
date of his meeting with Henry but there is little doubt that he knew him
when he was in college, if not before.
6 W. W. Henry, Patrick Henry (1891), I, 584; II, 144. Wirt, in his Sketches
of the Life and Character of Patrick Henry (citations from 2 ed., 1818)
drew heavily on Jefferson's sketch and letters, but, through modifications
and omissions, gave a more favorable impression (see esp. pp. 13-15, 18
n.). M. C. Tyler, Patrick Henry (1887), pp. 29-34, though less partisan than
W. W. Henry, regards Jefferson's comments on Henry's professional
character as inaccurate. So far as Henry's practice is concerned, he proves
his point. Jefferson's specific comments may have been too sharp, but his
general historical judgment on Henry seems sound.
gained his professional position chiefly by hard work, while his less learned
contemporary attained fame as a jury lawyer almost at a bound. Jefferson
had the scholar's contempt for shortcuts, and his own talent was of another
sort.
He probably thought little about the intellectual limitations of Patrick
Henry, however, when the latter called on him in the spring that he became
seventeen, or even when as a practising lawyer the orator regularly stopped
with him in Williamsburg. 7 If he afterwards questioned the possibility of
Henry's ever having read Livy or any other book more than once, at the
outset he was probably attracted by the engaging personality and was
undoubtedly impressed by the native genius of the man. More than anyother prominent leader in the Province, Henry sensed the feelings of the
inarticulate and appealed to the unformed West, whence Jefferson himself
had sprung. For intellectual stimulus and cultivated conversation the law
student went elsewhere, but he gained the most important of his early
political impressions from the self-taught lawyer who spoke at the Capitol
against the Stamp Act as Jefferson had never heard man speak before. This
was on Thursday, May 30, 1765, when he was twenty-two. If "the dull
monotony of a colonial subservience," of which he afterwards complained,
was not broken at this time, it was sharply punctuated. 8
The public character of Virginians at this date was hardly one of
subservience to the Mother Country. A traveler who had come that way in
Fauquier's time remarked: "They are haughty and jealous of their liberties,
impatient of restraint, and can scarcely bear the thought of being controlled
by any superior power." ° On the other hand, this visitor also reported that
they never refused necessary supplies to the government when called upon,
and that they were characteristically a loyal and generous people. Both
loyalty and jealous independence of spirit had marked the previous
discussion of the stamp tax, and of this young Jefferson had heard.
His teacher George Wythe had played a part in the actions of the
Assembly in the previous fall, when an address was dispatched to the
King and memorials were sent to the Lords and Commons protesting
against the proposed internal tax on both practical and constitutional
grounds. Wythe drew a draft of one of these papers, but, as he told
Jefferson, it was toned down by his colleagues on the commit r
presumably on the advice of Fauquier. The subject matter of tin
j 7 Randall, I, 40. i
8 To John Adams, Mar. 25, 1826 (L. & R., XVI, ltf)). 9 Burnaby, Travels
(1904 ed.), p. 55. He was in Virginia in T59-1760.
dignified documents, as the Governor aptly said, was "praying to be
permitted to tax themselves." There had been no response to the prayer,however; and in the spring of 1765 the notorious Act had been passed by
Parliament and assented to by the King, though it was not to go into effect
until the following November. 10
Neither the Governor nor the local leaders seem to have expected any
action on this question at the May session of the Assembly. The business
was nearly done and all but a third of the burgesses had gone home when a
new member took the veterans by surprise. 11 Jefferson probably heard that
his friend from Hanover had presented to the committee of the whole on
Wednesday certain resolutions which would be debated next day. He may
not have learned that they got into the mails in advance of final action.
They aroused heated comment as far away as Boston and sounded the
alarm bell of the American Revolution if any single writing did. Jefferson
could not fail to hear it, for he was near by. 12
There was then no gallery in the Capitol, so he took his stand on that
Thursday between the lobby and the burgess chamber along with his
younger friend John Tyler, who was still studying law with Robert Carter
Nicholas. 13 Here they heard Patrick Henry make a speech in which he
mentioned Caesar and Brutus, Charles I and Cromwell, and uttered the
name of George III. As they remembered it half a century afterwards, he
was then stopped with cries of "Treason," and extricated himself from a
predicament by adding that this monarch might profit from example. A
contemporary account gives a milder version of the famous passage, but a
minor lapse of memory on the part of two old men, who had heard the
traditional version in the meantime, would be quite forgivable. 14 Jefferson
also said that frequently, when listening to Henry, he closed his eyes and
afterwards was unable to remember a single word. In the torrent of sublime
oratory he could not distinguish waves. Of the indelible emotional
10 Burgesses, Journals, 1761-1765, pp. liv-lviii, 257, 294, 302-304;
Jefferson to Wirt,, Aug. 14, 1814, Ford, IX, 469.
11 Circumstances described by Fauquier in letter of June 5, 1765, to Board
of Trade {Burgesses, Journals, 1761-1765, pp. lxvii-lxviii).
12 Ibid., pp. Ixvi-lxvii. They appeared in the Newport Mercury, June 24,
and in the Boston Gazette, July 1, inaccurately however, for one that was
afterwards passed was omitted; see M. C. Tyler, Patrick Henry, p. 67 72.
18 To Wirt, Aug. 14, 1814, Ford, IX, 467 ff.; L. G. Tyler, Letters andTimes of the Tylers, I, 55.
14 "Journal of a French Traveller in the Colonies, 1765, I," AHR, XXVI
(July, 1921), esp. pp. 727-729, 745. The passage is given in its customary
form in Wirt, Patrick Henry, p. 65, Jefferson being cited as authority. It had
previously appeared in Burk's History of Virginia, III, 309, however, and
Jefferson had probably read it there.
impression that this speech made on him, however, there can be no
question.
Whether or not anybody accused Henry of treason, the responsible leaders
of the Colony were unwilling to go quite so far in formal action as he
desired. Like the Governor, Jefferson reported that the resolutions were
opposed by Speaker John Robinson, Peyton Randolph, and George Wythe,
and he added the names of Pendleton and Bland. 15 Their ground was that
the same principles had been set forth in the still-unanswered address and
memorial of the previous session, and that the latter were more likely to be
effective because of their more conciliatory tone. In their judgment the
question was essentially one of method, if not one of manners. Henry was
bolder than they had been, for he attacked the Stamp Act after its passage,
rather than before, and his audacity had its reward. The members of the
ruling group were reluctant to yield any part of their leadership to one
whom they regarded as a rash upstart, but it is a measure of their political
wisdom that most of them accepted him before long.
Two of the resolutions were either defeated or withheld on the day that
Henry made his speech, though both of them got into the papers elsewhere.
16 Another was passed by a single vote. This boldly asserted the exclusive
right of the Assembly to lay taxes, and stated that every attempt to vest
such power in any other person or persons whatsoever had a manifest
tendency to destroy both British and American freedom. Jefferson regarded
it as the strongest of them all and said that the debate on it was "most
bloody." It was after the passage of this resolution that he heard portly
Peyton Randolph say, as he came puffing out of the door: "By God, I would
have given one hundred guineas for a single vote." 17 On the next day,
before the burgesses met, the young law student stood at the end of the
clerk's table and watched Colonel Peter Randolph, then a member of the
Council, thumb over the volumes of the journal, trying to find a precedent
for the expunging of a vote. He could not recall whether his formerguardian found the erasure he was looking for, but he noted that soon
afterwards a motion was carried to expunge. According to the Governor,
there had happened "a small alteration in the House." The fact was that
Patrick
15 To Wirt, Aug. 5, 1815 (Ford, IX, 473 n.).
16 For a careful analysis of the seven original resolutions and their hotDI
note in AHR, XXVI, 746, citing M. C. Tyler, Patrick Henry, p. tf7, as
giving I correct statement of the form and reckoning of the numbers.
Fauquier's tetter of June 5, 1765, which was not available to Tyler, gives a
slightly different story of events. A copy of five of Henry's resolutions, as
reported by the committee of the whole, said to have been taken from the
lattcr's own copy is in LC, vol. 1. Prob-ablv it was sent to Jefferson bv
Wirt.
17 To Wirt, Aug. 14, 1814 (Ford, IX, 468).
Henry, thinking his work was done, had put on his buckskin breeches,
mounted his lean horse, and set out for home. 18
Jefferson also reported that there was a change of heart on the part of some
of the "timid members." By implication he afterwards approved of the
expunged resolution and sympathized with the "young hot and giddy
members," as Fauquier described them. The four resolutions which were
passed said quite enough about the taxation of the people by their own
representatives and about the established practice of colonial self-
government to put Virginia clearly on record; and his law teacher, who was
so intimate with the Governor, thought that even this reiterated statement
was unnecessary at the time. We cannot be sure that Jefferson disagreed
with Wythe and Fauquier at twenty-two, but his later comments imply that
he was no more appalled by the alleged rashness of Henry's course then
than he was afterwards. Reviewing the matter in old age, he spoke of the
"exact conformity" of their opinions. Also, he noted that the resolutions
were supported chiefly by the vote of the middle and upper country. The
implications of this observation were later revealed in his own political
career.
He may not have witnessed the stirring incident which occurred in the
following October, when the stamps arrived in Williamsburg, but he wasthere that month and could hardly have escaped hearing about it, for the
hero was his friend the Governor. Though Fauquier had regretted the action
of Patrick Henry in May, he realized that opposition to the Stamp Act had
crystallized since that time and obviously regarded the measure as
unenforceable. The actual presence of Colonel Mercer with the stamps
constituted an embarrassment and placed him in a situation requiring more
circumspection, he said, than he had ever before displayed. Going to the
Coffee House beyond the Capitol, he was sitting on the porch with the
Speaker and several members of the Council when Colonel Mercer came
thither, followed by a crowd which Fauquier would have called a mob had
he not known the gentlemen of property who composed it. He described the
subsequent events in a colorful letter to the Board of Trade.
I immediately heard a cry, "See the Governor, take care of him." Those
who were pushing up the steps, immediately fell back, and left a small
space between me and them. If your Lordships will not accuse me of vanity
I would say that I believe this to be partly owing to the respect they bore to
my character and partly to the love they bore my person. 19
18 Tyler, Henry, p. 66.
19 Nov. 3, 1765; Burgesses, Journals, 1761-1765, pp. lxviii-lxxi.
{■
LISTENING AT THE CAPITOL 95
Soon afterwards he and Mercer walked "side by side through the thickest of
the people." There were "some little murmurs" but they were not molested.
Mercer shortly resigned, and perhaps the honors were no more than even,
but Fauquier had maintained public order and his own prestige. There was
no such violence here as there had been a few weeks earlier in Boston,
where the house of Lieutenant Governor Thomas Hutchinson was
destroyed and his valuable books and papers were scattered in the street.
Mobs could not be assembled so readily in this agricultural province as in a
seaport city, and leadership here was retained by the genteel group. Also,
until Lord Dunmore appeared on the eve of the Revolution, the Province of
Virginia was fortunate in its governors. Fauquier and his immediate
successor, Lord Botetourt, were more tactful and judicious than Sir FrancisBernard and Thomas Hutchinson. It was not from them that young
Jefferson gained the low impression that he afterwards held of the manners
of British officials.
So far as imperial relations were concerned, from the time of the struggle
over the Stamp Act onward, he was more impressed with the agreement of
the political leaders of Virginia than by their differences of opinion. He
always credited Patrick Henry with giving the first impulse to the ball of
revolution there, and in all his later statements he manifested his own
sympathy with him and the bolder spirits, including the Lees. He believed
that a new political alignment was created as a result of the increased
prominence of this group. Factional rivalries probably played a
considerable part in these early struggles. The change was symbolized by
the discrediting of Speaker John Robinson, who was also treasurer of the
Colony and the central figure among the dominant leaders. When he passed
from the political scene in 1766, the year before Jefferson was admitted to
the bar and three years before he became a burgess, a new period began,
though at first the differences from the old one were not startling. 20
Robinson was involved in dubious financial transactions which Patrick
Henry and Richard Henry Lee suspected and which Jefferson afterwards
condemned, though he was gentle towards the man himself. In a time of
financial difficulty following the French and Indian War, Robinson as
treasurer had re-emitted redeemed treasury notes and accepted the paper of
various individuals in return, expecting that this
20 For an illuminating discussion of the political alignment in the pre-
Rcvohi-tionary years, see T. P. Abernethy, Western Lands and the
American R ch. XI. He regards the Stamp Act controversy as significant in
drawing P.itric k Henry and Richard Henry Lee together, in opposition to
the Robinson -Randolph group.
would be redeemed before the time when the notes had to be destroyed He
was also charged with attempting to cover his transactions by setting up a
loan office. Henry, without realizing the full implications of the proposal
but scenting scandal, attacked it boldly in the House of Burgesses and
uttered one exclamation which Jefferson never forgot. "It had been urged,"
said Jefferson, "that, from certain unhappy circumstances of the colony,
men of substantial property had contracted debts, which, if exacted
suddenly, must ruin them and their families, but with a little indulgence oftime might be paid with ease." Then, as he remembered, Patrick Henry
said: "What, Sir, is it proposed, then, to reclaim the spendthrift from his
dissipation and extravagance by filling his pockets with money?" a
The proposal was killed by the Council, not by the burgesses as Jefferson
recalled, and his memory may have been otherwise at fault. Again he said
that Henry was supported by the members from the upper counties, and that
only an aristocratic minority was opposed. After the death of Robinson in
1766, his private loans from public funds were discovered, and, insofar as
proved necessary, these were charged against his estate. The names of his
beneficiaries were not revealed, though some prominent planters have been
strongly suspected. The fact that Colonel Peter Randolph and Edmund
Pendleton were among the executors of Robinson's will need not imply that
they were personally involved but it does suggest where their political
sympathies lay..
The immediate result was the separation of the offices of speaker and
treasurer, as Fauquier had advised, Peyton Randolph assuming the one and
Robert Carter Nicholas the other. Both of these older men were in office
when Jefferson entered public life, and he never questioned their complete
integrity. Patrick Henry was now established as a man of prominence, but
he did not dominate the scene. In policy though not in social intercourse,
Jefferson was to be more closely identified with him and with Richard
Henry Lee than with the still-powerful remnants of the old ruling group.
Not until afterwards did he speak disparagingly of the aristocracy, or even
condemn extravagance and debt, but by this early date some seeds of doubt
had fallen into his retentive mind.
In order to complete the story of Fauquier we must anticipate somewhat.
The amiable Governor, whose chief fault was his love of gaming and who
may also have erred on the side of magnificence, was still in
21 Burgesses, Journals, 1766-1769, p. xxi; Ford, IX, 339, 466; W. W.
Henry, Patrick Henry, I, 76.
office when Jefferson began to appear in 1767 before the General Court, but
when his young friend entered the House of Burgesses two years later he
had passed forever from the scene. After a tedious illness, which he bore
with patience and fortitude, Fauquier died at the Palace in March, 1768, at
the age of sixty-five. Until the end he continued to be a friend to scientificinquiry, for he prescribed in his will that if he should die from any disease
of which the physicians did not know the cause his body might be opened.
Also, he strikingly revealed his humanitarian spirit. Regretting that it would
be necessary to sell his slaves, he specifically enjoined that the women and
children should not be separated, that his former servants should be
allowed to choose their own new masters, and that they were then to be
sold to those chosen masters at a considerable discount from the market
price. 22
Jefferson was not among the "principal gentlemen" who were present when
the unviolated body of Fauquier was laid to rest in Bruton Church, for he
was then in Albemarle planting his garden and preparing to start out on a
circuit of county courts. But when he got to Williamsburg a little later he
undoubtedly heard full details from George Wythe, who was one of the
executors of the late Governor's American estate. As a subscriber to the
Virginia Gazette, also, he could hardly have failed to read and approve the
lines which soon appeared there:
If ever virtue lost a friend sincere,
If ever sorrow claim'd Virginia's tear,
If ever death a noble conquest made,
'Twas when Fauquier the debt of nature paid. 23
Jefferson regarded him as the best of governors, but he owed a greater
political debt to Patrick Henry. Fauquier had done most for him in helping
him cultivate his tastes and expand the horizons of his mind.
22 W. & M., 1 ser., VIII, 173-178.
23 Rind, Va. Gazette, communication dated Mar. 10, 1768; see also Dixon
& Purdie, Va. Gazette, Mar. 3, 10, 1768.
Disciple of Enlightenment
A YEAR after he heard Patrick Henry declaim against the Stamp Act at the
Capitol, Jefferson left his Province for the first time and ventured farther
from home than he did again until after the American Revolution.
Beginning in May, 1766, when he was twenty-three, he made a journey ofabout three months to Annapolis, Philadelphia, and New York, returning to
Virginia by water. This was his nearest approach to a Grand Tour such as
young English gentlemen made at the close of their formal schooling. He
continued his preparations for the bar for several months longer, and he
never ceased to be a student, but this trip, besides being an educational
experience in itself, marked with some precision the end of his years of
tutelage.
He made the trip alone, though he had not expected to. He had counted on
the lively companionship of Frank Willis of Gloucester County. 1 Willis
had played disconcerting practical jokes on him and John Tyler when they
were reading law in Williamsburg (such as overturning the table or
carrying off their lawbooks), but he found Willis entertaining when he
himself was not studying. This waggish young man had to start earlier,
however, and Jefferson had no company but his own thoughts as he drove
to Annapolis in a one-horse chair. 2 On the way he was nearly spilled into a
stream when fording it and had other minor misadventures. The account of
them which he sent John Page shows that he was not wholly devoid of
humor, and his comments on the capital of Maryland show that he was
keeping his eyes open.
Observing the lower house of the Assembly in session, he was sharply
critical of its procedure, remarking that it was little better than a mob. The
members addressed the Speaker without rising from
1 Jefferson to Willis, July 23, 1766; courtesy of Papers of Thomas
Jefferson, Princeton Univ. See also Tyler, Tylers, I, 55. According to his
Garden Book, he set out from Shadwell on May 11, 1766.
2 His letter to Page from Annapolis, May 25, 1766, is in Bulletin N. Y.
Pub. Lib., II (1898), 176-177.
their seats and he put the question most casually, not bothering to call for a
division. The young visitor reflected that there was more decorum in the
House of Burgesses. He was struck by the beautiful situation of Annapolis,
however, and he must have concluded that the economy of Maryland was
much like that of Virginia, tobacco being the chief thing attended to in both
of them. 3 He witnessed the celebration of the repeal of the Stamp Act, and
to him this was probably the first notable sign of the community of colonial
interest.As he drove onward through Delaware and into Pennsylvania he saw
cultivated country which was very different from the Tidewater of Virginia
and the heavily forested Piedmont of his youth. The land beyond Newcastle
was beautifully laid out in fields of clover, grain, and flax. Crops like these
he afterwards encouraged in Albemarle, along with orchards like the
luxuriant ones he now saw, and he must have found this part of his journey
wholly pleasing. 4 Philadelphia could hardly have failed to arouse his
wonderment. There was no such citv in Virginia, or anywhere else in the
colonies for that matter. It had between eighteen and twenty thousand
people, and it stretched for almost two miles along the Delaware. He
probably noticed that the people were frugal and industrious, and he may
have observed as another did that they were "not remarkably courteous and
hospitable to strangers, unless particularly recommended to them." 5
However, he had at least one letter of introduction and he may have had
more.
This had been given him by Dr. George Gilmer, nephew of his Albemarle
neighbor Dr. Thomas Walker, who had recently returned from the
University of Edinburgh and was then living in Williamsburg. It was
addressed to Dr. John Morgan, who was already on the road to eminence in
Philadelphia. Gilmer had known Morgan in Edinburgh and was confident
that his "penetrating genius" would soon discern that Jefferson was a young
gentleman eminently worthy of his acquaintance. 6 Nothing was said here
about the latter's purpose in coming to the metropolis. This was to receive
inoculation against smallpox and it seems more likely that Dr. William
Shippen, Junior,
3 Burnaby, Travels, p. 85.
4 Ibid., p. 88. Burnaby made his journey in 1760. I have drawn freely on
his account, particularly for Philadelphia, pp. 88-102.
6 Ibid., p. 96.
8 Gilmer to Morgan, May 11, 1766; Hist. Soc. of Pa.; photostat UVA.
Presumably Jefferson picked the letter up in Williamsburg several days
afrer it v. .is written or received it on the road. On Gilmer, who will
reappear in this story, see R. B. Davis, Francis Walker Gilmer, esp. pp. 4-5.
F. Kimball in Procs. Am. Philos. Soc, vol. 87 (1943), p. 239, designating
Morgan as the inocularor of Jefferson, suggests that by showing the latter
some of his collection he may also have contributed to his education in thearts.
gave it. 7 Whoever the officiating physician may have been, the fact that
Jefferson was inoculated is noteworthy, for this enables us to place him
somewhat more precisely in the history of advancing science and to judge
of the progress of his expanding mind.
Agricultural Virginia was relatively free from smallpox but the scourge had
appeared there in his time. 8 The method of inoculation sometimes
described as "variolation" had been introduced into the Massachusetts Bay
Colony in the first quarter of the century, but in Boston it had met with
opposition which went to the extremes of mob violence, and it had been
officially prohibited in New York. It had been only occasionally resorted to
in Virginia up to this time, and the general belief there was that it served to
spread rather than to prevent the disease. 9 The mortality from this crude
form of inoculation was considerable and a much better method, Jennerian
vaccination, was to come; but young Jefferson, who made a point of
divesting his mind of prejudice and of forming independent judgments,
decided to run the risk. He appears to have suffered no ill effects from
taking his stand with the medical pioneers, and in his efforts to prevent this
dread disease he remained for a generation in the vanguard. 10
Another and less significant detail of information about his first trip outside
of his own region has been preserved. In New York he chanced to take
lodgings at the same place with Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts, then four
years out of Harvard. 11 They were to meet again in the Continental
Congress and to be associated in the bitter partisan struggles of still later
years against the Federalists. At this time, however, no one would have
been likely to think of Jefferson as an embryonic politician, in the sense
that we use the term today. It would have been agreed by competent
observers that he was admirably prepared to assume the public role which
was traditional in his class; but this did not necessarily involve agitation or
political
7 Family tradition in Randall, I, 46. Shippen is known to have administered
inoculation before this time (Carl and Jessica Bridenbaugh, Rebels and
Gentlemen, pp. 278-281, 296). Jefferson had him inoculate one of his
servants at a later time.
8 W. B. Blanton, Medicine in Virginia in the Eighteenth Century (1931),pp. 60-62. In the spring of 1763 Jefferson had kept away from
Williamsburg partly because of smallpox there; to Page, Jan. 20, 1763
(UVA photostat from Franklin collection, Yale Univ.; postscript, omitted
from previous versions, reproduced in M. Kimball, Road to Glory, p. 68).
9 For pertinent contemporary comments see F. N. Mason, ed., John Norton
& Sons, pp. 31, 38. A stringent law against inoculation was passed in 1770.
10 Domestic Life, p. 67; Jefferson to John Vaughan, Nov. 5, 1801 (letter
printed in H. A. Martin, "Jefferson as a Vaccinator," in N. C. Medical
Journal, of Wilmington, N. C, 1881, p. 32).
11 Jefferson to Gerry, June 11, 1812; L. & B., XIII, 161. Randall, I, 46,
points out that Jefferson was in error about the exact year.
manipulation, and to those who knew him best he must have seemed most
distinctive in the diversity of his interests and the universality of his spirit.
He had not traveled far as yet but he was already a citizen of the world in
his own mind; and he placed his trust, not in temporal powers, but in
liberated intelligence.
There is no certain way of knowing just when this apostle of freedom first
swore eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man,
but there can be no doubt that by this time he was bold as well as active in
pursuit of knowledge. 12 There is little question that, before he stepped on
the public stage, he had arrived at his abiding conviction that human
intelligence can unlock not only the treasure house of the past but also the
secrets of the universe, thus leading mankind onward to a richer and better
life, and that he personally was proceeding on that assumption.
He did not need to express in so many words his belief in the mind until
somebody combatted it, or until it appeared that some obstacle to its
freedom must be overthrown. This faith was so essential a part of his own
spiritual nature and of the framework of ideas within which he operated
that he generally took it for granted. It was in the air that his spirit breathed;
it was a major element in the intellectual climate in which he chose to
dwell. That climate was not Virginian, though many of his countrymen
basked in its warmth as he did. It was not American, though it prevailed in
important quarters on this continent while he was growing up. So far as he
was concerned it was chiefly English in its origins, but it had becomeinternational. It was the climate of opinion, or the cluster of ideas, or the
pattern of thought, which is commonly described as "the Enlightenment."
18
If we must date the great intellectual revolution of which he so gladly made
himself an heir, it began with Sir Isaac Newton and John Locke, whom he
included with Lord Bacon in his trinity of immortals. 14 It had spread
through widening circles of select spirits in England and on the Continent,
and by the middle of the eighteenth century it was well represented among
the colonial intelligentsia — most notably by Benjamin Franklin, to whom
he was a successor in more ways than one. Jefferson did not introduce the
Enlightenment into the colonics
12 His famous saying, "I have sworn upon the altar of Cod, eternal hostility
against every form of tyranny over the mind of man,'' was in a letter to
Benjamin Rush, Sept. 23, 1800.
13 On the Enlightenment in general, sec Preserved Smith, History of
Modern Culture, II, esp. ch. I; on its earlier American manifestations, sec
M. Curti, Growth of American Thought, ch. 5.
14 To Benjamin Rush. Jan. 16, 1811; Ford, IX, 2 r /6.
but he became its almost perfect embodiment and, after Franklin, its most
conspicuous apostle on his side of the Atlantic.
To its major tenets he always clung. Among the most important of these
was the belief that the mind of man had emerged from shackles and
darkness and had launched itself upon a limitless career of intellectual
conquest. By accepting this he by no means severed all links with the past
but he did become pre-eminently forward-looking. 15 Like his kindred
spirits he adopted certain confident hypotheses about universal natural law
and natural rights; and with these an attitude of hostility to arbitrary power
of any sort, a belief in the vast im-provability if not the perfectibility of
man, and an impulse toward humanitarianism. To Jefferson this was not a
body of cold doctrine, but of "liberal and expanded thought." It was a warm
and moving gospel.
The full implications of this living faith will appear only in the unfolding of
his story. But, since he had to become a disciple before he could stand forthas an apostle, a question which may already have been answered in general
terms should now be raised specifically. How did the influence of the
Enlightenment reach him in the forests of Virginia? The chief personal
impact upon his receptive mind came from the Williamsburg trio: Small,
Fauquier, and Wythe. They anticipated the greater trinity of Newton,
Locke, and Bacon.
William Small acquainted him more familiarly with Sir Isaac Newton and
opened before his eyes the vistas of an ordered universe. This
mathematician and natural philosopher may not have talked often with his
eager pupil about the dignity of human nature, since he doubtless assumed
it, but first among Jefferson's teachers he showed him what the mind can
do. Francis Fauquier, who kept charts of the temperature, discussed
philosophical matters at his generous table, and provided so solicitously for
the future of his slaves, represented the Enlightenment in its humanitarian
as well as its scientific aspects. George Wythe, as a classicist, belonged
more to the past than either of the others. But the study of the Greek and
Latin masters had served to enrich and liberalize his mind, not to enslave it,
and throughout life he was notably humane. It may be assumed that he and
both the other men were familiar with John Locke, whose general ideas
were so well known at this time and in this place that they might almost be
taken for granted, along with those of Newton. 16 Young Jefferson,
however,
15 For ties between the philosophers and the past, see Carl Becker,
Heavenly City of the Eighteenth-Century Philosophers, pp. 29-31, and
elsewhere.
16 Further reference to Jefferson's own familiarity with Locke is made in
ch. XIII.
was now less interested in political theory than he was in general learning,
and he appears, not inappropriately, to have made obeisance to Bacon first.
Before he set out for Annapolis he had in his possession at least one of
Bacon's books. 17
Jefferson eventually followed the path of free inquiry further than any of
his local contemporaries and he gathered richer fruits as he went along, but
the general spirit of the leaders among his countrymen was not uncongenial
with his own. At a later time he found some of the large plantersconservative in political and economic questions, as guardians of their own
interests; but the greatest of them were men of large affairs, in touch with
the European world and affected by its major currents of thought. The
Anglican clergy may have lacked spirituality, as the Evangelicals claimed,
and unquestionably they struggled to maintain their special privileges, but
they were not otherworldly and there were strong traces of rationalism
among them. If his contemporaries wondered about young Jefferson in
these and the next few years it was not so much because of the way he was
going as because they questioned the wisdom of anybody's going so far.
The zest with which he embarked on intellectual pursuits was similar to
that shown by other enlightened spirits, but it was manifested by him to
such a marked degree as to be characteristically individual. The habits of
unremitting study which he had formed by his college days and which he
ever afterwards maintained are not to be thought of primarily as the
expression of a stern sense of duty. No Calvinist in New England could
have been more rigorous in self-discipline than he was, but the supremely
significant fact about his lifelong quest of knowledge is that he found in it
"infinite delight." He always loved to study, for by this means he expanded
the horizons of his mind and gained the power of knowledge, which was
the only power he really craved.
Jefferson had begun to visit the office of the Virginia Gazette in
Williamsburg and to buy books there during his years as a law student." At
a later time not even he could have read all the volumes in his library; but
he probably read everything he bought in these years.
17 On Oct. 28, 1765, he had a copy of Bacon's philosophy bound, as shown
by the Day Books of the Va. Gazette, in the possession of Prof. J. S.
Wilson of the University of Virginia.
18 Entries from the Day Books, 1764-1766, show numerous purchases 1»\
Jefferson. These are reproduced in William Pedcn, Thomas Jefferson:
Book-CoDectOC (ms. dissertation, UVA, app. H). This valuable study is
briefly summarized in "Some Notes concerning Thomas Jefferson's
Libraries, II'. d> M., 3 ser., I, 265-274 (July, 1944).
Accordingly, his fugitive early book lists assume disproportionate
importance. Still more can be learned about his early tastes from the
notebooks he kept. Into these he copied extracts from the authors he readand, together with a few surviving letters from his young manhood and
scattered references in later writings, they provide the best available clues
to his early thought. The notebook which has been termed his "Literary
Bible," and which he began to keep when he was about twenty-one, is
particularly valuable. 19
The classical writers engaged him most at first, despite the impulse toward
natural philosophy which William Small gave him. They constituted a "rich
source of delight" to him throughout life and were the chosen companions
of his old age. From his days in Maury's school, Latin was a ready
instrument, and he found this language most useful in making himself a
scholar in the law. As for Greek, he read Homer in Pope's translation to
begin with; then, under the inspiration of Wythe, he turned to the original,
which he ever afterwards preferred. He read Euripides at this time but
apparently not Aeschylus; he never cared for Plato, and with Aristotle he
seems not to have concerned himself at all. He was acquainted with the
Latin poets, especially Virgil, and he valued the maxims of Seneca and the
republican moralities of Cicero.
Like most other people he was more imaginative in his early years than he
was afterwards. He was sensitive to the niceties of words as well as to
natural beauty, and at this stage he was fond of English poetry. 20 He read
a great deal of it, but in this field he appears to have been relatively
conventional and easily pleased. He bought the works of Milton before he
was twenty-one, and he copied numerous extracts from him in his
notebook, including diatribes against women from Paradise Lost. He
afterwards recommended to the young that they read the best of the poets,
and he himself was familiar with the older masters and almost the whole of
the eighteenth-century group. For a time he kept up with literary fashion,
and his knowledge of English verse was more than superficial, but he never
regarded himself as a man of "happy imagination" and poetic fancy. 21 He
read more for profit than pleasure and he sought no avenue of escape from
life.
He was familiar with Shakespeare from an early time, valuing him
"Gilbert Chinard edited this as The Literary Bible of Thomas Jefferson. His
Commonplace Book of Philosophers and Poets. I have drawn heavily on
both the text and comments in this important work.
20 To John D. Burk, June 21, 1801 (Ford, VIII, 65).21 To William Short, May 15, 1815; MHS Collections, 7 ser., I, 232. For
his knowledge of poetrv as shown later, see his "Thoughts on English
Prosody," in L. & B., XVIII, 415-451.
not only for his observation of human nature, but also because he best
displayed the "full powers of the English language." 22 He was acquainted
with current English drama and rarely missed a chance to attend the theater
in Williamsburg. For nondramatic fiction he cared little. His earliest
favorite among the writers in this field was Laurence Sterne, whom he long
chuckled over. In Jefferson himself, however, little humor had appeared as
yet except in the form of elaborate exaggeration. He was particularly fond
of history, but his interest in this subject was probably greatest after he
became a public man.
Like other disciples of the Enlightenment, he was aware of the value of
modern languages. He had employed French from the beginning of his
study of the law and he soon took up Italian. 23 Perhaps he was attracted to
Italian in the first place because it was the source of musical terms; before
long he also found that it had contributed richly to the language of
architecture. He had not yet tackled Spanish and he said regretfully, late in
life, that he never learned German. 24 He had a distinct flair for languages
but modern literature meant little to him except in English. Shortly before
the Revolution, when he discovered Ossian, he showed interest in Celtic.
This was akin to his enduring interest in Anglo-Saxon, which began when
he was struggling with legal terms as a law student. 25 He liked to trace
words, as well as legal and political institutions, to their sources; and even
in his early manhood his spirit was that of a scholar rather than a literary
man.
It is far more important to consider the predominant purposes of this
omnivorous young man than it is to draw up a full menu of his reading, for
he only tasted some things, while others he devoured. I lis appetite never
ceased to be Gargantuan but even he had to make some selection; and he
did this, not in the fastidious spirit of a gourmet, but in the mood of an
ambitious workman who wanted to build up his strength. He greatly
desired to make of himself a cultivated person, he did not scorn the
traditional embellishments of genteel life, and he loved learning and the
arts for their own sake. But, as one who lived in a new and undeveloped
country, he was most anxious to acquire"Randall, I, 56.
23 Va. Gazette, Day Books, entry of Feb. 4, 1764, showed the purchase of
Italnn books, including a dictionary.
24 To Peter Birkman, May 30, 1823 (LC, 223:40,050). A German song,
with interlined English translation, in his writing, at UVA is printed in M.
Kimball, Road to Glory, p. 108, and in part in Randall, I, 25. He may have
worked this out with a dictionary in young manhood and have forgotten
about it, but in itscit it does not prove that he ever learned German.
35 To Herbert Croft, Oct. 30, 1798 (L. & B., XVIII, 363). His well-known
essay on Anglo-Saxon follows, pp. 365-411.
knowledge that was useful to man. He regarded the human mind, not as a
toy to be played with, but as an instrument to be used in the cause of
progress.
By the time that he assumed a full share of the business of life, his own
mind was unusually well equipped for the accomplishment of practical
purposes as broadly conceived. Also, it was thoroughly emancipated — as
he properly believed it had to be before it could be fully employed. We
might be tempted to believe that this lifelong champion of liberty was born
into intellectual freedom in some ideal state of nature. No one was more
aware than he, however, that customs, traditions, and imperfect human
institutions impose shackles on the mind; and he himself must have had to
throw off some of these. The records of his inner life in this important
period are distressingly incomplete, but they bear traces of struggle and
strongly suggest that this struggle was primarily in the sphere of religion
and morals. It is a fair assumption that the first major obstacle to the
freedom of the mind which he clearly perceived was the doctrine of
supernatural revelation; and that, after he had rid himself of this, the major
intellectual problem of his young manhood was that of finding adequate
moral sanction elsewhere.
His general manner in regard to religious questions throughout life was one
of reticence, since he regarded these as a private concern. He wrote and
talked about them very little, as he did about intimate personal matters of
other sorts. He has left no diaries comparable with those of the Adamses
wherein he revealed his secret and sacred reflections. But he did keepnotebooks of his reading, and his "Literary Bible" is specially valuable in
providing clues to his nonpolitical thought.
One cannot be sure, of course, that he accepted all the sentiments of
Homer, Euripides, and Cicero, of Shakespeare, Milton, and Boling-broke,
that he copied; or that a unified philosophy could be fabricated from all
these fragments. In certain cases, however, later comments and actions
show the quotations to have been extraordinarily apt. Thus he copied this
sentence from Lord Bolingbroke: "No hypothesis ought to be maintained if
a single phenomenon stands in direct opposition to it." 26 Whether or not,
under the inspiration of Fauquier, he learned from this English writer to
apply to the Bible and theology the same tests as to secular history and
scientific hypotheses, the acceptability of this dictum to him is obvious in
the light of what he said later. Urging his nephew, Peter Carr, to apply
critical tests to the New Testament,
26 Literary Bible, p. 41. See penetrating comments of Chinard, Ibid., pp.
19-20, 34-35, and ch. 2 in the valuable study of Adrienne Koch, Philosophy
of Thomas Jefferson.
he wrote: "Your own reason is the only oracle given to you by Heaven; and
you are answerable, not for the Tightness, but uprightness, of the decision."
27 He certainly did not regard the intelligence of any single human being as
infallible, but he saw no escape from the obligation to employ the mind
fearlessly in every field.
He concerned himself much, in his twenties, with the mysteries of death
and immortality. In the year that he became President of the United States,
replying to a communication about the transmigration of souls, he had this
to say about the "country of spirits":
. . . When I was young I was fond of the speculations which seemed to
promise some insight into that hidden country, but observing at length that
they left me in the same ignorance in which they had found me, I have for
very many years ceased to read or to think concerning them, and have
reposed my head on that pillow of ignorance which a benevolent Creator
has made so soft for us, knowing how much we should be forced to use it.
28
During his inquiring youth and young manhood he did not find theanswers; and, characteristically, he addressed himself to the problems of
this world which reason can better understand. On the other hand, he did
find noble and inspiriting maxims and examples, not in the Christian
Scriptures, which he undervalued at this stage, but primarily in the writings
of classical antiquity, and out of these he evolved a working philosophy.
He attached himself to no school of shallow optimism. In extract after
extract one can perceive the mood of disenchantment, as in this one from
Pope's Iliad:
To labour is the lot of man below;
And when Jove gave us life, he gave us woe. 2 *
He learned from the Greek poets "not to expect too much from life; not to
dream of a chimerical bliss, . . . but to do his duty, without expecting to be
rewarded . . ., to cultivate his friends and love his country even to the point
of self sacrifice." 30 From ancient writers he learned the possibility of
courageous resignation, and under their inspiration he worked out for
himself a program which was little short of the heroic.
Allowance must be made for the period in his life when he recorded these
somber reflections. Melancholy was not characteristic of Jefferson
27 Aug. 10, 1787 (L. & B., VI, 261).
28 To Rev. Isaac Story, Dec. 5, 1801 (Ford, VIII, 107).
29 Literary Bible, p. 128.
30 Chinard, Ibid., p. 12.
in his ripe maturity; his temperament was then notably sanguine. The
extracts which he copied marked an early and passing phase. He had a
disappointing love affair in his early twenties, and soon afterwards lost a
favorite sister; he was not wholly at ease in social relationships as a young
man; and not until after his own marriage did he find himself as a domestic
being. It was at the beginning of this period of imperfect personal
adjustment that he wrote to John Page about bearing up "with a tolerable
degree of patience under this burden of life," of proceeding "with a pious
and unshaken resignation," and of arriving at such a philosophy that few
things could disturb him at all and nothing could disturb him much. 31Before he attained domestic happiness he had probably worked out his
enduring philosophy of life; it was marked by cheerfulness not gloom, and
he afterwards described it as Epicurean, though he hastened to say that the
term was much misunderstood. He came to believe that happiness was the
end of life, but, as has been said, he was engaged by "the peculiar
conjunction of duty with happiness"; and his working philosophy was a
sort of blend of Epicureanism and Stoicism, in which the goal of happiness
was attained by self-discipline. 32 At no time after he became mature did
he emphasize mere amusement, or pleasure for its own sake. This was true
in the arts as well as in literature.
Thus he appears as an exceedingly serious young man, who had worked
things out in his own mind just about as far as he thought they could be
worked out by him, and who had freed himself entirely from the need of a
churchly sanction. He was not wholly a rationalist, however, and he did
feel the need for some sort of authority which he was unwilling to concede
to church or priest. This he found within an individual's own breast in the
conscience, which he regarded as a special moral sense, as truly a part of
man's nature as his sense of sight or hearing, his arm or his leg. 33 How
early he reached this opinion it is difficult to say. He may have groped for a
time in a dim borderland of ethical uncertainty, but he had definitely
emerged from it before he wrote the earliest of his notable public papers,
for these are marked by a burning consciousness of moral values.
Addressing King George III in 1774, he said: "The great principles of right
and wrong are legible to every reader; to pursue them requires not the aid
of many counsellors." 34 The issues of his time do not now seem that
simple, but it is highly significant that he saw them not merely as political
and eco-
81 July 15, 1763 (Ford, I, 349-350).
82 Koch, p. 6, and ch. 1 passim, taking issue with Chinard in Literary
Bible, pp. 16-17; Jefferson to William Short, Oct. 31, 1819 (Ford, X, 143).
83 To Peter Carr, Aug. 10, 1787 (Ford, IV, 429); good discussion in Koch,
ch. 3.
84 In his "Summary View" (Ford, I, 446).
nomic but as moral issues, and that they aroused his righteous indignation.He was certainly not immoral, though some lapses might have been
expected when he was young; and, after the period of youthful doubt, it
would be improper to term him irreligious. As has been well said, "He was
a pious man, if the religion of a humane morality is recognized as a kind of
natural piety." 35 But unquestionably he was secular in these years and he
probably would not have called himself a Christian.
At some time before the American Revolution he copied the dictum of
Bolingbroke that the teachings of Christ comprise an incomplete body of
ethics; and that a system collected from the writings of the ancient
"heathen" moralists would be "more full, more entire, more coherent, and
more clearly deduced from unquestionable principles of knowledge." 36
Young Jefferson may not have wholly agreed with the English writer at this
stage; and in the ripeness of years he found in the teachings of Jesus "the
purest system of morals ever before preached to man." 37 Eventually he
regarded the "heathen" moralists as insufficient. Even in his old age,
however, he was fully convinced that the "priests" (Protestant as well as
Catholic) had "adulterated and sophisticated" the teachings of Jesus for
their own selfish purposes; and from his twenties until his death he was
anticlerical in varying degrees of bitterness. He served for a time as a
vestryman in his parish, as a leading planter was supposed to do; he
continued throughout life to have warm personal friends among the
"enlightened" clergy; and he always contributed generously to local
churches. But before he attacked the special privileges of the Establishment
in Virginia, ecclesiastical authority and traditional theology had wholly
ceased to have validity for him. The right to complete intellectual and
religious freedom which he afterwards championed so conspicuously for all
men he had already claimed for himself.
85 Koch, p. 39.
88 Literary Bible, p. 50.
37 To S. Kercheval, Jan. 19, 1810 (L. & B., XII, 345).
The Business of Life
MThe Young Lawyer 7767-7777
JEFFERSON began to practise law before he reached the age of twenty-
four, and he continued to do so for seven years. The five years since he
finished college had not been employed solely in preparation for his
profession; he was deliberately fitting himself for the whole of life as he
expected to live it. But he had studied law with the utmost seriousness, and,
considering the time he had spent, his professional career was short. In the
light of the generation of conspicuous public service which followed, his
legal career itself may be regarded as a period of further preparation, and
an exceedingly important one. At the time, however, the impressive facts
were that he threw himself into his profession with characteristic vigor and
quickly achieved an honored position in it.
From the beginning he was probably more interested in the study of law
than in practice, but if he rebelled against the drudgery incident to his
calling he did not do so because of any repugnance for details. The main
reason for his early abandonment of law was not that he disliked it, nor that
he preferred the political arena. He never hated anything connected with it
quite as much as he loathed the controversies and recriminations which
afterwards befell him as a public man. His practice of law was a constituent
part of the business of life until the courts were closed shortly before the
outbreak of the American Revolution, and it was the central part up to the
time of his marriage. He never disliked practical affairs in themselves. He
always an ended to them industriously and systematically, and he
complained about them only when they interfered unduly with more
delightful things — such as the enrichment of the mind and the enjoyment
of domestic life. He
had little reason to complain of undue interference before his marriage.
Thus he appeared in his first years at the bar as a man of business. Apart
from the interest which inheres in most of his activities, small or large and
private as well as public, this period is of particular significance in
revealing his habits as a man of affairs and the degree of his practical
effectiveness.
Before he mounted his horse to ride to court he had already entered upon
the business of life to some extent. The year that he attained his majority
and came into his inheritance he had ceased charging the expenses of his
education against his father's estate and had nominally assumed theheadship of the family. 1 Also, he had had to choose between the Rivanna
and the Fluvanna lands which Peter Jefferson had left to him and his young
brother. On this subject there was probably no question in his mind at any
time. He succeeded to the lands on which his father had lived and
immediately assumed a position of dignity and responsibility in that part of
the County.
The Rivanna estate comprised about half and much the more important part
of his total inheritance of somewhat more than five thousand acres. 2 The
family seat at Shadwell, with its four hundred acres, did not actually belong
to him until after his mother's death in the year of the Declaration of
Independence. Considerably before that time he built for himself a house
on the forested hill across the way, but until 1770 he continued to live at
Shadwell. From the age of twenty-two, also, he rented from his mother the
farm there, with the slaves who were on it. He had twenty slaves or more in
his own right, but these were otherwise employed. The gristmill which his
father had built was already his. It stood on the north bank of the little river,
and the water which turned its wheels was brought by a canal from a dam
half a mile above it. It was a profitable piece of property until it was swept
away, with its house and dam, in the "great fresh" of 1771.
He was not yet devoting himself much to agriculture, though he had
assumed the necessary financial responsibilities and had begun to keep his
Garden Book. The first entry in this, made in clear hand on March 30,
1766, has a more poetic flavor than he probably realized when he recorded
the simple fact that the purple hyacinth had begun to bloom. 3 All the
observations of that year had to do with flowers —with the narcissus and
puckoon in the family garden, with bluebells in the low-
1 Account with estate in Fee Book; HEH, UVA photostat.
2 See Appendix II, B, 1.
3 References will generally be by date only and, unless otherwise indicated,
all will be to E. M. Betts, Thomas Jefferson's Garden Book (Am.
Philosophical Soc, Philadelphia, 1944), cited as Garden Book.
ground and wild honeysuckle in the woods. Thus he appears first as an
observer of the pleasant phenomena of nature. By the time that he became a
lawyer, however, he had become more utilitarian; that year he sowed peas.Henceforth he continued to record plantings of flowers and vegetables,
shrubs and trees, but he had not started his Farm Book as yet. It is
impossible to believe that he was ever indifferent to the crops of tobacco
and corn on his red fields, but during his years as a bachelor he left his
farms pretty much as they were, probably committing the details of
management to a single steward or overseer.
With one matter which directly affected him as an Albemarle planter,
however, and which was also of considerable public interest, he actively
concerned himself from the time that he was grown. His efforts to improve
the navigation of the stream which flowed through his lands antedated his
services in the House of Burgesses and even his practice of law.
To the best of his knowledge, no hogsheads of tobacco had ever been
transported on the North Branch of the James to its junction with the larger
stream. About the time that he came of age, however, he learned that a
canoe had recently been used on its lower waters. Taking a canoe himself,
he explored the only seriously obstructed section and concluded that this
could be made navigable to loaded boats merely by the removal of loose
rock. He then set on foot a subscription, obtained two hundred pounds, and
interested his neighbor, Dr. Thomas Walker, who was a member of the
House of Burgesses.
It was in October, 1765, that an act of Assembly was passed "for clearing
the great falls of James river, the river Chickahominy, and the north branch
of James river." The legislative act merely authorized a "laudable and
useful" undertaking which was to be effected by private means. Three
groups of trustees were set up to receive subscriptions and to make the
necessary contracts. In the group assigned to the North Branch (Rivanna)
was young Jefferson, along with other prominent gentlemen of the County.
VVith almost every person named on the other lists he was afterwards
associated in public or private life. This appointment, therefore, constituted
the first official sign of his identification with the leaders of the County and
Province. Locally he was the initiator of the project and probably the most
active member of the group.
The work of clearing away the obstructions appears to have been finished
by the time of his marriage; and for a generation afterwards the stream was
used "completely and fullv," he said, for the carrying-down of produce.
Throughout the eighteenth century the navigablesection began at Milton falls, a mile or two below Shadwell, so boats did
not actually go past his mill, but the short land haul was not much of an
inconvenience to him. Years after he initiated this undertaking he took
great pride in it. Shortly before he was elected President he asked himself
whether his country was the better for his having lived at all. Then, rather
dubiously, he drew up a list of things in which he had been the instrument,
beginning with this youthful effort to further the flow of agricultural
commerce and following with the Declaration of Independence, which was
clearly second to it in point of time. Whether or not this was his most
memorable action before the Revolution, as he himself believed, it was his
first piece of constructive public
In the year 1767 the family at Shadwell, besides Thomas, consisted of his
mother and four other children. Jane Randolph Jefferson was now forty-
seven, several times a grandmother, and an old lady by the standards of the
time. His younger sister Elizabeth, unmarried at twenty-three, was
undoubtedly regarded as an old maid. Lucy, now fifteen, remained at home
a couple of years longer; then she married Charles Lilburne Lewis, who
was also descended from Isham Randolph. Besides her there were the
twins, Anna Scott and Randolph, who were twelve. 5
Peter Jefferson's thoughtful provisions for the maintenance of the younger
children and for the portions of the girls had been rigorously carried out
and continued to be. Enough of the financial records of the family have
survived to show that a good deal of bookkeeping was required and that the
elder son assumed much of the burden of this after he grew up. A decade
before he became important as a draftsman of state papers he showed that
he was particularly good at keeping accounts, and at any sort of paper work
in which diligence, accuracy, and neatness were required. He not only
made a record of the agreement with his mother whereby he hired five of
her Shadwell hands at six pounds each per annum; he also kept vouchers
for the sides of pork, the quarters of beef, and the bushels of corn that he
furnished her. For his unmarried and not wholly responsible sister
Elizabeth he began to keep a special account as soon as she was grown,
though his inability
4 His list of services, drawn about Sept. 1800, is in LC, 219:39161; printed
without precise date, Ford, VII, 475^477. Other important references on
this matter are LC, 211:37587, notes on the several acts of Assembly for
clearing the Rivanna River, 1764-1806; memo, in LC, 1:68, on making theRivanna navigable; and Hening, VIII, 148-150, giving Act of 1765.
6 For details, see Appendix I, C. It will be recalled that one of his sisters
had died and two had married.
to prevent her from mixing her charges with his own at a store in
Richmond caused it to become sadly confused. 6 There are no surviving
letters from this period to illustrate the generosity and affection which he so
consistently manifested towards all of his close relations, but his scrupulous
exactitude in keeping the financial records of the family was manifested
from the first. Life in the plantation village of Shadwell was doubtless
hospitable, generous, and friendly, as it so generally was in that clime and
region, and as it always was afterwards at Monticello; and Jefferson
himself was far from parsimonious; but he did like to put everything down
in black and white.
The major personal records (as distinguished from letters) which remain
and which serve to illuminate so many of the details of his own life had
their beginning in this period. They are wholly objective in form but they
are fascinating documents of their kind and are of great importance to
anyone who would understand him.
The Garden Book, which he started in 1766 and kept more or less
continuously for upwards of half a century, contains a much greater variety
of items than its title would imply and reveals from the outset the utilitarian
cast of his ingenious mind. In it he noted that it would take 2500 peas of the
sort he was planting to fill a pint measure; that a horse would generally eat
8 or 10 bundles of fodder in a night and 1170 during an Albemarle winter;
that 50 hills would yield 2000 cucumbers in a season. Some random bits of
horticultural lore he copied out of books, but he gained more from his own
observations or from friends or neighbors, who told him something of
interest which he promptly put down. To these he added, after he became a
builder, all sorts of miscellaneous calculations about bricks, mortar,
wheelbarrows, and the like. This is no diary of esthetic rapture; it is a
systematic, though fragmentary, factual record which served a useful
purpose to a practical man.
The Account Books, as they are commonly called, which he kept in
unending series until the week before he died, are distinctly informal. 7
During his years as a practitioner he listed law cases here as in a day book,and when he had finished with them or transferred them to a more
permanent record he scratched them off. He recorded here the most trivial
items of cash expenditure. The first entries, made in the summer of 1767,
show him attending court across the mountains in
•These accounts are in his Fee Book, Huntington I.ib., UVA photostat. In
their present form they may date from 1770, after the fire at ShadwcM.
7 These invaluable records are in several repositories, as is shown in the
Bibliography attached to this work. A complete set in photostat is at UVA.
Reference to them hereafter will be by date only.
Staunton. He paid a shilling to a washing woman, and gave a blacksmith
five shillings for shoeing his horse. Thenceforth, wherever he went, he
carried the memorandum book for that year with him, jotting down at night
all the expenditures that he remembered and adding other items of
interesting information which he had recently acquired. Considering the
circumstances, the entries are remarkably clear and understandable; they
rarely record impressions, but they have made it possible to chart his daily
movements to a degree which is rarely possible in the lives of even the
most notable of men.
In another book he began to keep a formal record of his important cases,
and he also had a fee book which served as a ledger and contained various
accounts. 8 These records, made with more careful hand than the daily
memoranda were, would delight the most critical of eyes. He listed his
cases by dates and number, separating them by neatly drawn lines and
leaving space for filling in the story of later developments. After the lapse
of more than a century and a half the writing is clear as crystal. Had he
been so disposed, he could have easily prepared a copybook for his sisters'
children.
From this beautifully kept record we learn that on February 12, 1767, he
got a client in the person of Gabriel Jones of Augusta County, and entered
caveat in his behalf for one hundred acres of land near Warm Spring.
About six weeks later he received three pounds from Jones, though the case
continued into another year. He was long to know this eccentric lawyer of
the Shenandoah Valley, at first as a friend and later as a political foe, and
he had much early business from this County, just beyond the Blue Ridge.
That was where the West began; later he said with only slight inaccuracythat Staunton was the farthest he ever went in that direction.
This outlying county seat was then small and crude. That summer he took a
case there for John Madison, father of his young friend James of Maury's
school and for long years the county clerk. The tradition is that John
Madison did him the honors of the place at the beginning of his legal
career, taking him at length to a loft where a party were playing cards by
torchlight. Madison, who had a powder horn beneath his coat, dropped
powder behind each man and trailed it out the door. Then, just as an
unlucky player was invoking the devil, he fired the train and caused the
gamesters to rush headlong from the accursed place. This is probably the
first story that Jefferson ever told8 Huntington Lib., photostats at UVA, referred to hereafter as Case Book
and Fee Book.
about riding the circuit. 0 It is a pity that he did not tell more, but he was no
Abraham Lincoln.
His business in the county courts was extensive; he had cases in forty or
more of them before he got through. Unlike Patrick Henry, however, he did
not lay the foundations of his legal reputation in this country practice. No
stories survive about his participation in dramatic trials, such as the
Parsons' Cause, and he gained no particular reputation as a jury lawyer. In
that field Patrick Henry was the greatest of his generation in Virginia, and
after his death many doubted if he would ever be excelled. 10 Even in
Henry's case much of the country practice was routine business, such as
bringing actions of debt; and his systematic young friend from Albemarle
was unquestionably his superior as a draftsman of legal papers and was
more diligent in matters of detail.
The county courts were informal and the more important trials did not
occur in them; "family tribunals" they have been called. At a later time
Jefferson spoke of the procedure in Albemarle as slovenly, and his careful
study of English cases could have availed him little there. The few
surviving comments from his contemporaries about his abilities as a
speaker give the impression that during his young manhood these were
greater than has been commonly supposed. Edmund Randolph said that he
spoke with "ease, perspicuity and elegance," though his style was less
impassioned than in his writing. 11 It was impossible for him to bellow; if
he raised his voice it soon grew husky. No gathering that he attended in
those years was ever very targe, but even in a small, informal courtroom he
could not hope to match Patrick Henry by appealing to the emotions of
jurymen.
The county court was a notable institution in Virginia, both in its judicial
and executive aspects. 12 Its magistrates were not jurists; as in his father's
and grandfather's day they were the leading citizens of the various districts.
Personal acquaintance with such men was of great importance to anyone
who would play an important part in provincial affairs, and making a round
of the counties constituted a political education in itself. Jefferson went
regularly to those that were near his own and he came to know somebodyin practically every one of them, he said. It is doubtful if ever during his
entire career he had such a wide personal acquaintance in Virginia as he did
before the Revolution when
•Memoirs of T. J. Randolph, pp. 12-13, Edgchill Randolph Papers, UVA.
On Madison, see W. & M., 2 ser., II, 185.
10 Henry, Patrick Henry, I, 24-26, and elsewhere.
11 Va. Mag., XLIII, 123; traditional account in Randall, I, 50.
"See note of B. W. Leigh in Revised Code of the Laws of Virginia (1819),
I, 244; Mercer, Abridgement, pp. 62-64.
he was actively engaged in the practice of law. It was on court days that the
farmers flocked to the various seats, that slaves and lands were sold, that
auctions of all sorts were held. 13 On such occasions the studious young
lawyer rubbed elbows with ordinary citizens to a greater extent than he
ever did afterwards. He gained for himself no such personal following as
Patrick Henry did, but he made innumerable acquaintances and gained an
insight into the thoughts of common men which could not be got from
books.
Both by training and temperament he was better fitted for practice before
the General Court, to which George Wythe introduced him early in this first
year. 14 Not even this tribunal was composed of judges who were learned
in the law. It was made up of the members of the Council, chosen for
wealth and standing without regard to legal knowledge. As he himself said,
"their decisions could never be quoted, either as adding to or detracting
from, the weight of those of the English courts on the same points." 15
During his last years as a law student and his early years as a practitioner,
accordingly, he had made careful study of cases in the courts of King's
Bench and Common Pleas. 16
The domestic judgments of the General Court were authoritative, whether
formed on sound legal principles or not. Such cases of domestic character
as had been reported, therefore, he studied and abstracted with care. These
he found in certain manuscript volumes that were in the possession of his
violin-playing friend John Randolph, the attorney general. The record
covered only the decade from 1730 to 1740; and there were no morereports thereafter until 1768, when he himself began to commit to writing
some of the leading cases of the day. In the midst of his own practice he
served as a self-appointed reporter and as such was a pioneer.
Whatever may be said about the prominent gentlemen who served as lay
judges, the Virginia bar at this time contained men of high professional
competence. Wythe was probably the most learned member — almost too
learned, some people thought. He had dwelt so long with the ancient
writers that it was hard for him to keep from giving a line from Horace the
force of an act of Assembly. 17 Edmund Pendleton had had less time for
literature, but he was probably more effective as a lawyer. Though a most
amiable man in personal relationships he was
13 Numerous items about court days can be found in Purdie & Dixon, Va.
Gazette, for 1767 and other years of Jefferson's practice.
14 "Autobiography" in Ford, I, 4. The circumstances have not been
disclosed. W Preface to his Reports of Cases determined in the General
Court of Va. (1829).
16 For his abstracts, see Chinard, Commonplace Book.
17 H. B. Grigsby, Va. Convention of 1116, p. 129; for an excellent
comparison with Pendleton, see pp. 125-130.
not above baiting Jefferson's guileless teacher, upsetting his equanimity,
and thus robbing him of his strength. 18 The star of Thomson Mason, who
was comparable with George Wythe in legal erudition, had risen; and John
Randolph, who had succeeded his brother as King's Attorney, was an
uncommonly able man. He suffered by comparison with the relative
newcomer, Patrick Henry, however, when they locked horns in criminal
cases, which were the latter's special forte. During this period the orator is
reported to have worn a black suit and tie-wig when he appeared in the
General Court, to the considerable improvement of his appearance. 19
Jefferson acted with him on certain occasions, proving himself to be no
master of overwhelming eloquence but an impressive speaker as long as his
voice held out. When they appeared together each of the men characterized
himself, so Edmund Randolph said: "Mr. Jefferson drew copiously from the
depths of the law, Mr. Henry from the recesses of the human heart." 20Two of the arguments which Jefferson used in actual cases have been
preserved in the reports which he made and which were published after his
death. 21 He may have selected these chiefly because of the questions they
dealt with, for one had to do with slavery and the other with the clergy.
About two years after he began to practise he took without fee the case of
one Samuel Howell. The latter's grandmother was a mulatto, begotten of a
white woman by a Negro man and bound by the law to serve until the age
of thirty-one. During her servitude she was delivered of Howell's mother,
and the latter, during her own servitude, was delivered of Howell. This
third mulatto was suing for freedom from the master to whom he had been
sold and who claimed his services until he was thirty-one. Jefferson's
scholarly argument was doomed from the outset and the Court did not even
wait to hear that of the equally humane Wythe on the other side. Jefferson's
contention was that one act had made a servant of the first mulatto, and that
a later one had extended it to her children, but that it remained for sonic
future legislature, if any should be found wicked enough, to extend it to
grandchildren and other issue more remote." The language of his peroration
must have been startling, especially when coupled with an
19 Wirt, Patrick Henry, p. 48.
19 Henry, Patrick Henry, I, \26.
20 Va. Mag., XLIII, 123.
21 Howell vs. Netherland, Apr. 1770; Godwin ct al. vs. Lunan, Oct. 1771.
These can be conveniently consulted in Ford, I, 373-381; 399-412. In his
Reports, Jefferson subjoined an opinion about the relations between
Christianity and the common law which is not germane here.
22 Ford, I, 381. Italics mine and mood changed.
earlier reference of his to the law of nature: "under that law," he said, "we
are all born free." M That he had come to such a philosophical position by
the time this case was adjudged in 1770 is a significant item in the history
of his thought, but such an assertion carried no weight with a practical-
minded court in a slave-owning society.
In the other reported case he represented the churchwardens and vestrymenof a parish in Nansemond County in an action whereby they sought to oust
an unworthy clergyman named Patrick Lunan. The latter was accused of
profane swearing, drunkenness, and adultery; he was said to have declared
that he cared not what religion he professed so long as he got his pay in
tobacco, and also to have exposed his private parts to public view. The
main question was whether or not the right of visitation and deprivation
resided in the Court; and by means of an elaborate historical treatise
Jefferson undertook to prove that it did reside in the Court, as representing
the King. His contention was upheld in October, 1771, and he got a five-
pound fee, but the case was still awaiting adjudication three years later
when he retired from practice. He had upheld the power of the provincial
Court over the clergy, but at a later time he would not have conceded so
much to the prerogative of the King.
Judging from the number of his cases Jefferson had a substantial legal
business. In the seven years of his practice he listed nearly a thousand in his
formal record. 24 The fact that Robert Carter Nicholas wanted to turn over
his business to him in 1771 is indicative of his standing; while the further
fact that he declined to take it, except for a very few cases which he
finished, shows that he already had just about as much as he could do. 25
His clients, at one time or another, included members of most of the
leading families of the Province: Randolphs and Pages, Carys and
Harrisons, Nelsons and Lees, Carters and Byrds. In the second year of his
practice he recorded in his Case Book, apparently with pride: "The Honble
Wm. Byrd retains me generally." x
His cases dealt with land ownership, debts, the recovery of slaves, slander,
assault and battery. He rendered opinions, for which he generally charged
twenty shillings; he drew some deeds and advised about wills; he instituted
suits in chancery. Even though his jury trials may
28 Ford, I, 380.
24 In his Case Book, 941 cases are listed by name. His legal business is
discussed by Randall, I, 47-48. It is now being analyzed by Edward
Dumbauld, who has given me the benefit of valuable informal comments.
26 Case Book, No. 612. First of these cases finished Apr. 16, 1771.
26 Case Book, June 14, 1768. This item and those in the following
paragraph are quoted through the courtesy of the Huntington Library.not have been colorful, there is human interest in many of his dry entries;
and they show clearly that the serious young lawyer, whose arguments
tended to be so elaborate, had abundant opportunity to observe the seamy
side of life. In the first year of his practice, for example, there were such as
these:
1767, June 9.
Gordon (a seafaring man) v. George Wythe (my friend). Defend him totis
viribus. Take no fee.
1767, Aug. 18.
John Thompson (Augusta) v. Moses Collier . . . [et al]. Bring action of
trespass for taking pi's son and keeping him 2 or 3 days. Also for entering
his house and taking forcibly a bottle of whiskey and shirt.
1767, Nov. 17.
David Frame (Augusta) v. James Burnside (Augusta). Bring action of
slander for saying he saw the pi who is a married man in bed with Elizabeth
Burkin, etc. [Dismissed at plaintiff's request.]
Whether or not this business was profitable depends on the criteria that are
applied. The statement of Jefferson's executor that his average profits as
expressed in dollars were about $3000 a year has often been quoted. 27 For
those days that sum would have represented a handsome addition to the
living and income that he got from his landed estate. In this generous
estimate, however, the word "profits" is loosely used to designate the sums
that were due him. Never did the fees that he charged aggregate much more
than ^500 a year, and they generally amounted to less; furthermore, he
never succeeded in collecting as much as 50 per cent. His legal business
reached its greatest volume in 1770, and in that year he managed to collect
^213 of the amount that was due him. 28
It is doubtful if he had any more trouble with collections than other lawyers
did. Difficulties of this sort were general and notorious. The year that he
was admitted to the bar another lawyer announced that the backwardness of
his clients in paying him would have obliged him to quit his practice had he
been impelled by no other reason. John Mercer had appointed a receiver,but the latter, out of /10,000, had not yet been able to collect enough to
cover his own wage and Mercer's
27 Randall, I, 48.
28 A summary of his receipts, fees due, and total business for the years
1767-1772 is in Account Book for 1773. From other records it appears that
his business declined somewhat thereafter.
taxes. Accordingly, the unfortunate lawyer now felt compelled to sue. 29
The situation was so serious that, in May, 1773, Jefferson, Pendleton, John
Randolph, Patrick Henry, and two other lawyers inserted a notice in the
Gazette.™ They announced that it would not be possible for them to
continue their practice in the General Court on the same terms as
heretofore. Even if the fees allowed by law were regularly paid, they said,
these would barely compensate them for their incessant labors or reimburse
their expenses and the losses incurred by the neglect of their private affairs.
Yet even these confessedly moderate rewards were withheld in large
proportion by the "unworthy part" of their clients. Accordingly, they
announced that after a specified date in the fall they would require full
payment before rendering an opinion, and would not prosecute or defend a
case unless they received the tax in advance and half the fee. By that time
Jefferson had already found it necessary to give more of his time to his
personal affairs, and in the year following this announcement he wholly
retired from practice.
In his years as a bachelor, that is, until he was nearing twenty-nine and had
been almost five years at the bar, absence from home disturbed him much
less than it did after he had a family of his own, and unquestionably his
journeys imparted increased interest to his life. On his way to the county
courts and to Williamsburg he generally went on horseback or in a one-
horse chair. His servant Jupiter, who was just his age, as a rule went with
him or followed close behind, possibly carrying his luggage in a cart. The
name of this trusted companion of the road, who had been going with him
since his days as a law student, recurs in his Account Books with
regularity. Jefferson was always giving money to Jupiter — to pay a
saddler in Staunton, to pay for ferriages to Williamsburg, and for bread and
candles there. He even borrowed small coin from Jupiter at times when he
himself ran out. 31He and his slave did not keep house; both in the county seats and in the
provincial capital he stayed generally in such lodgings as the times
afforded, though en route he frequently stopped with relatives or friends,
such as the Carrs and Thomas Mann Randolph, whom the slaves called
"Tuckahoe Tom." His visits to Williamsburg coincided with the court
sessions and thus fell in the most crowded times, when the regular residents
had too many guests. In the second year of his practice, if we may judge by
the size of his various bills, he lodged at Charlton's on the broad Duke of
Gloucester Street and took many
29 Rind, Va. Gazette, Feb. 19, 1767.
80 May 20, 1773; reproduced in Ford, I, 416.
"Details from Account Books, 1767-1771.
meals at the Raleigh Tavern across the way, going to the Coffee House
beyond the Capitol frequently for food and liquid entertainment, and
occasionally to Ayscough's and Mrs. Vobe's.
If the gaming in these places was as constant as has been reported, the
clatter of the dice-boxes must have been trying to one who prized
tranquillity so much. He made many visits to John Page at Rosewell, riding
or driving to York, then ferrying to Gloucester. At the home of this friend
he fiddled and talked in company which was often if not always mixed. It
was a pleasant life, and as a young gentleman who bought for himself not
only books and fiddlestrings but also broadcloth, silk hose, and buckskin
gloves, he played his conventional part in it. He continued to indulge in idle
social chatter when he wrote to Page but it was not in his nature to be silly
for very long.
The playhouse in Williamsburg had several good seasons during his early
years as a lawyer. The Virginia Company of Comedians which came there
in 1768 may not have been the equal of the London Company of the elder
Lewis Hallam which had visited the capital in his boyhood, or of the
American Company of David Douglas which had appeared there when he
was in college, but it put on a considerable number of plays that spring and
when he was there he rarely missed one. 32 Among these were Addison's
The Drummer, The Merchant of Venice, Otway's Venice Preserved and
The Orphan, and The Beggar's Opera, with Peter Pelham conducting theorchestra. Farces were often added to the main attraction and the spirit of
the company was as comic as its name implied. There were no other
regular theatrical performances until the spring of 1770; and before the
gaieties of that season were in swing a disturbing event had occurred on the
banks of the Rivanna and had been reported in Williamsburg.
On February 22, 1770, this item appeared in the Virginia Gazette:
We hear from Albemarle that about a fortnight ago the house of Thomas
Jefferson, Esq., in that county, was burnt to the ground, together with all his
furniture, books, papers, &c, by which that Gentleman sustains a very great
loss. I le was from home when the Accident occurred. 83
To be exact, the conflagration occurred on February 1. JerTc had dined
with the family, probablv about two o'clock, and hail then gone to
Charlottesville on business. 34 He had his first news from I
32 Purdie & Dixon, Va. Gazette, Mar. 31; Apr. 7, 14; May 12, 19, 26,
1768.
83 Purdic & Dixon.
84 Memoirs of T. J. Randolph, LYA, p. 2.
servant who was dispatched after him and who undoubtedly reported that
no lives were lost. The tradition is that he immediately asked if they had
saved his books, and that the slave replied, "No, Master, all lost, but we
save your fiddle." Presumably this was the instrument he had bought for
five pounds in Williamsburg the year before. Actually, a few books were
saved, along with two or three beds, but little else. For two or three years
he had been planning to leave Shadwell as soon as his building operations
on the mountain would permit, and work was sufficiently advanced at
Monticello for him to move there late in the following November, to
endure the rigors of winter in a single room. 35 The other members of the
family continued to live at Shad-well until after his mother's death,
probably making the best they could of the remaining buildings. 86
Jefferson estimated at two hundred pounds sterling the value of his books
that were burned, but it was not the monetary loss that evoked his groans.
These were mainly law books which he could not immediately replace, andwith them were destroyed the notes which he had carefully prepared for his
cases in the approaching General Court. "These are gone," he wrote Page,
"and like the baseless fabric of a vision, leave not a trace behind." 37
Unlike John Marshall, he did not learn through the ear but through the eye;
he was not one who could speak on the spur of the moment; he put all
important things down on paper and without notes he was lost. He
wondered, therefore, if it would not be possible for him to get a
postponement of his cases, believing that an exception might justly be
made in such singular circumstances. He managed to maintain a light tone
of youthful banter in writing to this good friend, but he could not conceal
his deep concern.
His friends hastened to console and help him, though Page at the time had
troubles of his own. 38 His wife had just lost her mother, so he penned only
a few hasty lines at York, which the younger Thomas Nelson enclosed. The
latter promised to speed Jefferson's order to the booksellers and assured
him that his cases would be postponed. The elder Thomas Nelson offered to
make him a loan from his own collection, and in the meantime sent hinges,
locks, and pulleys, doubtless thinking that these would be needed at
Monticello sooner than had been expected. By sending him nectarines,
apricot grafts, and grapevines for the orchard he was planting on the
hillside there, George Wythe
85 To James Ogilvie, Feb. 20, 1771 (Ford I, 390-391). 86 F. Kimball in Va.
Mag., LI, 315. "Feb. 21, 1770 (Ford, I, 370).
38 Thomas Nelson, Jr., John Page, and Thomas Nelson, Sr., to Jefferson,
Mar. 6, 1770, MHS.
showed that he maintained his classic calm.* 8 Like Page, he congratulated
his young friend on his philosophic spirit, predicting that he would not only
surmount his difficulties but be the richer for his unfortunate experience.
Soon thereafter Page, now more at leisure, wrote him in sentimental vein.
40
It is probable that he did get a continuance of his cases, or most of them; at
all events, he managed to get through the busiest of his legal years. He
restored his books at the earliest possible time, borrowing for this purpose
one hundred pounds which Dabney Carr had lying idle, though this sum
alone was not enough. Within three years he had more volumes than he hadlost. 41 His personal papers, however, were not replaceable, and it is
largely for this reason that the story of his life up to 1770 can never be told
with such fullness as can that of his later years. He himself said: "The
letters of a person, especially of one whose business has been chiefly
transacted by letters, form the only full and genuine journal of his life." 42
During his young manhood, when he was fresh in the world of affairs, he
probably did not make copies of his letters so carefully as he did afterward;
but we would know considerably more about him before he reached the age
of twenty-seven if the house at Shadwell had not burned.
Fortunately, the loss was not so complete as he implied. He said that he
was destitute of papers of every kind, whether public or private, of business
or amusement. But he had preserved his memorandum Account Books and
was thus enabled to draw up new records. 43 His Garden Book almost
certainly was at Monticello. Probably he had continued his boyish habit of
reading on his hilltop and for that reason also kept his commonplace books
there. He has left a fairly full, though largely an external, story of his young
manhood; but it was not until after the fire that he became par excellence a
keeper of records and began to accumulate documentary treasures such as
have rarely been amassed by any man. This was a part of the business of
life which he took seriously and attended to with care.
39 Wythe's letter of Mar. 9, 1770, from MHS, is reproduced in Garden
Book, p. 20.
40 April 1770, MHS.
41 In his Account Book for 1773, he noted that he had 1256 volumes.
42 To Robert Walsh, Apr. 5, 1823, UVA.
43 Account Book, 1770, c. June 1.
DO
Among the Burgesses 1769-1771
THE coming of a new royal governor to Virginia about six months after
Fauquier died was an event of great interest in the Province, and it had
important effects on the career of Jefferson, who was twenty-five years old
at the time. He was in Williamsburg in late October, 1768, when the RightHonorable Norborne Berkeley, Baron de Botetourt, arrived. He was not
among those who extended an official welcome to his Lordship about
sunset or who had supper with him afterwards at the Raleigh Tavern, but he
could hardly have failed to view the festive illumination of the "city" that
night. Then it was that people of all ranks "vied with each other in
testifying their gratitude and joy that a nobleman of such distinguished
merit and abilities" had come to dwell among them. 1 Though Jefferson
preferred Fauquier, who was not a lord and was technically only a deputy
governor, he was not yet suspicious of noblemen as such, and, like most
other people, he probably thought it a compliment that the British
authorities had sent to the Colony a resident governor general.
There were some people in Virginia and more in England who questioned
the wisdom of appointing this Lord of the Bedchamber, who had suffered
serious if not discreditable financial reverses; but the description of
Botetourt by Junius as "a cringing, bowing, fawning, sword-bearing
courtier" was extreme. 2 Now about fifty, he had been
a Purdie & Dixon, Va. Gazette, Oct. 27, 1768. Botetourt (whose name is
pronounced in Virginia so as to rhyme with "Hottentot") took the oath at
the Capitol immediately after his arrival; Council Journals, Colonial Va.,
Oct. 26, 1768, UVA photostats. For reception and comment, see Goodwin,
Williamsburg, pp. 55-57. Entries in Jefferson's Account Book leave no
doubt that he was there, though there is no entry for this day.
3 For comments on the appointment see Sir Henry Cavendishes Debates of
the House of Commons, II, 21 n., 24, 25 n.; E. Channing, Hist. U. S., Ill,
103; C. W. Coleman, in W. & M., 1 ser., V, 165-170; Rowland, Mason, I,
133.
a diligent Tory member of the House of Commons, and had come into his
title four years before he sailed to America. Nobody could question his
loyalty to his King, and everybody agreed that he was a good companion.
He wore a smile upon his face, and the Virginians were disposed to take
him at his face value. In the end they loved him more than they had
Fauquier or any other of their viceroys. Jefferson regarded him as both an
honorable and an amiable man, but he never became intimate with him.
Botetourt provided the occasion for Jefferson's early entrance into political
life. On the day after his arrival the new Governor properly dissolved theold Assembly, which was not then in session, and soon after that he issued
writs for the election of a new one. As a result of this action the freeholders
of Albemarle met in the courthouse in Charlottesville before the middle of
December and elected Thomas Jefferson as one of their two burgesses; and
in the month of May, 1769, he took his seat for the first time as a member
of a legislative body. 3 During the next fifteen years he performed his
public service primarily as a legislator.
The electors who chose him on this occasion were men possessing at least
fifty unsettled acres, or twenty-five if they had a plantation and small
house. 4 For the times the suffrage was liberal, since that much land could
be rather easily acquired. The freeholders voted openly, however, and the
opinions and preferences of the recognized leaders were generally
determinative. Jefferson's friend Dr. Thomas Walker, who had just returned
from an important Indian conference at Fort Stanwix, was re-elected. 5 The
other burgess in the previous Assembly had been Edward Carter, whose
holdings in the County considerably exceeded Jefferson's and included
Carter's Mountain, towering over Monticello. Carter had failed to attend
during the last session, however, and this fact probably was to his
disadvantage. 6
It is impossible to determine now just how sharp the contest was, but
presumably there were no public issues. The campaigning of that era,
which they called "burgessing," was wholly personal and consisted
primarily of providing drinks and other refreshments at or before elections
— "swilling the planters with bumbo," as one observer put it. 7
3 Council Journals, Colonial Va. t UVA photostats, Oct. 27, Nov. 1, 1768;
Purdic & Dixon, Va. Gazette Dec. 15, 1768, reporting Jeffenon'i election.
*Act of 1762 (Hening, VII, 517-530).
5 Purdie & Dixon, Va. Gazette, Dec. 1, 1768, reported that he and hi had
passed through Philadelphia before Nov. 21; anJ JciTcrsoiis Account Book,
Nov. 26, 1768, shows that they were back by then.
6 Woods, Albemarle, pp. 163-164.
7 Letter of Theodorick Bland, Sr., June 27, 1765 (Bland Paper.Jefferson and Carter may have provided rum jointly, and the former
recorded other expenditures for drinks and cakes. 8 All this was modest,
however, and it had the flavor of gentlemanly hospitality. By nature
Jefferson was not good at electioneering or at mingling with a crowd. "His
manners could never be harsh," one of his friends observed, "but they were
reserved towards the world at large." 9 It was fortunate for this future hero
of the plain people that his career began in a period when influential
gentlemen were at the helm. The meeting at the courthouse was for him a
sort of prelude to politics, but it can be more aptly described as a genial
introduction to public life.
At that time and place a man of his estate and training was expected to
share the burden of public affairs, and his ultimate election to the Assembly
might have been confidently expected without any special effort on his part.
Normally he would have served first as a local magistrate and possibly he
did. A couple of years later he was a justice of the peace and member of the
county court, as his father had been, and he may have begun this service
before he attained the more responsible post of burgess. 10 At all events, he
quickly telescoped his father's public career.
Early initiation into public affairs was not uncommon in the Province but
his election at the age of twenty-five to a position which his father had
attained only in the ripeness of years was a tribute to him, nevertheless. The
leaders among the local gentry had undoubtedly perceived that Peter
Jefferson's son was a young man of unusual talent and diligence, and they
must have been impressed with the enterprise and public spirit which he
had shown in his vigorous efforts to improve the navigation of the Rivanna.
In later years his fellow citizens of Albemarle congratulated themselves on
their foresight in giving him this early appointment, and with it the
opportunity to become more widely known. The freeholders of his County
elected him as soon as they very well could, they retained him as their
representative until he proceeded to larger tasks, and they never let him be
a prophet without honor at home. Both they and he had reason to be proud
of this unfailing loyalty. 11
He afterwards claimed that he always disliked public life, but there is no
more evidence that he avoided it at the outset than there is that he made
vigorous efforts to enter it. Participation in matters of local
8 Account Book, Dec. 5, 9, 1768.9 Edmund Randolph, in Va. Mag., XLHI, 122.
10 On June 12, 1771, it was reported that he and others had declined to
serve longer; Council Journals, Colonial Va., UVA photostats.
11 Address of the Citizens of the County of Albemarle [Dec. 1789]; LC,
53:9021-9022.
government was as much a part of the normal business of life as practising
law or cultivating his farms. Service in the House of Burgesses was not
continuous but periodical, and he was still a bachelor who could easily take
the road. He was not personally aggressive and did not crave power, but he
always set high value on the esteem of his fellows and at this stage he
craved honor. In that sense but probably in no other he had more than the
"little spice of ambition" which he acknowledged. 12
He could not have failed to see that in this region the only real promise of
distinction lay in the field of public affairs. As has been well said, "to live
and act like gentlemen was a thing once so common in Virginia, that
nobody thought of noticing it." 13 Lawyers achieved little prominence
merely as lawyers. Patrick Henry first attracted attention in a public case,
and all of the able practitioners in the General Court whom history
remembers were statesmen as well. Science and philosophy were not
professions here; they were merely the avocations of gentlemen who must
obtain support and gain prominence by other means. Years after Jefferson
entered the House of Burgesses an eminent jurist sagely remarked: "The
truth is, that Socrates himself would pass unnoticed and forgotten in
Virginia, if he were not a public character." 14 Jefferson was not yet a
public character but he had taken a necessary step if he would ever become
one.
He did not wait until the eve of the Assembly to go to Williamsburg with
his trusty Jupiter. He was there during most of the month of April, 1769,
attending to legal business and diverting himself at odd times. 15 Early in
May, along with the other burgesses, he took the oath in the Council
chamber at the Capitol. Since this was his first session, the procedure
probably impressed him more than it ever did afterwards. The formalities
required a good deal of walking to and fro but fortunately the distances
were short. After being sworn, the burgesses returned to their own
chamber, whence they were summoned again to the Council room to attendthe Governor; he then instructed them to go back and choose a speaker.
Thcv unanimously elected Peyton Randolph, the mace was laid on the
table, and Lord Botetourt was informed. 16 This was by no means the end
of it, however, for they then attended His Excellency again and learned
with-
12 To James Madison, June 9, 1793, Apr. 27, 1795 (Ford, VI, 291; VII,
10). 13 St. George Tucker, Apr. 4, 1813, in Memoirs of the Life of William
Wirt (1850), I, 316. "Ibid., I, 317.
"Account Book entries, Apr. 6-May 5, 1769. 16 Burgesses, Journals,
1766-1769, pp. 187-189. The session began on May 8.
out surprise that he had approved their choice. His Lordship was wearing a
light red coat. The Speaker, now formally recognized, laid claim to the
ancient rights and privileges of the House — particularly freedom of
speech and debate, exemption from arrest, and the protection of their
estates. These the Governor solemnly promised to defend. Then, slowly
and with long pauses, he made them a little speech. The members finally
returned to their own places and resolved that an address be presented to
His Excellency in response to his "very affectionate" words. These
resolutions were drawn by the young Burgess from Albemarle.
All this was traditional procedure, embroidered by deliberate design. In this
provincial setting the visible representative of a distant monarch was
putting on as best he could a royal show. He had ridden from the Palace to
the Capitol in a superbly furnished coach of state, which had been
presented to him by the Duke of Cumberland, uncle of the King, and now
bore the Virginia arms. Jefferson and the other burgesses had no doubt
watched it as six white horses drew it up the broad Duke of Gloucester
Street. 17
If the later foe of kings regarded this parade and all these reflections of
regal splendor as unbecoming to a representative body which was jealous
of its own prerogatives, he gave no such suggestion in the first of his public
papers. The brief resolutions which he drew at the request of Edmund
Pendleton were in the courtly style. 18 We need not be surprised to find in
them such standardized expressions as "a most humble and dutiful
address," "his Majesty's sacred person and government," and "a lively sense
of his royal favor." More honeyed words than these appeared in the petitionwhich the House of Burgesses had sent to George III the year before, when
as a matter of fact it was asserting its own rights. The iron hand was
covered, almost concealed, by its velvet glove. 19
If Jefferson's early draftsmanship is to be judged at all from these
stereotyped resolutions it must be from the last of them. In this he effected
a felicitous juncture of loyalty with firmness, thus aptly expressing the
spirit of this polite but self-reliant group. If any questions affecting Great
Britain should arise he hoped they would be discussed on this ruling
principle: "her interests, and ours, are inseparably the same." And, finally,
he prayed that "Providence, and the royal pleasure, may long continue his
Lordship the happy ruler of a free and happy people."
17 Goodwin, Williamsburg, pp. 57, 240.
18 May 8, 1769 (Ford, I, 369).
19 Apr. 14, 1768 (Burgesses, Journals, 1766-1769, pp. 165-171).
He had to content himself with this slight production, for the address which
he drew soon thereafter was thought by the committee to follow the diction
of the resolutions too strictly, and not to amplify the subjects sufficiently.
The chief objector, Robert Carter Nicholas, was then asked to draft the
paper, and in Jefferson's opinion he did this "with amplification enough."
20 Some of the phrases of the younger man reappeared in less rhythmical
form in the address which was adopted, but this was a less distinguished
piece of writing than his original resolutions, whatever may be thought of
them. Time showed much more convincingly that he was a better writer
than the veteran Nicholas or any other of the distinguished committeemen,
but this experience at the beginning of his legislative career left an
unpleasant memory of chagrin. Time also showed that sensitiveness was
characteristic of his nature and constituted his chief personal weakness as a
public man.
Pendleton was undoubtedly aware of his diligence and of his skill in all
sorts of paper work, and probably anticipated that he would prove a useful
committeeman, as in the next few years he did. Jefferson was appointed to
two other committees in his first session but it is unlikely that he was
immediately introduced into the inner circle of the legislators, as has been
claimed. 21 In formal sessions he was a silent member even after he hadbecome much more mature. He was always at his best in a small group, and
he did not like to raise his voice.
He never sat in a larger legislative body than the House of Burgesses. The
members must have crowded the small chamber and have had little elbow
room, if ever they were all there. Each of the fifty-seven counties was
entitled to two of them, and three boroughs and the College of William and
Mary each had one. Nearly all of the leaders whom Jefferson had seen in
action during his student days were still in evidence, for the principle of
continuity in office prevailed. Peyton Randolph was even more dignified
and stately, since he had become a permanent presiding officer, but
Jefferson found him affable and kind. Richard Bland looked more than ever
like a piece of parchment. Robert Carter Nicholas was weighted with care,
being the treasurer of the Colony, but he was not yet at the point of offering
his law practice to the young committeeman whom he had chagrined. Par-
rick Henry was dressing better but he was never anything but plain, nor
was he at all remarkable until he began to speak. I le generally remained
inactive until a crisis arose, bothering little with routine or
20 Ford, I, 369; Burgesses, Journals, 1766-1769, pp. 199-200.
21 Hilldrup, Pendleton, p. 75. I lis committees were Privileges and
Elections and Propositions and Grievances.
detail. Richard Henry Lee was a more even speaker, though he never
attained such heights; and adroit Pendleton was the best director of
parliamentary affairs. 22
From Charles City County, where Jefferson afterwards found a wife, had
come big Benjamin Harrison. Archibald Cary, whose daughter married
Thomas Mann Randolph of Tuckahoe, was there from Chesterfield; he was
one of the smaller men. Jefferson's early client Gabriel Jones had crossed
the mountains from Augusta; and his friend Thomas Nelson, Junior, had
come up from York. More important than any of these in history and in
Jefferson's future career, however, was a splendid figure of a man from
Fairfax. Ordinarily, George Washington did not have much to say but he
had come to the meeting with something in his pocket. It was probably at
this session that Jefferson met him for the first time, but a decade passed
before they knew each other very well.Though the new burgess from Albemarle was one of the taller among many
tall members, he did nor yet tower in this company and at his age he could
hardly have been expected to. He learned far more from their deliberations
than he contributed to them. These able Virginians constituted an
experienced, vigorous, and self-confident group, banded together by
common interests and infused with a common spirit. They did not need the
spur of Patrick Henry's passionate oratory at this meeting. In closed
sessions there was some dissent, but on questions which affected their
liberties as legislators and their rights as colonists they stood practically as
one.
Jefferson had an opportunity to observe this united front somewhat sooner
than Lord Botetourt did. On May 16, 1769, by unanimous vote the
burgesses passed certain resolves; and on the next day the genial
representative of the King who had sought to avoid just this eventuality
found it necessary to dissolve them. Despite all the lengthy ceremonial at
the beginning they remained in session for only ten days.
Much turbulent water had gone over the dam since Jefferson had heard
Patrick Henry inveigh against the Stamp Act in this same chamber, and had
witnessed in Annapolis the rejoicings at the repeal of that obnoxious
measure. His relative Richard Bland had written a pamphlet, entitled An
Inquiry into the Rights of the British Colonies, which he read and from
which he profited. He himself never bothered, however, to follow Bland in
denying the virtual representation of the colonies in Parliament, which
certain Britishers had alleged as a
22 Good descriptions and characterizations of most of these leaders are in
H. B. Grigsby, Va. Convention of 1116 (1855).
justification for taxation. That question was closed in his mind by the time
that he began to speak of the "connected chain of parliamentary
usurpation." Of all the acts of "usurpation" which had followed the
imposition of the stamp taxes, the temporary suspension of the legislature
of the Colony of New York left the deepest impress on his mind. 23 The
previous Assembly had addressed itself to this question, and Jefferson
himself retained the conviction that never, until they had surrendered their
common sense, would Americans admit that they held their political
existence at the will of Parliament. This issue arose again and became
dominant in the end.A more burning issue in this session was provided by the Townshend
duties, voted by Parliament two years earlier and still on the statute books.
These had been imposed at the instance of a showy and cynical British
minister who derided the distinction between internal and external taxes.
Since the obstreperous colonists had objected to the one, he would
accomplish a similar purpose by giving them the other. By this time
Jefferson may already have reached the conclusion he afterwards
proclaimed: that the controversy over internal and external taxes was a
sham battle. But, in direct opposition to Townshend, he believed that
Parliament had authority to impose neither, rather than a right to impose
both. The burgesses were not yet ready to say that. They were opposed to
laws designed to raise revenue under the guise of regulating external trade,
but they were willing to acquiesce in measures for "preserving a necessary
dependence."
At this juncture they were particularly concerned about what had happened
in Massachusetts. The Bay Colony continued to be a seat of trouble.
Jefferson himself said that the struggle which led to the American
Revolution began in each colony "whenever the encroachment was
presented to it," and that there was opposition in Massachusetts earlier than
in Virginia. 24 Also, for various local reasons, the internal struggle was
more acute and the violence much greater there. A board of customs
commissioners was now seated in Boston and thus the duties on glass,
paper, colors, and tea constituted a more visible "encroachment." As in a
more famous instance several years later, the Massachusetts patriots
appealed to the other colonies, and Jefferson's countrymen did not fail
them. If the Virginians and the New Engenders were not the chief actors in
the Revolution, he thought they were. 25
In February, 1768, the House of Representatives of Massachusetts
"Judging from his comments in his "Summary View," Ford, I, 435-436. 24
To Benjamin Waterhouse, Mar. 3, 1818 (Ford, X, 103). 26 Ibid., X, 329 72.
Bay had sent to the other colonial legislatures a circular letter, urging
united action against the Townshend duties. At their next meeting the
Virginia Assembly had petitioned the King and addressed the Lords and
Commons; and by direction the Speaker of the Burgesses wrote to the
Speaker of the Massachusetts House that the Virginia representatives
"could not but applaud them for their attention to American liberty." 2eFurthermore, he spoke of their own "fixed resolution to concur with the
other colonies in their application for redress." Judging from what had
happened already, Botetourt had little reason to hope that his conciliatory
manner would suffice to detach the Virginians from their concert with their
brethren to the North.
Unfortunately, the British authorities had chosen to make an issue of the
Massachusetts circular. They had ordered it to be rescinded and the House
of Representatives had refused. The secretary of state for the colonies, Lord
Hillsborough, instructed hapless Botetourt and the other provincial
governors to dissolve any assembly which approved the circular.
Furthermore, some months before Jefferson attended his first session,
Parliament approved this policy and recommended the revival of an old
statute which allowed the government to call to England for trial persons
accused of treason outside of the Kingdom. The threat was specifically
directed against the "traitors" in Massachusetts, but the law could have
been applied to Patrick Henry and Peyton Randolph just as well, had it
been seriously intended.
On the ninth day of their session the burgesses accepted the challenge
without flinching. They declared again that they, not Parliament, had the
right to levy taxes on the Colony. They also asserted the right of petition to
the King, and the lawfulness of procuring the concurrence of the other
colonies. As usual, they assured the King of their loyalty, but in the same
breath they asked him to avert the "dangers and miseries" which would
ensue from the transportation of anyone to England to be tried. 27
Botetourt had hoped to conciliate them and keep them silent, but under his
instructions he had now no choice. He was dressed in scarlet when he
summoned them into his presence and said: "I have heard of your resolves,
and augur ill of their effect. You have made it my duty to dissolve you; and
you are dissolved accordingly." 28 This was about noon on a Wednesday.
With the greatest order and decorum the "late representatives of the people"
went immediately to the Apollo Room of the Raleigh Tavern; they elected
Peyton Randolph
26 Apr. 15, 1768 (Burgesses, Journals, 1766-1769, p. 174). 27 Burgesses,
Journals, 1766-1769, p. 214, and frontispiece.
28Ibid., p. 218.
moderator and proceeded to transact highly important business in the best
of form. Jefferson needed to do nothing but go along with this powerful
current. On the next day he put his name to the first significant public paper
that he ever signed. 29
This was what was known as an "Association," and because of the great
prestige of the Colony and the historic eminence of the signers it became
one of the more famous of its kind. It was a nonimportation,
nonconsumption agreement, based on part of a draft of George Mason's
which Washington had brought with him from Fairfax County. 30
Scholarly and patriotic Mason, who avoided legislative duties all he could,
was not there. He had favored nonexportation also, but the others were not
yet prepared to go that far. Jefferson was among the great number of
"principal gentlemen" of the Colony, including eighty-nine of the "late
representatives," who signed the final report of a special committee after it
was approved on Thursday and then drank toasts to the King, the Governor,
and others. He still regarded himself as a loyal subject, but from this
beginning he was wholly resolute in his defense of colonial "rights."
He and the others promised that they would not import, and that after
September 1 they would not buy, any goods taxed by Parliament for the
purpose of raising revenue. A similar agreement about a long list of other
articles was to remain binding until the Townshend Act had been repealed.
At designated dates they also promised to cease to import wines and slaves.
They set up no machinery of enforcement, however, and this proved to be
an ineffective measure. 31 It was an important gesture and threat,
nevertheless, and Jefferson took it more seriously than most.
Unless Lord Botetourt intended to dispense with the Assembly altogether
and thus leave routine business unattended to, he had to issue writs for a
new election. This he did in August and the elections were held in
September. As Jefferson remembered, the only casualties were among the
very few burgesses who had dared dissent from the opinions of the
dominating group. In the courthou iiar-
lottesville he himself was returned by the voice of the freeholders of
Albemarle. His legislative career had lasted only ten days so far; but,
having survived an election, he was now a veteran of sorts. 32His second session, in November and December of this year, was
2B May 18, 1769; Ibid., pp. xxxix-xlii.
30 Rowland, Mason, I, 136-140.
31 Lingley, Transition in Va., pp. 57-58.
"Purdie & Dixon, Va. Gazette, Aug. 10, Sept. 7-?« 17^,9; Ford, I, 7.
interrupted by no crisis and lasted about six weeks. He served on more
committees this time, but like the others he was largely occupied with
routine affairs, such as individual petitions and bills for the docking of
entails on land. 33 So far as imperial relations were concerned this meeting
was serene, and Lord Botetourt basked in the sunshine of popularity. No
penalties had been imposed on the burgesses because of the actions of last
May. This was one of many instances of the inconsistent and vacillating
policy of the unstable ministry in England. After having uttered
unnecessary threats, as Edmund Burke pointed out, the ministers now knelt
to be kicked. 34 In Virginia it was courtly Lord Botetourt who did the
kneeling, and the burgesses proceeded to bestow on him, not a kick, but the
nearest thing to a caress that they could put in words.
In his opening address the Governor made a most conciliatory
announcement. The British administration, far from wanting to impose
further taxes on America for purposes of revenue, intended to propose at
the next session of Parliament that the duties on glass, paper, and colors be
taken off. He wisely failed to speak of tea, and, humorously conceding that
the present ministers were not immortal, he admitted that their successors
might attempt to undo their works. But he did not believe the plan would
fail. As for himself, he was willing to be declared infamous if he did not at
all times, in all places, and upon all occasions exert every power to obtain
satisfaction for the colonies. The burgesses were enchanted, and Jefferson
himself believed that the Governor meant everything he said. 35
The response to such an important announcement was not entrusted to a
young burgess who might possibly have claimed something more; it was
left to the sage veterans, Pendleton and Nicholas. They expressed gratitude
and loyalty to the King, and they undoubtedly voiced the prevailing
sentiment about the Governor himself. "Your Lordship's great regard andattention to the welfare and true interest of this colony has before endeared
you to us all; but your generous and noble declarations, upon this occasion,
demand our warmest and most grateful acknowledgments." 36 The
Governor had made himself the hero of the hour and could hardly have
been denied generous applause.
It seemed to Thomas Jefferson afterwards that this sort of thing smacked
too much of humility, and that, while Botetourt said all he
33 Burgesses, Journals, 1766-1769, pp. 262, 296, 298, 310, 316.
34 Cavendish, Debates, II, 21.
35 Burgesses, Journals, 1766-1769, p. 227; Ford, X, 330.
36 Burgesses, Journals, 1766-1769, p. 234.
could, he could not say enough. To certain critics of the ministry in the
House of Commons, on the other hand, and among them men who had
opposed the Townshend duties in the first place, the speech and conduct of
the Lord of the Bedchamber seemed absurd. In the opinion of Burke and
others he had said far too much: he had laid on Parliament the odium for
imposing burdens, and had given all the credit for removing them to his
King. 37 Even Lord North recognized the issue. Said he: "The language of
America is, We are the subjects of the King; with parliament we have
nothing to do. That is the point at which the factions have been aiming:
upon that they have been shaking hands." 38 Jefferson would have
approved, for he afterwards claimed that he held this position from the first.
But there is no record that he said so, publicly, until four years later and he
believed that he was in advance of public opinions when he did.
Meanwhile, it was recognized in England as in Virginia that Botetourt was
amiable and much beloved.
He was a man around whom pleasant stories gathered. From his friend
Anne Blair, Jefferson could have heard one which ought to have appealed
to his musician's heart, whether or not he loved a lord. One summer
evening as the Blairs and their guests sat singing on their steps, they saw a
lantern and candle coming up the street. The pedestrians soon stopped as
though to listen, and the music abruptly ceased. Whereupon a voice called
out: "Charming, charming! proceed for God's sake, or I go home directly."Then all sprang up and the air echoed with "Pray, walk in, my Lord." No,
he would not do that, but he would sit on the steps beside them. This he did
till the party broke up and the guests went home. 39 In December the
Speaker and the burgesses gave a party at the illuminated Capitol to
Botetourt which Jefferson was entitled to attend. It was noted that the
patriotic spirit which had given rise to the Association of gentlemen in
Raleigh Tavern was now manifested by the ladies at the Capitol. Nearly a
hundred of them came in homespun gowns. They undoubtedly fluttered
about His Lordship, who had no lady of his own at the Palace but managed,
nevertheless, to give splendid entertainment there. 40
Jefferson was one of those who regarded the struggle with the British
authorities as far from over. The duty on tea remained and was supported
by the ministry in Parliament on the ground that the
37 Jan. 9, 1770, Pari. Hist., XVI, 670, 675; May 9, 1770, Cavendish,
Debates, II, 14-36, esp. 20-22, 26, 31. In Pari. Hist., XVI, 1001-1010, the
latter debate is dated May 8, and is reported in much less detail.
38 Cavendish, Debates, II, 31.
89 Anne Blair to Martha Braxton, Aug. 21, 1769 (W. & M., 1 scr., XVI,
178). ^Purdie & Dixon, Va. Gazette, Dec. 14, 1769.
Mother Country must retain the right to tax. The practical inconvenience to
the colonies might now be slight, as Lord North said, but the principle for
which the more aggressive patriots had contended had been denied. 41
Throughout the preliminaries of the Revolution Jefferson kept principles
clearly in mind and the action which he took in June, 1770, illustrates the
point. He then signed another Association agreement which was to be
binding until the offensive act of Parliament had been totally repealed or a
meeting of one hundred Associates had provided otherwise. This
agreement, which was made by a large group of burgesses and local
merchants during the spring session of the Assembly, went further than that
of the previous year by setting up county committees of enforcement. It
soon appeared, however, that these could not be genuinely effective, since
the spirit of Association had everywhere declined. 42
It was during this session that Lord Botetourt signed Jefferson's
commission as lieutenant of Albemarle and chief commander of the militiathere. 43 Thus, at the age of twenty-seven, he became the ranking official
of his County and could be called Colonel. His service in this important
post may not have been continuous, but he was occupying it when war
actually broke out and Colonel Jefferson then concerned himself diligently
with military affairs. He did not see much more of Botetourt, for in October
the genial Baron was gathered to his fathers. Jefferson was then in
Williamsburg attending the General Court and no doubt was present at the
funeral services in Bruton Church and in the College chapel, where the
remains were interred. 44 The ceremonies were the most elaborate that had
ever been seen in Virginia and are reputed to have cost seven hundred
pounds sterling. Also, he was a member of the Assembly which afterwards
voted that an "elegant" statue of this much-mourned gentleman be erected
in marble at public expense. This statue later became a landmark and
caused the memory of His Lordship to remain green in Williamsburg. 45
Jefferson afterwards viewed the death of Botetourt, which had seemed so
tragically untimely, as a fortunate event for the cause of the Revolution. He
believed that if this conciliatory courtier had lived on he would have been
able to embarrass the measures of the patriots greatly. It seemed to him that
his Virginia countrymen had
41 Mar. 5, 1770; Pari Hist., XVI, 853-855.
42 Burgesses, Journals, 1770-1772, pp. xxvii-xxxi.
43 June 9, 1770; LC, 1:52. This is followed by a similar commission,
signed on Dec. 15, 1770, by William Nelson, acting governor.
^Goodwin, Williamsburg, pp. 61-62, with citations. Jefferson noted in his
Account Book on Oct. 15, 1770, that Botetourt had died the day before. 45
Burgesses, Journals, 1770-1772, p. 138.
fallen into a sad state of insensibility to their actual situation. 4 * Not only
was the tea tax unrepealed; the Declaratory Act, by which Parliament had
asserted the right to bind the colonists by their laws in all cases whatsoever,
still hung suspended over them like the sword of Damocles. Others than he
had noted the cooling of the spirit of Association — because of the
defection of the northern provinces, some people said. A meeting of
Associators was called for December 14, 1770, but so few met that they
could do nothing but adjourn until summer. 47 Jefferson was inWilliamsburg that day and was probably numbered among these few. He
continued longer than most people to be scrupulous about the agreement
into which he had entered. In the year 1771, as a prospective bridegroom,
he particularly wanted building materials and furnishings and fine clothes.
Not until June, however, did he feel free to authorize his agent in England
to purchase certain articles which had been previously prohibited. 48
As a public man he had now come into a barren period. Of all the sessions
of the House of Burgesses that he attended before his marriage, his first
was much the most exciting. Following the Boston Massacre there was a
reaction against patriotic activities even in Boston, and the Virginians had
no other burning grievances for several years. The time for him to appear
as a rebel had not yet arrived. But it was as inevitable as anything can be
that he would take his stand against what he regarded as tyranny, for the
spirit of liberty was the essence of his mind.
During his early legislative career, he said, he made an effort for the
emancipation of slaves which came to nothing. Whether he made or
seconded an abortive motion which was not entered on the record, or his
memory was at fault in regard to the form of his proposal, undoubtedly he
already had a strong desire to mitigate the evils of slavery. But, as he
reflected, nothing liberal could then expect success. 48 He was still living
in the "dull monotony of a colonial subservience" and, both as a local
patriot and a humanitarian, he had to wait for a more propitious hour.
Momentarily, he had to combat ills created by the forces of nature.
46 Ford, X, 33072.; I, 7.
47 Burgesses, Journals, 1770-1772, p. xxxi.
^To Thos. Adams, June 1, 1771 (Ford, I, 394-395).
49 "Autobiography," in Ford, I, 4. Randall, I, 58, says that in his first
session he introduced a bill giving to owners the right to manumit their
slaves. In a letter r<> Edward Coles, Aug. 25, 1814 (Ford, IX, 477), he
speaks of a bill moderately extending to slaves the protection of the laws
which was introduced by Richard Bland and seconded by him. The surest
indication of his attitude at this time is to be found in his argument in
Howell v. Netherland, April, 1770 (Ford, I, 373-381).The "great fresh" of 1771 destroyed many other things besides his mill; that
summer he attended a special session of the Assembly which President
William Nelson had called on account of the general devastation. 60 He
was again in Williamsburg in October when still another governor arrived.
Lord Dunmore was fated to arouse controversy, not to compose it. There
could be no valid objection, however, when he dissolved the Assembly. In
late November, Jefferson was re-elected by the freeholders, while his
contemporary John Walker was chosen in place of his father. 51 During
this same year, however, Jefferson declined to serve longer on the county
court, and when the new Assembly finally met in February, 1772, he was
not there. By that date he had married, and for several years he had been
building a house. Colonial rights might still be in jeopardy but supremely
important personal matters had to be attended to. The time had come for
him to settle down.
60 July 11-20, 1771; Burgesses, Journals, 1770-1772.
61 Purdie & Dixon, Va. Gazette, Dec. 5, 1771. The election was on Nov.
29.
oo
Beginning at Monticello 1769-1772
BY the year that he began to practise law Jefferson had given a name to the
little mountain across the Rivanna from Shadwell and had started to graft
cherry trees there. 1 He had translated "little mountain" into Italian, a
language he was now familiar with, and undoubtedly he pronounced the
word in the Italian manner. A month after his twenty-fifth birthday he made
an agreement for leveling the top of this elevated place and by this time, if
not earlier, he had decided to build a house there. 2 Not yet, however, did
he know who was going to live in it besides himself.
In the year he entered the House of Burgesses laborers of his began to dig a
cellar in the stiff mountain clay. 3 The work which he thus inaugurated he
continued for ten or twelve years; he returned to it as a new task a decade
after that; and the building of the mansion at Monticello in its historic form
proved to be little short of a lifetime's work. Nothing else that he ever did
was more characteristic of him as a person and a mind. In spirit he was pre-
eminently constructive, and he could not think of himself or of his house orof human society as finished. But he was not merely creating an
architectural or intellectual monument; he was a deeply domestic being,
makin home. Throughout his maturity his spirit ceaselessly roamed the
universe, searching out the good things in it, but his heart was on his
mountaintop, and if his ghost now walks it is surely there.
Few activities interested him more than building, and it is unfortunate that
the scanty early records do not reveal just when this in-
1 First known reference, Garden Book, Aug. 3, 1767.
2 Ibid., p. 12, quoting Account Book, May 15, 1768.
terest was manifested first. The natural supposition is that, as an
enthusiastic boy at home from school, he watched the building operations
that his father was carrying on at Shadwell and observed Peter Jefferson at
the drawing-board. It is said that while he was in college he got his first
work on architecture from an old cabinetmaker; and as a law student he
may have picked up ideas and books from Richard Taliaferro, father-in-law
of George Wythe, who was called an architect at the time and was certainly
a builder. 4 The study of architecture for purposes of personal improvement
was quite in accord with the tradition of the Renaissance as perpetuated in
England, and in that country this was pre-eminently the age of the
gentleman amateur. 5 In his own developing region Jefferson became
notable for his knowledge of the arts, but his consuming interest in
architecture began, not with his concern for culture, but with his desire to
engage in actual construction, or to help his friends do so. He had to be his
own designer and builder, but he considerably surpassed amateur standards
before he was through and he soon came to be regarded by his local
contemporaries as an authority. It is possible that he designed other houses
before he did his own, though the first full chapter of his architectural story
was written in the bricks and mortar of Monti-cello.
To many at the time it must have seemed that his personal project was
impracticable. In deciding to establish a plantation seat on such a height he
was following no precedent that could be found in Virginia, or in England
for that matter, and he appeared to be flying in the face of common sense.
The difficulties in carrying on construction in such a place were immense.
The woods were thick, much grading had to be done in stubborn soil, and,
besides the building materials themselves, water had to be brought to thehilltop at first. He had to figure with exactitude just how much of it was
required. His choice of a site does not show that he was an impractical
theorist, for in the course of time he actually worked out his problems. It
does show, however, that he had not disciplined his mind to the loss of
imagination; and events proved that in matters connected with his home he
was least disposed to count the labor and the cost.
His choice also revealed a sensitiveness to natural beauty which he did not
often express in words. His eye, like his mind, sought an extended view.
From this spot he could see to the eastward an expanse of forested country,
rolling like the sea; and to the westward he could
4 M. Kimball, Road to Glory, p. 147, citing letter of William Short, July 8,
1828; Waterman, Mansions of Virginia, pp. 342, 345, about Taliaferro. 5
B. S. Allen, Tides in English Taste (1937), I, ch. 2; II, 125-126.
look across the treetops to a mountain wall of lavender and blue. The lesser
and scattered intervening hills flattened out somewhat when viewed from
this eminence, but the country was little marred by the hand of man as yet
and the prospect was majestic, though not quite stupendous. The eye could
ask for nothing better, except for the presence of a body of shimmering
water. Despite what he had done for it the Rivanna was not that.
According to the agreement, a plot on the northeast end of the mountain
was to be leveled by Christmas, 1768, and be paid for in wheat and corn. In
the spring Jefferson was planting fruit trees on the southeast hillside,
spacing them properly in an almost ideal spot. The excavations of 1769
were for the foundations of the first outbuilding. By summer he had
arranged for the molding and burning of brick and had set a man digging a
well; by early fall he had laid out on the north side of the mountain a park
more than a mile in circumference, had ordered 8,000 chestnut rails to be
mawled, and had arranged for a friend who was sailing for England to buy
articles for the house there. 6
His house plans were still tentative. The first thing he had done was to get a
few drawings of other dwellings, crudely executed by other hands. 7 He
could not hope to find satisfactory models in his immediate locality, and
even when he surveyed the entire Province most of the private houses
seemed to him ugly and uncomfortable. He thought it fortunate that they
were perishable. Thev were generally of wood, and in reaching his ownearly decision to use brick he had to combat a strong contemporary
prejudice against it, because of the belief that rain could less easily
penetrate wooden walls. He wanted to employ durable materials and to
contribute to permanent improvement. There were expensive mansions in
Virginia at that time. Rosewell, which he visited so often, was fabulously
so; and Westover and Carter's Grove, which he must have known, were
places of note. But, after he had informed himself about what had been
done in other lands, he was convinced that the first principles of the art of
building were unknown in the Colony, and that scarcely a model existed
"sufficiently chaste to give an idea of them." 8 To the twentieth-century
observer of mellow river mansions and restored Williamsburg his strictures
seem much
6 Garden Book, p. 17; Account Book, July 25, Sept. 20, Sept. W, Or. 22,
I76P.
7 On his successive plans, see F. Kimball, Thomas Jefferson, Architect, pp.
.
and plates at the end of the volume, reproduced from MHS. This invaluable
work is supplemented for this period by M. Kimball, Road to Glory, ch. K,
incorporating additional items which the former reviewed. Sec also the
drawings in Waterman, Mansions of Virginia, pp. 388-390.
8 Comment in Notes on Virginia; Ford, III, 258.
too severe and his standards rather arbitrary. All the domestic architecture
of Virginia prior to the building of Monticello cannot be thus dismissed
with a wave of the hand. He probably did not have quite such strong
feelings about local houses in 1769 as he did when he definitely expressed
them a dozen years later, but at the very beginning his tastes and ambitions
caused him to search for better examples elsewhere.
It is not at all surprising, therefore, that he turned to books. That was a
common practice when anyone wanted to build better than the average, and
he could not have been expected to blossom forth spontaneously as a
creative designer in his middle twenties. His distinction lay in the fact that
he referred to more books than others did, that he went beyond British
works to more remote sources, that he attained results which accorded with
his own superior tastes and special needs. His first collection ofarchitectural works was notable in his locality, and it was representative of
more than one of the trends and fashions of his times. 9 He was most
influenced, however, by English architects who had imitated Palladio, and
by the great Italian himself, who had gone back to Roman antiquity for his
models and his rules. Thus did a freedom-loving and forward-looking
American attach himself to a school which found its inspiration in the
distant past and which now impresses one as dogmatic. It may seem that
some explanation is called for.
The facts themselves, as they appeared in the last third of the eighteenth
century, can be left to speak for themselves, but something may be said
here in regard to the developing architectural philosophy of Jefferson. Like
most other men he was not all of a piece, but in this instance the alleged
inconsistency is more apparent than real. Liberty was never anarchy to him,
but freedom to seek the truth. It seemed proper enough that there should be
rules in architecture as there were laws in nature, and rules were
exceedingly useful to a young gentleman amateur on the edge of
civilization who wanted to build a house. If that structure had not been
harmonious within itself, restrained, and symmetrically proportioned it
would not have been a fitting habitation for him, or at least for the sort of
man he aspired to be. What he valued most in classical antiquity he prized
in architecture: simplicity, serenity, and reserve — coupled with the sort of
dignity which seemed
9 F. Kimball, Jefferson, Architect, pp. 34-35, 90-101, listing his
architectural books with probable dates of acquisition. As an indication of
the catholicity of his collection, it may be noted that by 1783 and probably
by 1771 he had a copy of Chambers, Designs of Chinese Buildings,
Furniture . . . (1757).
appropriate to his majestic site. For what he wanted he now turned, not to
the more monumental works of Palladio, but to the country style of his
lesser villas. 10
He probably introduced himself to certain English disciples of Palladio,
such as James Gibbs and Robert Morris, before he made the acquaintance
of the master himself. One of the books by Gibbs which he acquired among
the first gave rules for architectural drawing and measurement which were
better than those generally available to American builders, and he followed
these until he found others that seemed superior. 11 As his father's son hetook to mechanical drawing. His procedure was that of the draftsman, not
the freehand artist; and at this stage he drew, not with pencil, but wholly
with ink. 12 His mind was mathematical and he had a penchant for
precision. This was one reason, though not the only one, why he was so
greatly attracted to Andrea Palladio from the time that he discovered him.
13
A person of Jefferson's classical training must have been impressed by the
information that the Italian had examined the stately monuments of old
Rome with unparalleled diligence and attention, thus making himself the
master of the noblest ideas of the ancients. It was claimed that Palladio,
walking through the rubbish, had discovered "the true rules of an art, which
till his time were unknown." 14 He probably seemed to his disciples the
Newton of architecture, though Jefferson never placed him quite that high.
In the works of this master, however, Jefferson found rules for the
proportions of the five orders, along with various other measurements, and
as time went on he refigured the proportions of his own house accordingly.
Nor could he fail to perceive the kinship of spirit between the distinguished
son of Vicenza and himself. In his first chapter Palladio quoted Vitruvius in
regard to the chief desiderata in a building: conveniency, solidity, and
beauty. Then he said: "As for the beauty of an edifice, it consists of an
exact proportion of the parts within themselves, and of each part with the
whole: for a fine building ought to appear as an entire and perfect body,
10 For a general characterization, see Waterman, pp. 341-342. He credits
Jefferson with the 'authorship" of a whole group of Virginia houses in this
style, admittedly on the basis of circumstantial evidence, however (p. 345).
11 James Gibbs, Rules for Drawing in Architecture (London, 1753). He
also had a copy of Gibbs, A Book of Architecture containing Designs of
Buildings and Ornaments (London, 1728).
12 Jefferson, Architect, p. 26.
13 Of the various eds. of The Architecture of A. Palladio which he
eventually owned, he appears to have had that of Leoni (London, 1742) by
or before 1770. My own references are to the cd. of Leoni of 1721.
"Prefatory note, Leoni, Palladio (1721).wherein every member agrees with its fellow, and each so well with the
whole, that it may seem absolutely necessary to the being of the same." 16
There is here no denial of the freedom of the mind to reach its own
conclusions, but the strong hope is held out that the order and harmony
which Jefferson was seeking might be found.
The design of the main house which Jefferson decided on about 1770
shows distinct traces of Palladian influence, but it went back to his own
earlier, more conventional, and more practical plan of a central mass with
wings. 16 To this he afterwards added octagonal bays or projections, which
may have been inspired by the Select Architecture of Robert Morris. If he
did draw plans for other dwellings before his own the best case can be
made for the Harrison place, Brandon, which bears a striking resemblance
to one of Morris's plates. 17 There can be little doubt that he used some of
the designs of this English architect as starting points, at this and other
times, and from him he could also have received counsels of moderation in
ornament. "I think a building, well proportioned, without dress, will ever
please," said Morris; "as a plain coat may sit as graceful and easy on a
well-proportioned man: . . . But if you will be lavish in ornament, your
structure will look rather like a fop, with a superfluity of gaudy tinsel, than
a real decoration." 18
Fundamentally, Jefferson was austere. He preferred chaste architectural
models and he worked out his proportions mathematically before he drew
his plans in ink. He was not an unbridled genius in this or any other field;
there was nothing lawless about him, despite his pioneering bent. He was
unusually scholarly and painstaking, and at the same time receptive; and he
had a rare gift of adaptation which constituted a form of originality. He
provided for his personal needs with ingenuity, and at Monticello he did
not slavishly follow any single guide. The elevation which he drew before
1772 showed a central portico of two orders, the stronger Doric capitals
supporting the Ionic columns, as Palladio had prescribed. 19 This drawing
is impressive but it has an unfamiliar look to modern visitors, for the upper
columns were never placed. By the year of his marriage he had also worked
out a general plan, including the dependencies. 20 Almost anyone who has
ls Ibid.,p. l.
16 Jefferson, Architect, Fig. 18 and notes. This should be compared with
Fig. 11, which appears to have been directly inspired by Palladio, and also
with Fig. 24.17 Waterman, pp. 366-367.
18 Robert Morris, Select Architecture: Being Regular Designs of Plans and
Elevations (London, 1755), Preface.
19 Jefferson, Architect, Fig. 23; Waterman, p. 391; Leoni, Palladio, Bk. I,
ch. 12.
20 Jefferson, Architect, Fig. 32 and notes. Reproduced in this volume.
BEGINNING AT MONTICELLO 149
been to Monticello can recognize this, for it was largely carried out in the
course of time. It was a country scheme, such as had great vogue in
eighteenth-century England, and was strongly reminiscent of Palladia 21
The idea was to connect the supporting buildings, keeping them under one
roof for the convenience of the owner. Jefferson once flirted with the idea
of having "offices" run all around the mountaintop, but abandoned it as
grandiose. He now planned a succession of rooms in two L-shaped blocks,
connecting with the main house and each terminating in a square
outbuilding. After studying the lay of his land, he decided to take
advantage of the slope by sinking the service rooms below the level of the
main structure, covering them with terraces and having them open
outwards rather than upon the inner court. His adaptation of the scheme
was individual, but in putting the meanest rooms out of sight he was
following the counsel of the master. Palladio drew an analogy from the
human body, which contains some noble and beautiful members and others
which, though useful, are ugly and disagreeable. Then he reverently said:
"But as our blessed Lord has ordered our members so as to make the finest
of them to be the most exposed to sight, and concealing them that are not
seemingly so: just so we must contrive a building in such a manner that the
finest and most noble parts of it be the most exposed to publick view, and
the less agreeable disposed in byplaces, and removed from sight as much as
possible." 22
The major danger was that comfort and convenience would be sacrificed to
stateliness by putting kitchen, pantries, woodhouses, laundries, servants'
quarters, and the like too far away. There was reason to put them at a
distance in those days, for there were no screens, and Jefferson had plentyof domestic servants to carry things to and fro. Accordingly, the
housewife's objection to his placing the basement kitchen on the opposite
side of the house from the dining room would not have been so quickly
raised then as now. On the other hand, it would have been unfortunate if he
had placed his stables under the northwest wing as he once planned;
actually, he kept them at a greater distance and eventually used that wing
chiefly for coaches and an icehouse. 23 He did not get around to building
his terraces until after the Revolution. Nor did he put up at the turns the
Chinese temples he once considered, or the octagons with domes like those
at Lord Burlington's
21 Allen, Tides in English Taste, I, 64. Sec Jefferson's favorable comment
on Moor Park, seen by him during his tour of 17K6 (I.. & B., XVII, 243).
22 Leoni, Palladio, Bk. II, ch. 2, p. 58.
famous house at Chiswick which he afterwards preferred. 24 He was not
without romantic impulses, but prudence and practical necessities imposed
restraint.
The first structure that he erected was one of the outbuildings, often
referred to as "the southeast pavilion." He moved to this simple brick
building in the November after the house at Shadwell burned. Here he had
parlor, kitchen, hall, bedchamber, and study all in one. Hither, as tradition
has it, he brought his bride. Probably no part of the main house was
completed at the time of his marriage. 25 They were still making and
laying bricks after the Declaration of Independence, and as late as 1778
Jefferson contracted for stone columns. The house was not wholly done in
1781 when the British rode up the mountain, and it was remodeled
extensively fifteen years after that. He had only begun to create an
architectural monument when he became a husband. What Mrs. Jefferson
came to was only a mansion in the making. On paper the house proper had
five rooms on the first floor, after the octagonal projections were added. 26
These consisted of a central parlor or saloon, with a dining room and
bowroom on one side and a bedroom and dressing room on the other. The
precise form of the second floor is uncertain, but presumably the large
library over the parlor was flanked with bedrooms.
According to Palladio, the "cbnveniency" of a house consisted in its
suitability to the quality of its master. 27 In the common meaning of theterm, the house at Monticello was not for some time a convenient one, if it
ever was really, and amid all the clatter of construction it must have lacked
the tranquillity which its owner so greatly prized. Those who knew the
workings of his mind, however, must have observed as a contemporary did
that in his locality he took pride in running before his times, and that he
purposed to assume a style of living more refined than had been handed
down to him by his own ancestors or was practised by his contemporaries
in the Province. 28 In polite learning the second William Byrd may have
been his equal, and as a man of the world his superior, but as a man of both
taste and learning he had no contemporary or historic rival in Virginia. In
more senses than one he had set himself upon a mountain.
24 Kimball, p. 126.
25 Account Book, Nov. 26, 1770; Garden Book, p. 70; to James Ogilvie,
Feb. 20, 1771 (Ford, I, 391); Randall, I, 65. Mrs. Kimball believes that the
northwest wing of the main house may have been habitable (Jefferson, the
Road to Glory, p. 156).
26 Jefferson, Architect, Fig. 24. There is some question about the exact
date when Jefferson added the octagonal projections, but they were in the
completed house before he remodeled it.
27 Leoni, Palladio, Bk. II, ch. 1, p. 57.
28 Edmund Randolph in Va. Mag., XLIII, 122.
Yet he was never one who desired to be gazed at. He sought privacy as
well as elevation and he had good reason to expect it in this inaccessible
place. His joy was in a new creation. America itself was that, as he said
later; at least, in comparison with Europe, it was built on a better plan. 29
The time for effective political planning was not yet come, but he could
create an appropriate setting for the sort of life he aspired to live. Whether
he was in any strict sense original does not matter. He was trying to bring
to this new Country the best wisdom of his age; and, in the attempt to solve
his own problems, he figured things out in advance with a diligence and
exactitude which were unparalleled in his native society.
Nothing was too small to excite his interest and homely matters concerned
him along with the artistic. He had planted an orchard on the hillside belowthe southeastern outbuilding before he established bachelor quarters there.
He had set out ingrafted pears and apples, cherry trees still to be
"inoculated," peachstocks on which he intended to graft almonds, and
quinces and nectarines besides. In the hollow he had planted pomegranates,
figs, and walnuts, along with peachstocks to be inoculated with apricots. 30
He was picking up bits of horticultural lore from his neighbors, reading in a
garden dictionary, and planting bushels of clover seed, but he had not
worked out a full garden plan as yet. 31
His mind also turned to questions of landscaping, but he never did have his
retainers dig the rectangular flower beds behind the house which he showed
on his general plan. 32 The open ground on the west seemed to him to call
for a shrubbery, and for this he drew up an impressive list. At this stage
there was more immediate need for thinning trees, removing undergrowth,
and domesticating the place gene -ally. Nonetheless, he wanted it to remain
an asylum for wild anima s except beasts of prey, and he was already
thinking of procuring i buck-elk to be monarch of the wood. Somewhat
later he did stock his park with deer but he was not able to do much with
landscaping for many years. The suggestions which he wrote down in his
Account Book are of chief interest here because they show that, for all his
classicism, he was eclectic in his tastes. 33 He thought of Chinese
ornaments as well as Grecian and was not even averse to Gothic.
29 To Angelica Church, Feb. 17, 1788; quoted in Garden Book, p. xv.
80 Mar. 14, 1769 (Garden Book, p. 15).
81 He did this about 1774 (Ibid., Plate V; see also Plate VI). s2 Ibid., Plate
III and comments.
38 Garden Book, pp. 25-27; also in Randall, 1, 60-62. In Jefferson, the
Road to Glory, p. 161, Mrs. Kimball attributes them to the influence of
Thomas Whatcly's Observations on Modern Gardening which Jefferson had
acquired bv the summer of 1771.
Most striking and startling of all were the alternative plans which he set
down for a burying place. The one that he established later was a great deal
simpler than either of these. He now recorded in his Account Book the
Latin epitaph which he had Written for his sister Jane, along with mournful
poetic bits from both Latin and English. As a literary being he was notuntouched by the sentimental melancholy of his time. But the sad reveries
of this highly intellectual young planter could have been more easily
explained by almost any observant person who had attained maturity. The
simplest statement of his case, though not necessarily a complete one, is
that he was in love and needed a wife. It was fortunate that he did not have
to wait for one much longer.
CxiO
Attaining Domestic Felicity 1772-1774
ABOUT the time that he moved to Monticello and set up bachelor quarters
in the first outbuilding there, Jefferson began to make regular visits to a
place in Charles City County called the Forest, where there was an
attractive young widow. To say that he paid court to her is to be quite
precise, for he lived in a courtly age and this shy and reserved man tended
to be formalistic in social matters as in architecture. His attitude toward
love and marriage was strictly conventional, and his early manner toward
women was stilted. This was a real romance, nevertheless, and his marriage
to Martha Wayles Skelton on New Year's Day, 1772, ushered in the
happiest period of his life. External circumstances cast some shadows on
the domestic scene during the next ten years, but the atmosphere was one
of unusual spiritual serenity. He never had the slightest doubt that he was
well mated.
This genuine love match was preceded by an uncertain affair which
Jefferson himself described afterwards as improper. His relations with his
neighbor Mrs. John Walker were unknown or unnoticed at the time, but
they were widely advertised years later, when he was a conspicuous target
of scurrilous attacks. As a notorious episode this storv really belongs to his
history as President, when he was several times a grandfather, but the
events themselves fell within a period when he was young and onlv locally
prominent. The known facts should be stated here though their importance
must not be exaggerated. 1
He had served as an attendant at the wedding of John Walker and Elizabeth
[Betsey] Moore at the age of twenty-one. Jack Walker was not quite the
same sort of friend as John Page and Dabncy Carr, but
a For the history of the whole affair, extending to the year 1809, secAppendix
he had been intimate with Jefferson from their days at Maury's school.
They had been at college together and they loved each other, Jack said. Dr.
Thomas Walker of Castle Hill, his father, was one of Peter Jefferson's
executors; he advanced some of his own money to his ward when the latter
went to William and Mary, though there is no reason to suppose that this
was not repaid. Betsey was the daughter of Colonel Bernard Moore, and
two of her brothers were at the College in Jefferson's time. The young
couple eventually settled down at Belvoir, on the old Nicholas Meriwether
estate, five or six miles from Shadwell. 2 Jefferson not only continued to be
intimate with Walker; he gave elaborate advice to one of Betsey's brothers
about the study of law, and became good friends with Colonel Moore, from
whom he got garden items and at whose home, Chelsea in King William
County, he visited. 3
It was in the year he was twenty-five that Jefferson made a mistake. He was
then unmarried, full of physical strength and vigor, and for four months his
friend was away from home. John Walker was attending a conference with
the Indians at Fort Stanwix and acting as a clerk of the Virginia delegation
of which his father was a member. Before he left he made his will, naming
Jefferson first among his executors, and he entrusted his wife and baby
daughter to this friend's special care. It was just after his return that
Jefferson was elected to the House of Burgesses with Dr. Thomas Walker.
A generation afterwards John said that during his absence Jefferson's
conduct towards Mrs. Walker was improper; and the President of the
United States candidly admitted to certain particular friends that at one time
it was. Singling it out from the other accusations which his enemies had
hurled against him, he said this privately: "I plead guilty to one of their
charges, that when young and single I offered love to a handsome lady. I
acknowledge its incorrectness." 4 Also, when he was in his sixties, he did
what he could in private to make amends to his alienated friend, and to
relieve Walker's mind in a time of embarrassing publicity by exculpating
the lady from all blame. Such action was in full accord with his strict code
of manners and morals.
Jefferson's incorrect conduct was not reported to the injured husband in
1768, however, or soon afterwards, and the natural supposition is that the
lady did not regard the offense as grave. Jefferson continued to be intimate
with Walker and with various close relatives of his; and2 Slaughter, Memorial of Joshua Fry, p. 63. The exact date of the coming
of the Walkers to Belvoir is uncertain, but unquestionably they were near
neighbors of Jefferson by or before 1768. On the place see E. C. Mead,
Historic Homes of the South-West Mountains, pp. 159-162.
8 Randall, I, 53-57; Garden BooTz, 1767, 1768, pp. 6, 10, 12.
4 To Robert Smith, July 1, 1805 (Bixby, p. 115); see Appendix III.
only two or three years after this, as one of five trustees, he offered for sale
certain lands belonging to Betsey's father in order to pay the Colonel's
debts. 5 For a decade and half longer his standing in this circle was of the
best. It was not until after he had gone to France in 1784 that Mrs. Walker
told her husband about Jefferson's designs on her. When he was at a safe
distance she unfolded a lurid storv of "base transactions" — in 1769 and
1770, when he was still a bachelor, and extending into 1779, when he had
been for some years a married man. As Walker wrote it all down fifteen or
twenty years after he got the report, it was a disgusting tale which bore the
marks of gross and willful exaggeration, whatever may have been the
cause. 6
In the absence of other testimony, such an incredible story cannot be
accepted in detail. All we can be sure of is that Jefferson made advances of
some sort to his friend's wife while he himself was single, that he deeply
regretted his actions afterwards, and that he accepted all the blame. He may
possibly have erred more than once in his youthful ardor, but this sensitive
man was not bold toward women and the awkward maneuvers which Mrs.
Walker reported suggest none of the accomplishments of a rake. He was
much more in character as a devoted husband and kind father than as an
aggressive lover, and it is hard to believe that he would have persisted in
the face of rebuffs at any age. He generally observed the proprieties almost
to the point of stiffness; he was notably loyal to his friends; and there is no
reason whatever to question his complete fidelity to his own wife. He
would have been in a safer position, however, if he had got her sooner than
he did, when he was nearly twenty-nine.
In Virginia as a rule people did not wait as long as Jefferson did to marry.
His delay had distinct advantages, besides some dangers, for it enabled him
to devote himself to his studies and to his profession to a degree which
would have been difficult in wedded life. By the year that the house atShadwell burned, however, he WIS aware that as a bachelor he had missed
many joys. His friend and brother-in-law Dabney Carr had not yet
proceeded as far along the road to professional success and public
prominence as he had, and may have had a harder time making ends meet.
Yet Jefferson believed that the husband of his sister Martha, "in a very
small house, with a table, half a dozen chairs, and one or two servants,"
was "the happiest man in the universe." 7 Utterly neglecting "the costly
apparatus of life," Carr spoke,
5 Rind, Va. Gazette, Jan. 10, 1771. «LC, 155:27117-27121; sec Appendix
III. T To John Page, Feb. 21, 1770 (Ford, I. 3?3>-
thought, and dreamed of nothing but his young son. This was a boy named
Peter, who was born that year and of whom we shall hear again. 8 Jefferson
did not then know that he himself would never have a son for long. On the
contrary, he soon had reason to believe that he would acquire one ready-
made, for Martha Wayles Skelton had one.
She was five and a half years younger than he and at eighteen had married
Bathurst Skelton, who had followed him in college. Her son John was born
when she was nineteen, and less than a year after that she became a widow
and went back to her father's place in Charles City County, west of
Williamsburg. 9 After a decent interval she was doubtless in the provincial
capital for part of the social season, and by the autumn of 1770 Jefferson
had probably met her there. At all events, he gave Jupiter money to buy
hair powder and buckles for him that fall and he bought many tickets for
the play.
Perhaps he visited the Forest before December. Beyond a doubt he was
there then, as he was regularly during the next year, tipping the servants
with unfailing regularity and conducting himself generally in a handsome
manner. 10 Early in 1771 he made inquiries about the coat of arms of his
own family, though he did so with private display of wit. He asked a
merchant friend, who oscillated between Virginia and England, to search
the Herald's office for him. "I have what I have been told were the family
arms," he said, "but on what authority I know not. It is possible there may
be none. If so, I would with your assistance become a purchaser, having
Sterne's word for it that a coat of arms may be purchased as cheap as any
other coat." " He was in no parsimonious mood, however; and he did not
scorn "the costly apparatus of life." He purposed to carry on his line in adistinguished manner, and he was aware of the fact that Martha belonged to
a wealthy family.
She was the eldest daughter of John Wayles, who was born in Lancaster,
England, and had acquired a large legal practice in Virginia — more
because of his industry and practicality than his learning, Jeffer-
8 Born Jan. 2, 1770; W. & M., 1 ser., XV, 117.
9 Death notice of Bathurst Skelton in Purdie & Dixon, Va. Gazette, Oct. 6,
1768.
10 Various items in Account Book.
11 To Thomas Adams, Feb. 20, 1771 (Ford, I, 388-389). Attempts to trace
this inquiry have been unsuccessful up to the present, though there is
evidence that Jefferson used a coat of arms to some degree, whether or not
he was technically entitled to do so. The best documentary evidence is a
wax seal on a letter to Jan Ingenhousz, July 9, 1787 (original in Am. Philos.
Soc). This agrees essentially with the coats of arms reproduced on the
cover of Domestic Life and by Curtis in The True Thomas Jefferson
(1901), p. 18. It should also be noted that he later used a seal bearing the
motto, "Rebellion to Tyrants is Obedience to God," though this had no
connection with any coat of arms.
son thought. 12 More important still, he had acquired a large landed estate,
along with debts which were considerable but seemed to be amply covered.
Jefferson and others found him a most agreeable man, and he conducted his
extensive affairs in a generous and optimistic spirit.
Her mother had died soon after Martha was born, leaving no other children.
She was of the prominent Eppes family, which had been associated to some
degree with the early Jeffersons, and by her marriage settlement she had
assured her descendants of certain inherited lands and slaves. There were
three other girls in the family, the daughters of another of John Wayles's
wives. One of these girls, Elizabeth, who played an important part in the
family life of Jefferson later on, may already have married Francis Eppes,
first cousin of Martha, and another was engaged. John Wayles had three
wives and lost all of them. The third one was the widow of Reuben
Skelton. Martha had added to the genealogical confusion by marrying hisbrother Bathurst. 13
That alliance had proved short-lived, and by the early months of 1771
Jefferson wanted to offer her another. He found her responsive but he was
discouraged at first by his failure to solve the housing problem. 14 In June
his prospect of becoming "more regularly a paterfamilias" were much
brighter, and he then made an important change in the order he had
previously given to his merchant friend. By that time he had seen a "forte-
piano" and he now wanted that sort of instrument instead of a clavichord.
Purposing to give this to Martha, he desired the case to be of fine
mahogany, solid not veneered, and the workmanship very handsome. Also,
he ordered for himself some stockings of the best quality, along with "a
large umbrella with brass ribs, covered with green silk, and neatly
finished." He was impatient for these articles, particularly the piano, and
predicted rather humorously that his orders would be somewhat enlarged
thereafter. It was at this date, also, that he sought a builder to help him at
Monticcllo; things were moving on the mountain but not as fast as he liked
and he himself could not be there all the time. 15
He may not yet have set up in his books his account with the estate of
Bathurst Skelton; but about this time he opened another one prematurely.
This was for John Skelton, son of Bathurst, with himself as guardian in
behalf of Martha his wife. He made an entry on account
12 Autobiography, Ford, I, 6.
13 See Appendix I, D, for genealogical details.
14 To James Ogilvie, Feb. 20, 1771 (Ford. I, 390-391).
15 To Thomas Adams, June 1, 1771 (Ford, I, 395). He said "an architect,"
but was probably using the term loosely.
of the boy but attached no figures. He was not to acquire a stepson, after
all, for John Skelton died in the summer before the marriage, not yet having
reached the age of four. 16 John was only a fleeting memory to Jefferson,
though possibly a poignant one since he was exceedingly fond of children.
Martha was a present reality and a future hope. Writing to his prospective
brother-in-law late that summer, he avowed his sentiments for her in
language of formal extravagance which sounds artificial to the modern ear:"Offer prayers for me too at that shrine to which tho' absent I pray continual
devotions. In every scheme of happiness she is placed in the foreground of
the picture, as the principal figure. Take that away, and it is no picture for
me." 17 Somewhat later, within the Wayles family circle, he referred to her
as Patty but he closely guarded that intimate name.
The surviving descriptions of her are meager, and there is none
contemporary with these events. In comparison with him, she certainly was
not tall; as an old slave put it, she was "low." The tradition is that her figure
was slight, though well-formed, that she had large hazel eyes and luxuriant
auburn hair. Within the family much was said afterwards about her beauty,
and this can be accepted in essence though not in full detail. 18 Jefferson
himself was straight and strong and his countenance was not unpleasing,
but he was not a handsome man; beyond a doubt he prided himself on
winning a pretty wife. There is considerable evidence of her amiability and
her sprightliness of manner. 19 Her gaiety of spirit offset the characteristic
seriousness of her lover; in her presence he could unbend. Gentle and
sympathetic people always attracted him most, and clearly she was that
sort, though she may have had her fiery moments before childbearing wore
her out.
She was not only a "pretty lady" but an accomplished one in the customary
ways, and her love for music was a special bond with him. She played on
the harpsichord and the pianoforte, as he did on the violin and the cello.
The tradition is that music provided the accompaniment for his successful
suit: his rivals are said to have departed in admitted defeat after hearing
him play and sing with her. 20 In later years he had the cheerful habit of
singing and humming to himself as he went about his plantation. This is not
proof in itself that he was a pleasing vocal performer, but with Martha in
the parlor it was probably
16 The date given in his copied memorandum is June 10, 1771. The
account is in his Fee Book.
17 To Robert Skipwith, Aug. 3, 1771 (Ford, I, 399).
18 The flattering account in Randall, I, 63-64, was based on the tradition.
19 Robert Skipwith to Jefferson, Sept. 20, 1771; MHS. Comments from
later years will be given hereafter.20 Randall, I, 64.
ATTAINING DOMESTIC FELICITY 159
easier for him to sing than it ever was afterwards.1 By this time he had
found opportunity to take violin lessons in Williamsburg from Francis
Alberti, who had come to the capital as a player and had remained as a
teacher." 2 Martha is said to have taken lessons on the harpsichord from the
same man. No doubt she shared Jefferson's enthusiasm when he induced
the Italian to come to Monticello at some time after the wedding, and to
continue to give instruction there.
Jefferson tried to get a better violin for himself, as well as the handsome
pianoforte for his future wife. He is said to have carried with him on his
early travels a "kit" or small fiddle, on which he plaved at odd moments
with a minimum of annoyance to his hosts; and he had purchased an
instrument for five pounds in Williamsburg. 23 He now had his eye on the
fine violin which John Randolph had imported; and during the spring that
he went most often to the Forest he made an agreement with the Attorney
General which George Wythe and Patrick Henry witnessed, among others.
24 He was to get this prized instrument if he survived his friend, and
Randolph was to get books of his to a high value if things went the other
way. The bargain was somewhat jocular and it seems one-sided, unless
Jefferson felt pretty confident that he would be the survivor. Actually, he
did get Randolph's violin four years later under circumstances which he
had no reason to predict. He was not now thinking of revolution and his
wishes were well expressed by another. "May business and play, music and
the merriment of your family lighten your hearts," said his prospective
brother-in-law. 25
During the fall of 1771 he had to do something besides visit Martha. He
had to go to court in Williamsburg and to get himself re-elected to the
House of Burgesses, among other things. By this time he had decided that
the legal business of Robert Carter Nicholas was an additional burden
which he could not assume. His declination was not wholly because of the
demands of his own practice; there were other important matters to be
attended to. 20 On Christmas Eve he set out with Jupiter from Monticello
on his way to be married, but he did not arrive until after Christmas Day.
Francis Eppes signed the wedding bond with him and he paid forty
shillings for the license on the last day of the old year; the wedding was onthe first day of the new. Two
21 H. W. Pierson, Jefferson at Monticello, p. 86; ms. Life of 1 "First
reference in Account Book, Jan. 31, 1768. See Randall, I, 131-132, for the
tradition; here, however, Alberti is wrongly named Dominico.
23 Account Book, May 25, 1768.
24 Apr. 11, 1771 (Ford, I, 392).
"Robert Skipwith to Jefferson, Sept. 20, 1771; MHS. 26 Oct. 31, 1771,
Case Book, No. 612; Randall, I, 49.
clergymen were present and there was at least one fiddler. The atmosphere
must have been gay, and in due course the servants were well tipped. 27
The homeward trip was delayed by a stay of more than two weeks at the
Forest — in whatever seclusion the couple could find. In mid-January they
set out in a phaeton, which had already been mended at Shirley and had to
be mended again at Tuckahoe. Not until they left the hospitable seat of the
Randolphs where the bridegroom had lived as a boy did silence fall. He
then ceased keeping his accounts. Before the end of the month they were at
Monticello, where the ground was covered with three feet of snow. The
story is that they arrived late at night, having left the phaeton at Colonel
Carter's Blenheim, and proceeded eight miles over a mountain road on
horseback, only to find that the fires were out and the servants were all in
bed. 28 Martha's introduction to her unfinished home may have been
discouraging, but she had her husband's company for a couple of
uninterrupted months. The House of Burgesses met without him in
February and he did not go to Williamsburg on legal business until the
mountainside was green.
The leaves had only begun to turn in late September when their first child
was born, an hour after midnight. Like so many others on both sides of the
family she was named Martha. For six months they wondered if she would
survive; then she "was recovered almost instantaneously by a good breast
of milk" — supplied by a Negro wet-nurse no doubt. This experience
convinced her father, who already had little confidence in medicine as then
practised, that it was better to rely on nature than doctors, especially in the
case of infants. 29 After this early fright it fortunately turned out that Patsy— as she was called in the family —had inherited her father's robust
constitution as well as his sanguine temperament, and she was a comfort to
him to the end of his life.
Not until eighteen months after the birth of Patsy was there another baby;
meanwhile, the health of the mother excited no comment and presumably
was satisfactory. During the early part of Jefferson's second year as a
married man he was often away from home, and by the spring of 1773 the
political pot had begun to simmer. But these were pleasant months on the
mountain — that is, until tragic events occurred in May.
The first of these and the more shocking was the death of Dabney Carr,
who was not yet thirty. Jefferson's friend had made marked
27 Account Book, Dec. 1771, Jan. 1772.
^Family story, told by Martha Jefferson Randolph, in Randall, I, 64;
Garden Book, Jan. 26, 1772.
^To T. M. Randolph, Oct. 19, 1792, recounting the experience (LC,
78:13465).
progress at the bar; practising in the same courts as Patrick Henry, he had
become the most serious forensic rival of that orator who had yet appeared.
He had recently made an impressive debut in the House of Burgesses,
which Jefferson had partly contrived and of which he was always proud. He
was more prosperous now than he had been soon after Peter Carr was born.
He was in Charlottesville when he died of bilious fever; Dr. George
Gilmer, who now lived near by at Pen Park and attended all the Jeffersons,
was unable to combat it.
The family tradition is that the burial was at Shadwell, before Jefferson
could return to Albemarle from Williamsburg. Within a week, however, he
set two men grubbing a graveyard on his mountain, beneath an oak tree
where he and Dabney are reputed to have read and talked together and to
have agreed that they should both lie someday. Soon he had the remains of
his friend interred at this spot. This was not the fanciful burying ground
which he had conjured out of his earlier romantic melancholy; it was a plot
of only eighty square feet. But from that time it was a hallowed place. 30He believed that of all men living he loved Dabney Carr the most, and he
was performing a deeply sentimental act. Yet he noted with cool precision
how many hours were required for the grubbing and calculated that one
laborer could do an acre in four days at that rate. Also, he recorded the fact
that the first peas had come to the table and calmly observed that it had
been a remarkably forward spring. He was never one to give free
expression to his emotions; and he was quite in character in turning for
relief to figures, to garden peas and the weather, to the prosaic affairs of
every day. This strong, strange man did not wear his heart upon his sleeve.
His eagerness to perform friendly service was shown in his efforts to
provide for the legal business of Dabnev Carr. He never lost touch with the
affairs of his widowed sister, and her six children found in him a second
father. She stood beside him some years later in his own hour of greatest
sorrow, and by that time her family had joined his; he himself was then
teaching little Peter as he would have his own son. 31
Soon after the grubbers vanished from the graveyard word came of the
death of John Wavles. 32 This was less tragic, for he was a widower
30 Garden Book, May 22, 1773, and p. 44; Plate XX7 shows the location.
See also Domestic Life, p. 47.
31 To William Fleming May 19, 1773; Ford, T. 41*. See Appendix I. C,
note 3, for his relations with the Carrs; and Wirt, Patrick Henry, p. 89, for a
good comment on Dabnev.
82 May 28, 1773, recorded in Account Book on May 31.
JEFFERSON THE VIRGINIAN
of fifty-eight and his children were all grown or nearly so. Jefferson liked
him and undoubtedly mourned his loss but from the practical point of view
there were compensations; the result was the doubling of his own estate. He
became involved in a maze of financial transactions as one of the executors,
along with his brothers-in-law, Francis Eppes and Henry Skipwith. When
he went to the Forest in July and acquired from a servant there at an odd
moment a couple of mockingbirds, he could hardly have anticipated how
vexing and protracted these affairs would be. The immediate prospect was
distinctly favorable. 33The division of the property was made in 1774, two years after his
marriage. Jefferson then acquired, on behalf of Martha, more than eleven
thousand acres of land. His father-in-law had left a heavy debt to an
English mercantile firm, however, and he promptly sold some six thousand
acres in order to meet his proportionate share of this. The net effect of the
inheritance was to add to his own possessions Poplar Forest in Bedford
County, and Elk Island and Elkhill in Goochland. The latter place played a
part in his history through the Revolution, but only Poplar Forest was
permanently retained. Early in the fall after John Wayles died he made his
first recorded visit to this favorite seat of his later years. 34
There was one difficulty but it seemed small at the time. He did not get
cash for the lands he sold; rarely could anybody get that in Virginia. He
received from the purchasers what he called bonds and we should call
notes; and the English creditors of John Wayles would not accept these in
settlement, preferring Jefferson's bond. Accordingly, though his share of
the debt was covered it was not paid. As things turned out, he was not able
to collect from his own creditors until after the currency had depreciated
and was compelled to provide for his inherited debt all over again. In the
year 1774, however, he had no reason to anticipate this misfortune, and he
was fully warranted in thinking of himself as a wealthy man.
So far as his own patrimony was concerned, his operations from this date
through the Revolution consisted primarilv in disposing of outlying lands
and acquiring others nearer home. Outside of the County he acquired by
patent one bit of property which greatly interested him. It contained Natural
Bridge, which he afterwards described as the most sublime of the works of
nature. 35 In round figures he had some
33 Ford, I, 6; Account Book, July 9, 1773. For details of transactions and
the later history of the Wavles inheritance, see Appendix II, B, 3.
34 Sept. 8, 1773; Garden Book, p. 42.
85 It was in this period that he acquired Lego, north of the Rivanna. For
details of transactions see Appendix II, B, 2. Comment on Natural Bridge
in Ford, III, 109.
five thousand acres from his own patrimony, concentrated in Albemarle;
and about that many outside the County from the Wayles estate. Theimmediate effect of his wife's inheritance, however, was more than the
doubling of his ease of circumstances, for his slaves were increased at a
higher rate. By this time he had somewhat more than 50 in his own right,
and he listed 135 whom he held on behalf of his wife. At Monticello,
domestic servants were abundant and a number of the favorites came into
his possession through her. Ursula, the fat woman who nursed Patsy and
later children, and her husband "King" George, had been acquired for Mrs.
Jefferson, while the noted Hemings family, who were mostly "bright"
mulattoes, came through the Wayles estate. Jefferson was kind to his
servants to the point of indulgence, and within the framework of an
institution he disliked he saw that they were well provided for. His
"people" were devoted to him; and they made his home life comfortable
and jolly.
Now that he had so many slaves, or as he said "servants," and so much
land, he had to expand his records. In the year 1774 he began his Farm
Book. 36 Through force of circumstances, however, his personal interest in
agriculture was not fully manifested for a score of years. 37 Public affairs
had not yet disrupted his life but he was still a busy lawyer, and he gave
less personal attention to his farms than to his home. The plantation seat
was the center of life in Virginia, and particularly so with him. Bricks were
still being molded and burned at Monticello and building was going on. By
this time he had had at least one of the "roundabouts" made; four of these
ultimately encircled the mountain, being connected by oblique roads. 38 He
had kept on planting fruit trees, and in the spring of 1774, soon after the
peaches had come into full bloom, he laid out a permanent vegetable
garden on the southeastern slope between the orchard and the first
roundabout. It was to have at each end a rectangular isosceles triangle, and
he gave specific measurements for the hypotenuse and legs. 89
During his wife's second confinement he stayed close by, diverting himself
and making himself useful by planting vegetables. In the beds he put
numbered sticks and in his record he rendered homelv names in Italian.
Thus garlic appeared as Aglio di Toscania, but, although this variety came
originally from Tuscany, it was only garlic by any name. Succory or wild
endive was put down as KadicMo di Pistoia; a white onion was Cipolle
bianche di Tuckahoe; and beans given him
38 Original at MHS, photostat UVA. Now being edited by F. M Rctts.
87 See Appendix II, B, 2.88 Garden Book, Nov. 12, 1772, and p. 38.
89 Ibid., Alar. 31, 1774, and Plates IV, V.
by somebody across the mountains were Fagiuoli d*Augusta. 40 The
Italian names reflect the influence of a new neighbor. Philip Mazzei was a
friend of his in two Revolutions, and figured in a historic controversy
relating to George Washington into which Jefferson fell a score of years
after he met the enthusiastic Florentine on the little mountain in Albemarle.
41 Their early association provides the first striking example of Jefferson's
penchant for international friendship and illustrates other ways of his.
Mazzei was something of a Benvenuto Cellini in his youth, according to his
own report, and as such would hardly have appealed to Jefferson; but he
had come to Virginia with the useful purpose of planting vineyards and was
under the patronage of the very merchant, Thomas Adams, from whom
Jefferson had ordered a pianoforte. Immediately upon his arrival in the
Province, he and his laborers had gone temporarily to the home of Francis
Eppes. Then, with Adams, he had set out for the Shenandoah Valley, where
the latter had property and hoped Mazzei would settle. It was unfortunate
for these plans that they stopped for an evening at Monticello. This was in
November, 1773. 42
Early the next morning, Mazzei and his host got up before the others, thus
revealing one of the latter's habits. Jefferson took him for a considerable
walk, showed him a tract of land which he could buy, and offered to give,
or more probably to lend, him some of his own land. On their return,
Adams, on looking at Jefferson, said: "I see by your expression that you've
taken him away from me. I knew you would do that." ^ The host smiled
and suggested that they have breakfast. He was never backward when
given the opportunity to acquire and keep an interesting acquaintance. He
got Mazzei established near by at Colle, keeping him as a guest until his
house was built. Soon a dozen Italian workmen arrived, and to their delight
the tall, friendly Virginian, who cultivated the linguistic arts as he did his
garden, talked with them in Tuscan, which he had picked up unaided.
Thus did Jefferson help introduce Italian wines and vegetables into the red-
clay country, and with them new varieties of spades and billhooks and a
novel sort of hunting coat. The vineyards, though cultivated diligently for
several years, did not prove permanent; but some40 Ibid., pp. 47, 51.
41 His famous letter to Mazzei, Apr. 24, 1796, is in Ford, VII, 72-78.
42 Memoirs of . ..Philip Mazzei, pp. 165-166, 192-193; R. C. Garlick, Jr.,
Philip Mazzei, Friend of Jefferson, pp. 40-47. 43 Memoirs, p. 192.
of the vignerons merged with the population. 44 Jefferson, who had
subscribed to the wine company, added to his own cellar, which had
previously contained chiefly rum, Madeira, port, and small beer. From
Mazzei he got certain delicacies of food, such as anchovies, but he paid
generously; in this, as in most of his friendships, he gave more than he
received. 45 An exception should be made in the matter of talk, for he
finally admitted that Mazzei wore him out.
Other events in his domestic life before he entered more actively upon his
public career can be described from his Account Book for
1774.
March 1. My sister Elizabeth was found last Thursday being Feb. 24. 4.
Sent my mother a quarter of stalled beef 118 lbs. weighed by Mr. Bryan for
which charge @ 20/ comes to 23/8.
6. A flood in the rivanna 18f. higher than the one which
carried N. Lewis's bridge away and that was the highest ever known except
the great flood of May 1771.
7. Sold my two old book cases to Mr. [Charles] Clay
for £5 of which credit him 40/ for performing the funeral service this day
on burying my sister, Elizabeth*, & 40/ more for preaching Mr. Carr's
funeral sermon, which last sum charge to D. Carr's estate. The other 20/ is a
gratuity. 10. Took admn. of E. Jefferson's estate. 46
These prosaic entries mark the end of one of Peter Jefferson's children, who
had wandered both in body and in mind. The details of the sad story were
buried with the victim, and at Monticello itself the balance was soon
redressed. At about eleven o'clock on the morning of April 3, Martha
Wayles Jefferson gave birth to another daughter, who was named JaneRandolph for her grandmother. At least she survived long enough to
acquire a name. She lived about eighteen months, to be exact. The personal
prosperity of her father was now at its height and his domestic tranquillity
was relatively unmarred. Until he took the turn of the road which led
straight to political revolution, joys had predominated over cares and
sorrows and he was an enviably happy man.
44 Jefferson to Gallatin, Jan. 25, 1793 (L. & B., IX, 14—15).
45 Account Book, Sept. 13, 1772; Dec. 3, 1773.
46 Ibid., \ll*t. The first four items are successive.
. J
! . 1
s Revolting Against an Empire
The Growth of a Political Mind
FOR more than two years after his marriage Jefferson's activities were
largely personal and professional. This was not merely because of domestic
circumstances and his own inclination; it was owing even more to the
conditions of the times. The longstanding but intermittent quarrel with the
Mother Country did not become acute until the spring of 1774, when the
teapot really began to boil. He had not attained "a marked grade in politics"
by then, and he did not become a public character in the full sense until
some months afterwards. 1 But he had already identified himself with the
most aggressive group of the local patriots, and upon occasion he had been
exceedingly active behind the scenes. What was more important, he had
given much thought to fundamental political questions while the imperial
controversialists appeared to be marking time.
He absented himself from the meeting of the House of Burgesses just after
his marriage, for personal reasons his colleagues could easilv understand;
and after that the Governor saved the young husband trouble by keeping
the Assembly prorogued for another year. His Excellency John Murray,
Earl of Dunmore, Viscount Fincastle, Baron of Blair, of Moulin, and of
Tillymont, undoubtedly believed that he was sparing himself difficulty aswell. This Scottish peer, who had come to the governorship of the Province
of Virginia from that of New York, had been received with the honors
befitting one who was so many times a lord, but it soon appeared that he
was a man of different temper from his courtly predecessor. The spirited
Virginians did not like his haughty airs. Jefferson himself disliked
arrogance as he did few other qualities, and Dunmore was probably the first
high British official in whom he observed it. He had no particular personal
contacts with the Governor, unless it was at Dunmore's instance that he
drew plans for
Edmund Randolph in Va. Mag., XLIII, 122.
the enlargement of the College of William and Mary and the alteration of
the Palace. 2 But he was on hand in the spring of 1773 when Dun-more ran
into his first serious political difficulties, and he then played a
characteristically patriotic part.
The Governor would have preferred to get along without the Assembly, but
he had to call it because of forgeries of paper currency which the Treasurer
had detected. The burgesses, including Jefferson, attended to this special
business when they met in the month of March. While complimenting the
Governor on his energy in bringing the counterfeiters to justice, however,
they rebuked him politely for the summary methods he had used. His
Excellency replied to them tartly, and he wrote to his superior in England:
they "seem at least obliquely in some degree to censure my conduct." There
did not really seem to be much doubt about it. 3 He also said: "There are
some resolves which show a little ill humour in the House of Burgesses,
but I thought them so insignificant that I took no notice of them." He
showed thereby either a deplorable lack of foresight or an unusual spirit of
restraint. These resolves created a standing Committee of Correspondence,
and constituted one of the more fateful acts in the preliminaries of the
Revolution. 4 The Governor could still prorogue the Assembly but such
action on his part was now rendered relatively ineffectual, for the
Committee could continue to meet.
There had been an incident in Rhode Island, where a revenue vessel called
the Gaspee had been burned, and the question of sending offenders to
England for trial had come up again. Along with Patrick Henry, Richard
Henry Lee, Francis Lightfoot Lee, Dabney Carr, and possibly some others,
Jefferson had concluded that the old and leading members lacked the zealwhich the times required. Accordingly, this little group met privately in the
evenings at the Raleigh Tavern for consultation. They were all convinced,
he said, that the greatest need was for unity of colonial action. This could
hardly have been attained during the next few years without the
Committees of Correspondence. There had previously been local
committees in Massachusetts but Jefferson himself never had any doubt
that the one in Virginia was the first that was set up to represent a colony as
a whole. 5 He never claimed that the original idea was his, and credit for it
seems to belong
2 Waterman, Mansions of Virginia, pp. 394-398. He speaks more
confidently about the College than he does about the Palace.
8 Burgesses, Journals, 1773-1776, pp. ix-xi.
4 Mar. 12, 1773 (Ibid., p. 28); Dunmore's comment, p. x.
6 "Autobiography," in Ford, I, 7-9; to S. A. Wells, May 12, 1819, Ibid., X,
128. On the general subject see E. D. Collins, in Annual Report Am. Hist.
Asso., 1901, I (1902), 345-371.
to Richard Henry Lee. He did say that his group drafted the resolutions,
that he was asked to introduce them, and that he gained that privilege for
Dabney Carr, who thus made his political debut in connection with an
important action. Both of them attended the first meeting of the committee
of eleven, but neither was appointed to the select committee of three, which
was distinctly more conservative in temper. Nonetheless, he and his
brother-in-law helped create an agency which was designed to tie the
colonial patriots together and which undoubtedly served to promote the
revolt against the Empire. 8
But the time for open revolt was still not ripe, and Dunmore continued to
save him trouble by proroguing the Assembly. It did not meet again until
May, 1774, and it was in this interim of a year that Dabney Carr and John
Wayles died, that he had to take care of his wife's large inheritance, that he
induced Philip Mazzei and his vignerons to settle near Monticello. Not
until after the birth of his second daughter did he have much freedom or
occasion to engage in important public business.
There had been grave developments in the sphere of imperial relations inthe meantime. Dunmore was probably wise, from his restricted point of
view, in putting off the Assembly as long as he could; but his timing proved
to be bad, for news of fresh woes in Boston reached Williamsburg during
the session. The British officials had blundered into a major crisis. They
had caused the hated tea tax to become a highly visible reality and had
united colonial opposition by permitting the East India Company to import
tea direct, to the injury of American merchants. 7 The cargoes of some of
the ships had met a spectacular fate in Boston, and the Virginians now
learned that Parliament had passed the Port Act. According to Jefferson,
this involved the "utter ruin" of a prosperous commercial city. The tinder
had been laid for some time and a spark had now ignited it. The question
was whether the fire would rage only in the vicinity of Boston or would
sweep down the seaboard. He was one of those who helped it spread.
A neighbor of George Washington's, whose mind was more like Thomas
Jefferson's, was in Williamsburg on private business during that fateful
month of May. George Mason commented informally on the situation,
saying much in praise of Patrick Henry. "Whatever resolves or measures
are intended for the preservation of our rights and liberties, will be reserved
for the conclusion of the session," he pre-
6 Eckenrode, Revolution in Va., p. 33; Henry, Patrick Henry, I, 162;
Burgesses, Journals, 1773-1776, pp. 41-43.
7 A. M. Schlesinger, Colonial Merchants and the American Revolution
(1918), pp. 262-264.
dieted. "Matters of that sort here are conducted and prepared with a great
deal of privacy, and by very few members; of whom Patrick Henry is the
principal. At the request of the gentlemen concerned, I have spent an
evening with them upon the subject." 8 Jefferson was probably one of these
"very few members," and he certainly belonged to a little group who were
now plotting privately about means of taking "an unequivocal stand in the
line with Massachusetts."
He and his fellows had "cooked up" something by the time that Mason
wrote. He himself has been given the major credit for the idea of a general
day of fasting and prayer to signalize the closing of the port of Boston, and
as the most scholarly member of the party he probably did most of the
rummaging for precedents and Puritan forms. He did not introduce thepious resolutions, however. He and the others wisely induced Robert Carter
Nicholas, whose character was more grave and religious, to do that.
Nobody in the House of Burgesses dissented. Lord Dunmore did not stop
with the prorogation of the Assembly this time; he dissolved it. He claimed
that this paper reflected highly upon the King and Parliament, but the most
significant of its phrases was the one that spoke of "our sister colony of
Massachusetts Bay." 9
Jefferson was among the great body of burgesses who proceeded to the
Raleigh Tavern and signed another Association, and he soon attended a
meeting of the Committee of Correspondence which ordered that letters be
sent to similar committees elsewhere, about the calling of a general
congress. 10 If he did not march to Bruton Church with other former
burgesses on June 1, in solemn defiance of Lord Dunmore, it was only
because he was not in town; and he and John Walker called for a patriotic
service of prayer in his parish in Albemarle, without bothering to consult
the Governor. 11 The purpose of this, as proclaimed in words which he no
doubt wrote, was "devoutly to implore the divine interposition in behalf of
an injured and oppressed people." The people met generally throughout the
Province, he said,
8 Mason to Martin Cockburn, May 26, 1774; Rowland, I, 169.
9 Ford, I, 9-10; Burgesses, Journals, 1773-1776, p. 124.
10 Burgesses, Journals, 1773-1776, p. 138. In connection with the
Association it is said that Mason, Henry, R. H. Lee, and Nicholas were "for
paying no debts to Britain"; James Parker to Charles Steuart, June 17,
1774, in Mag. of History, III (March, 1906), 153.1 have found no evidence
that Jefferson made this proposal, as stated in Brant, Madison, p. 141.
"Purdie & Dixon, Va. Gazette, June 2, 1774; Ford, I, 418. The Account
Book implies that Jefferson was not in Williamsburg on June 1. The
sermon in St. Anne's parish was to be preached by the Reverend Charles
Clay, with whom he had had numerous personal contacts. He himself had
been elected a vestryman but it is uncertain whether he ever served; see
Meade, II, 49.
with anxiety and alarm in their faces, and the effect was "like a shock of
electricity, arousing every man and placing him erect and solidly on hiscentre." 12 He had helped translate the local grievance of Boston into a
common cause, and unquestionably he himself was among the first to be
electrified.
His distinguished contemporary John Adams, writing to him long
afterwards, said that the real revolution in America was "in the minds of the
people" and was effected between 1760 and 1775, before a drop of blood
was shed at Lexington. 13 The observation can be readily applied to
Jefferson with only minor changes in words and dates. He had strongly
armed his mind before critical events occurred, and was more than ready
for them when they came. He never did set forth his political philosophy in
full and systematic form, but he gave valuable clues to its development. He
went through an evolutionary rather than a revolutionary process, and with
him thought long preceded action and determined its direction in advance.
His early study had not been concentrated on problems of government. It
was naturally centered on the law until he was admitted to the bar and it
probably continued to be for a good many months after that. But he left
place in his rigorous schedule of reading for what he called "politics," and
he laid great emphasis on the history of legal doctrines and institutions. By
no means the least of his services to his own Commonwealth during the
Revolution were in the technical field of law, and these were made possible
only by the knowledge which he had laboriously acquired as a student and
a practitioner and to which he made additions after he ceased attending
court.
The step from the study of law to that of government was so short that he
could easily have taken it without any special deliberation. It would have
been strange indeed if he had not given some thought to political theory
and done some reading on the subject while he was inquiring so diligently
into legal origins. It is reasonable to suppose, however, that his interest in
general political questions was stimulated by his entrance into the House of
Burgesses, when he assumed his traditional responsibilities as a public
man; and unquestionably it was accentuated thereafter by his growing
awareness of the fundamental problems which must be solved. 14
12 Ford, I, 12. He had forgotten that the meetings were not all held on the
same day.
"Adams to Jefferson, Aug. 24, 1815 (Works, X, 172).u Chinard, Commonplace Book, pp. 4-14, gives invaluable clues to the
chronology of Jefferson's early reading. In Jefferson, the Road to Glory, pp.
209-210. Mrs. Kimball cites a bill of books, including works of Locke and
Montesquieu,
Throughout life he was deeply interested in the application of knowledge to
human affairs, and with him human affairs came to include a great deal of
government. In old age he spoke of the "enormities" of the times in which
he had happened to live, and lamented that they had deflected him from the
delightful pursuit of knowledge. They did not really deflect him, for he
continued to study assiduously and to deal in applied scholarship
throughout his long generation in public life. The real effect of
circumstance was to direct his reading and thinking into political channels
to a greater degree than he had expected, and thus to restrict somewhat the
scope of his intellectual activities, though most people would regard these
as quite broad enough.
The dates of the various entries in his notebooks cannot be determined with
entire confidence; and, even if they could be, the works that he cited cannot
be assumed to have been the source of his ideas. These ideas he shared to
greater or less degree with his contemporaries and he could have plucked
many of them from the air. In numerous instances the printed page served
him chiefly by providing confirmation or clarification of beliefs and
opinions that he already held. Beyond any question, however, he prepared
himself with extraordinary care to meet the issues of his time. He gave a
positive answer to the challenge of one of the ancient writers whom he had
made a companion of in his youth:
. . . For with slight efforts how should one obtain great results? It is foolish
even to desire it. 15
It is a more important fact that he read widely and stored his mind with
riches than that he abstracted particular writings. More important still was
the spirit of fearless inquiry in which he pursued knowledge. Years after he
made his extracts from the history of the common law, he described them
in words which can be applied just as well to his notes on the subject of
government:
They were written at a time of life when I was bold in the pursuit of
knowledge, never fearing to follow truth and reason to whatever resultsthey led, and bearding every authority which way. 1 "
which he ordered in 1769, as indicating a sharp change in his interest at that
time. (Bill dated Sept. 19, 1769; VHS.) In view of the scarcity of his early
book lists this is an important item, but I shall not attempt to date the
history of his thought so precisely.
16 From Euripides (Literary Bible, p. 92).
16 To Thomas Cooper, Feb. 10, 1814; L. & B., XIV, 85.
Before he seriously thought of independence from Great Britain he himself
had attained full intellectual freedom and had let his mind take him where it
would, regardless of authority. There were, however, two significant
exceptions: he found moral sanctions in the monitor within every human
breast, and he found them in the laws of nature. In each case he was
performing an act of faith, but the results were by no means unfavorable to
the cause of liberty.
Before the imperial crisis became acute in 1774-1775 and he first had
occasion to present his political ideas in an important way, the doctrine of
natural rights was one of his postulates. Just where he got it is a fascinating
question, but one to which it seems impossible to give a specific answer. If
he did not draw on John Locke in the first place but got the ideas of that
noted writer secondhand, he certainly had his very phraseology by heart in
1776. 17 The simplest explanation of his failure to copy much from Locke
in his student notebooks is that he was familiar with his most important
ideas already. For the same reason, probably, he did not bother to copy
extracts about natural rights from the writings of other prominent
exponents of the theory. 18 Having accepted the doctrine as a disciple of
the Enlightenment, he took it for granted ever thereafter, just as he did the
freedom of the mind.
Like so many of his "enlightened" contemporaries, Jefferson believed that
men had originally been in a state of nature; that they had then been free to
order their own actions and to dispose of their own persons and property as
they saw fit; that government was instituted among them in the first place
by consent. In the Declaration of Independence he summarized the current
doctrine in its classic American form. Two years before that, describing
colonial grievances and ostensibly addressing the King, he spoke "with thatfreedom of language and sentiment which becomes a free people claiming
their rights, as derived from the laws of nature, and not as the gift of their
chief magistrate." Even as early as 1770, he had said publicly that under the
law of nature all men are born free. 19
Jefferson said relatively little at any time about the social contract which
was supposed to have preceded the formation of society; when
17 Admirable discussion in Becker, Declaration of Independence, ch. 2;
valuable specific comments in Chinard, Commonplace Book, pp. 41-44,
54; learned discussion of alleged differences from Locke in R. B. Perry,
Puritanism and Democracy, pp. 184-187.
18 Such as Lord Karnes; see Chinard, Commonplace Book, pp. 16-19, and
arts. 557-568.
19 Ford, I, 380, 445.
he referred to contracts or compacts he generally meant charters,
constitutions, or other formal agreements of the historical sort. Even if the
hypothetical prehistoric contract had been successfully challenged in his
day, as it was afterwards, it is practically inconceivable that he would have
surrendered his conviction that men were born to freedom and not to
slavery, for with him this was a profound moral conviction. 20 He did not
use his terms with the precision of an academic philosopher and in papers
directed to particular occasions he did not bother to define them; but in the
early stage of his political career he employed the term "right" primarily in
a moral sense. He was confident that force could not give it, and that it
could derive from no king. He found its source in the universal law of
nature; it arose from the nature of things. "The God who gave us life gave
us liberty at the same time," he said. 21 Nothing less could have been
expected of God, for liberty was right, just as force was wrong. He was far
from being a cynic. He never ceased to believe that good, not evil, lay at
the heart of the universe; and it was this faith that kept him from being a
mere intellectual and gave him his rare quality of spiritual leadership.
He clearly recognized the radical implications of the doctrine of natural
rights when he applied it in 1770, prematurely, to the institution of slavery.
Accepting the doctrine as wholeheartedly as he did, he could not have
failed to judge other time-honored but unjust institutions by its universalstandard. Besides being an honest thinker, however, he was practical; and
during the years that he was formulating his own ideal he considered the
characteristics and merits of various forms of government. This he did,
presumably, when reading Montesquieu's Esprit des Lois. At a later time he
turned against this noted writer, especially because of his predilection for
things British and his assertion that a republic could be effective only if its
territory was small. Before he himself revolted against the British
monarchy, however, he had copied into his notebook in the French
numerous quotations from Montesquieu, with summaries and reflections of
his own. Thus he commented:
He [Montesquieu] considers political virtue or the Amor Patriae, as the
energetic principle of a democratic republic; moderation, that of an
aristocratic republic; honor, that of a limited monarchy; and fear, that of a
despotism; and shews that every government should provide that it's
energetic principle should be the object of the education of it's youth.
20 Excellent discussion in Koch, Philosophy of Thomas Jefferson, ch. 15
21 Ford, 1,447.
That it's laws also should be relative to the same principle. In a democracy,
equality and frugality should be promoted by the laws, as they nurse the
amor patriae. . . ."
The order in which these four forms of government were listed —
democratic republic, aristocratic republic, limited monarchy, and despotism
—was precisely that of his own preference in the ripeness of his political
maturity. But the only one of them which we can be absolutely sure that he
strongly opposed before the imperial crisis became acute was the last. From
the moment that he embraced the cause of intellectual liberty and human
progress it had been utterly impossible for him to favor a despotism; from
his early manhood the beacon by which he steered his bark was hope, not
fear. On the other hand, if he had regarded the existing English government
as really a limited monarchy, in which honor ruled, he probably could have
lived under it happily for a good many years. It was in 1774 that he made a
direct though wholly unsuccessful appeal to the King. Not until two years
had passed and blood had actually been shed did he become an avowed
republican. Within that brief period, however, his mind became fully
prepared, not only for the Commonwealth of Virginia, but also for theRepublic of federated states. He went to the pains of surveying with
scholarly thoroughness the history of the various federative systems of
Europe which might serve as models for the American experiment. 23In the light of the thinking he had already done, the avowal of
republicanism which he made in 1776 at the age of thirty-three might easily
have been anticipated. But there is a real question about his early attitude
toward aristocracy and democracy, for he did not immediately challenge,
and he never wholly repudiated, the tradition in which he himself had been
bred. The society of Virginia was threatened with loss of fluidity now that
the British policy had restricted its westward movement, but it was still
characterized by a high sense of honor and a general spirit of moderation,
as Montesquieu had said that a limited monarchy and an aristocratic
republic ought to be. Jefferson himself was not only a fine gentleman
whose fortunes had improved; he was also a recognized member of a ruling
group which ruled well on the whole. He afterwards spoke of the "ciphers"
of the aristocracy and undoubtedly there were such; but the contemporary
record shows that he admired Peyton Randolph and Edmund Pendleton, as
he afterwards did George Washington, and that he greatly valued the
services which such intelligent and responsible leaders performed.
"Chinard, Commonplace Book, arts. 777-778, and pp. 31-38. u lbid. y pp.
24-28, and arts. 749-757, probably dating from 1774-1776.
It would have been surprising if he had wanted to substitute for leadership
of this sort the rule of the uneducated crowd about whom so many grave
doubts had been expressed by the ancient writers. The fact is that never in
his life did he believe it necessary to choose between such alternatives. By
the time of the Declaration of Independence he was convinced that
aristocracies of birth and wealth were artificial and unjust, but what he
sought to liberate and promote was a "natural" aristocracy of talent and
virtue. He himself first appeared in the forum as one who had inherited a
noble tradition of responsibility along with great privileges. It is
exceedingly doubtful that he harbored any dreams of popular leadership at
the outset, but there is abundant evidence that he was motivated from the
first by the spirit of noblesse oblige.
The following quotation which he copied from Euripides reflects the mood
of his student days rather than that of his maturity, but this sort of pride
lingered in him for many years.
To be of the noble born gives a peculiar distinction clearly marked among
men, and the noble name increases in lustre in those who are worthy. 24His interest in a coat of arms had been expressed somewhat humorously,
but he was fully aware of his own superior status and his first concern was
to prove himself worthy of his privileges. Afterwards, the lamp by which
he guided his feet was that of a reasoned and humane philosophy.
As a reasoning human being he weighed the merits of a democratic
republic. He had read in Montesquieu that the right of suffrage is
fundamental in such a government, because, as he himself observed, the
people exercise their sovereignty by their votes. 25 The idea of popular
sovereignty probably seemed to him a reasonable one when it first dawned
upon him — much more reasonable, certainly, than the divine right of
kings. Not until 1776, however, did he make any serious effort to extend
the suffrage, and in practice his advocacy of a more democratic government
was always conditioned by circumstances. This is another way of saying
that his working philosophy was by no means devoid of common sense.
In the year 1774 his later actions could not have been predicted in detail,
but there could be no possible doubt of the temper of his mind or of the
trend which his thought had taken. He was essentially of the intellectual
type, veering toward the utilitarian; he formed his maturing
24 Literary Bible, pp. 10, 84.
25 Commonplace Book, art. 776.
convictions in the light of the fullest information that he could obtain; and
while freeing himself from the tyranny of ancient dogma he had revealed
himself also as a man of faith. He embraced natural law while denying
revelation, and he recognized in human reason and in the moral sense of
the individual an authority which he would not grant to priests and kings.
His chief concern was for the attainment and maintenance of liberty, and
this provides the best single clue, not only to his motives in the Revolution
but also to his entire career. It was not yet inevitable that he should revolt
against the Empire, but it was little short of certain that he would be content
with no external control which was more than nominal. Also, it could have
been confidently predicted that he would assess local political institutions
in the light of reason, and when the opportunity came would try to improve
them. He regarded tyranny as wrong in theory and generally stupid in
practice. There was no question in his mind that self-government was right
in theory, and that in practice it was more likely than despotism to beintelligent. Being a believer in the educability of mankind, he might have
been expected to favor the gradual but steady extension of self-government.
His immediate concern, however, was to preserve it in the degree that it
already existed in the American colonies.
Championing Colonial Rights 1774-1775
JEFFERSON'S chief literary contribution to the patriotic cause before the
Declaration of Independence was made in the summer of 1774, somewhat
by accident and under circumstances that were disappointing to him at the
time. For quite different reasons the situation was discouraging to Lord
Dunmore. Having dissolved one Assembly because of the solemn mischief
which Jefferson and his little group of zealots had started, the Governor
hopefully ordered the election of another one. He soon learned, however,
that he was going to be confronted with the same determined faces, and
hastened to prorogue the new body before all the returns were in. He did
not permit the Assembly to convene, actually, until nearly a year had
passed.
There was another meeting which he could not stop — a convention which
was called for August in Williamsburg and consisted of the selfsame
burgesses. He had no troops wherewith to disperse these resourceful
gentlemen; they were unable to assemble officially with his consent but
were quite able to do so unofficially without it. That is, most of them were;
but unluckily Jefferson could not get there.
The freeholders of Albemarle, meeting in Charlottesville toward the end of
July, 1774, conformed with the general pattern of procedure. They left their
delegation exactly as it had been before by re-electing Jefferson and John
Walker as their representatives. 1 Also, they adopted resolutions which the
former had drawn. He elaborated these ideas, expecting to present them to
the convention, but after he had set out for Williamsburg he was stricken
with dysentery on the hot road and
1 Reported, Purdie & Dixon, Va. Gazette, Aug. 4, 1774. See also June 16,
1774, supplement; and July 14, 1774.
forced to turn back. 2 Besides being unheroic in itself, this necessary-
retreat occurred at a most unfortunate time, for the crisis had incited him toput his thoughts in order and had emboldened him to essay a more
conspicuous public role.
Perhaps he would not have moved any faster toward a position of
commanding leadership if he had continued his journey to the provincial
capital. He might have received more votes for delegate to the general
Congress in Philadelphia if he had been present at the convention, but the
seven who were actually chosen would probably have been elected in any
case. 3 All the members of the delegation, which was headed inevitably by
Peyton Randolph, were Jefferson's seniors in public life and better known
than he; and they were generally regarded as "glowing patriots." George
Washington stood third on the list, and Patrick Henry was fourth. Later in
Virginia, Jefferson was described as the penman of the Revolution, as
Washington was its sword and Henry its tongue; but no one of the three
was pre-eminent as yet, and Jefferson least of all.
He foreshadowed his fame, however, by now appearing, not as a soldier or
speaker, but as a writer. He had presented his ideas in the form of
resolutions, which were to be moved as instructions to the Virginia
delegates to Congress and then be embodied by Congress, he hoped, in an
address to the King. Unable to be the bearer of his own paper, he sent it on
in two copies, one of these he addressed to Peyton Randolph, whom he
expected to preside, and the other to Patrick Henry. He never knew what
happened to Henry's copy; probably that careless orator mislaid it
somewhere. The other one was laid on the table for inspection and was read
in the presence of a large number at Randolph's house, where it was
applauded though not wholly approved. It was never acted on officially,
but, without his knowledge, it was printed in Williamsburg as A Summary
View of the Rights of British America. He did not supply the title and did
not appear by name. Before the year was out it was reprinted in
Philadelphia and appeared twice in England.* This accidental pamphlet of
twenty-three
2 Ford, I, 13, 418-420.
8 Observation of Edmund Randolph, Va. Mag., XLIII, 216-217. In order
the delegates were: Peyton Randolph, Richard Henry Lee, George
Washington, Patrick Henry, Richard Bland, Benjamin Harrison, and
Edmund Pendleton. See also James Madison to William Bradford, Aug. 23,
1774 (Brant, Madison, p. 142). There was some unwarranted suspicion of
Bland at the time.*Ford, I, 421-447, with historical and bibliographical note and Jefferson's
own corrections. It has been reproduced in facsimile from the 1st ed., with
an excellent introduction and bibliographical note by T. P. Abernethy (New
York, 1943), the note showing the location of copies. The text of all the
editions is the same. The preface to the English editions has been attributed
to Arthur Lee.
pages gained wider currency than any other writing of his that was
published during the Revolution except the Declaration, and it clearly
anticipated that more famous and more polished document. It contributed
to his contemporary reputation, and until this day it has commanded the
deeply respectful attention of historians.
Jefferson had not had time to perfect his paper and realized that there were
inaccuracies in it. The pamphlet reveals very considerable learning and
contains glowing sentences, but it is more noteworthy for boldness and
fervor than for historical precision or literary grace. Written in the white
heat of indignation against the coercive acts of the British government, the
Summary View has a distinct place in the controversial literature of the
period. But it was more than a tract for the times; it embodied a reasoned
theory of imperial relations which, actually, was better adapted to a later
era. As a contemporary indictment of British policy it bordered on
recklessness, but it was distinctive in its emphasis on philosophical
fundamentals and its prophetic quality. When the circumstances of its
writing are remembered, "a range of inquiry not then very frequent, and
marching far beyond the politics of the day" will surely be granted it, as
Edmund Randolph said. 5
The intemperance of Jefferson's language would have made his resolutions
unacceptable as the official statement of a responsible group desiring to
accommodate a dispute, and he himself recognized that his paper was too
strong for the Virginia convention. He was modest about it after his
passions had cooled. When twice as old as when he wrote it he said: "If it
had any merit, it was that of first taking our true ground, and that which
was afterwards assumed and maintained." 8 One thing he meant by the
expression "true ground" was the complete denial of the authority of
Parliament over the colonies. Inseparable from his position was a theory of
imperial organization which he afterwards claimed that he had held from
the beginning of the controversy. This was that the relation between the
colonies and the Mother Country was the same as that between Scotlandand England from the accession of James I to the Act of Union, and
between Hanover and England in his own time, "having the same executive
chief but no other necessary political connection." 7 In Virginia up to
August, 1774, nobody but George Wythe had agreed with him in these
matters, as he remembered. Edmund Randolph, also relying on memory,
afterwards
6 Va. Mag., XLin, 216.
6 Jefferson to John W. Campbell, Sept. 3, 1809; Ford, IX, 258.
7 Ford, I, 12.
said that the principle of bowing to external taxation by Parliament, "as
resulting from our migration, and a necessary dependence on the mother
country," was generally conceded in Virginia until Jefferson shook it. 8 But
ideas like his had occurred to some other American minds.
The logic of the situation was quite clear to Benjamin Franklin, for one,
before Jefferson had even entered the House of Burgesses. As early as 1768
that sage observer had concluded that, in logic, there was really no middle
ground between the power of Parliament to make all laws for the colonies
and that of making none; and he had drawn an analogy between the
colonies and Scotland that was practically identical with the one Jefferson
afterwards employed. 9 In earlier stages of the growing controversy,
colonial opposition had unquestionably been directed against particular
measures which could be termed unconstitutional; but the readiness of
certain Americans to take the next step and repudiate Parliament altogether,
while avowing loyalty to the King, had been observed by Lord North four
years before Jefferson put himself definitely on record. 10 Jefferson's
concept was essentially that of "imperial partnership" or a "commonwealth
of nations," and he was one of the Americans who anticipated the British
empire of self-governing states, even if he was not the only one. 11
Undoubtedly, he put himself in the vanguard of the Patriots in Virginia and
in the colonies as a whole by publicly advocating the repudiation of
Parliament at this juncture. Events were moving rapidly and ideas were
crystallizing with them, but not even at the Continental
8 Randolph, in Va. Mag., XLIII, 216. Before Jefferson sent his paper,however, James Madison had privately referred to the denial of
parliamentary authority as orthodox doctrine; to William Bradford, July 1,
1774 (Brant, Madison, p. 145).
9 Discussed by Becker, Declaration of Independence, pp. 101-104. Verner
W. Crane, who is making a study of Franklin in England, has called my
attention to the importance of a comment in Monthly Review, 1 sen, LI
(London, 1774), 391. The reviewer [Edward Bancroft] points to the action
of the Assembly of Massachusetts Bay in 1773, in claiming independence
of Parliament, and connects this with earlier proposals of an American
advocate [Franklin]. It appears that previously Franklin had counseled
against pressing this issue, and that in 1774 he again sought to evade the
question of sovereignty for practical reasons.
10 May 9, 1770; Cavendish, Debates, II, 31.
11 Mention should be made of James Wilson, who expressed similar ideas
about this time. On the general question see R. G. Adams, Political Ideas of
the American Revolution, ch. 3; R. L. Schuyler, in Pol. Science Quart.,
XXXVIII (192V), 104-114; and Parliament and the British Empire, chs. 1,
2; C. H. Mcllwain, The American Revolution: A Constitutional
Interpretation; Becker, Declaration of Independence, ch. 3. An excellent
article by A. M. Lewis, "Jefferson's Summary View as a Chart of Political
Union," is scheduled for publication in the William & Mary Quarterly.
Congress, which met in the early fall, was it possible to go as far as he
desired. Congress then claimed for the provincial assemblies the exclusive
power of legislation in all matters of taxation and internal policy, subject
only to the negative of the King, but they cheerfully consented to the
operation of parliamentary acts that were limited to the regulation of
external commerce. 12 Throughout his paper Jefferson's emphasis was on
what Parliament could not do. He minimized necessary concessions and
practical limitations, and proclaimed colonial "rights" in a sweeping and
dogmatic way. "The young ascended with Mr. Jefferson to the source of
those rights," said a later commentator; "the old required time for
consideration, before they could tread this lofty ground, which, if it had not
been abandoned, at least had not been fully occupied throughout America."
13
At the moment it did not seem the part of political wisdom to assume sucha lofty position, and Jefferson would have been lonely in it if the
controversy with the Mother Country had been soon resolved. By
attempting to ascend to the source of authority in a time of crisis he laid
himself open to the charge of being an impractical theorist. Nevertheless,
he located ultimate authority in precisely the same place that he did two
years later when he was drafting a much more important document.
Fortunately for him, general opinion had caught up with him by then. Or, to
be more precise, the uncompromising Patriots were then in control of
Congress, and they were ready to square action with theory.
Jefferson gave no general statement of the doctrine of natural rights in his
Swnmary View, but he based his whole argument on it. Even on practical
grounds he might have come to the same conclusion about Parliament. He
might have contented himself with saying that the British Americans had
once been essentially self-governing, and that because of their present
stature and circumstances they ought to be. But he grounded his argument
on the nature of things — as they were in the beginning and evermore
should be. His presuppositions may be questioned, and there were flaws in
his historical presentation, but morally his case was strong.
He took the position that originally, in England, the ancestors of these
British Americans had been free, just as their more remote Saxon
forefathers had been in their native wilds; and that they had a natural
12 Journals Continental Congress, I, 42, 68-69; John Adams, Works, II,
374-375. Adams said that the resolutions represented a compromise which
nobody really liked. Also, it should be remembered that Jefferson was not
in Congress until 1775*
13 Edmund Randolph, in Va % Mag. x XLIII, 216,
right to emigrate and establish laws and regulations of their own, just as the
Saxons did. His cousin Richard Bland had said much the same thing a
decade earlier. In his own studies, however, Jefferson had given particular
attention to the Saxons, especially in connection with land tenure, and he
believed that they exemplified English liberty in its purest form. The
important consideration is not that he idealized them, though he did; it is
that his mind craved historical as well as philosophical authority, and that
he could not be content without finding precedent somewhere for the
freedom he was so sure was right.He also followed Bland in asserting dogmatically that the conquest and
settlement of the American wilds had been made wholly at the expense of
individual colonists: "for themselves they fought, for themselves they
conquered, and for themselves alone they have right to hold." 14 No aid
from the British treasury was given them until after they had become
valuable for commercial purposes, he said. In his opinion, this later help
gave no title to the authority of Parliament; it was wholly a commercial
matter and could be repaid by trade privileges. He greatly overstated the
case for the individual settlers, who could not have survived without British
protection prior to the time that he himself became grown. But he was not
writing history; he was trying to play a part in making it by passionately
pleading what seemed to him a sacred cause.
These settlers, having emigrated by right and established themselves by
their own exertions, "thought proper to adopt that system of laws under
which they had hitherto lived in the mother country, and to continue their
union with her by submitting themselves to the same common Sovereign,
who was thereby made the central link connecting the several parts of the
empire thus newly multiplied." 15 He claimed that there was a compact
between the colonists and the King which was embodied, partly at least, in
the early charters. He by no means regarded these charters as royal gifts; on
the contrary, he emphasized the restrictions that they imposed on royal
power. For example, he perceived tyranny in the Stuart practice of
parceling out lands to favorites and in erecting new governments. To his
mind, this family of princes had no more right to dismember the province
of Virginia when once established by charter than they had to divide
England itself. The Stuarts had met their deserved reward, however, and he
found more pertinent examples of arbitrary power in later acts of
Parliament.
By the time that he drafted this paper Jefferson had arrived at a conclusion
which would have caused any English mercantilist to raise
"Ford, I, 430. »»7W,431.
his eyebrows; namely, that the exercise of free trade with all parts of the
world was a natural right of the colonists. No law of their own had taken
away or abridged this right. Indeed, he found confirmation of it in the
"solemn treaty" of March 12, 1651, between the Commonwealth and the
House of Burgesses. Some of the later acts for the regulation of commerceseemed to him indefensible on practical grounds, but his most important
assertion was this: "The true ground on which we declare these acts void is,
that the British parliament has no right to exercise its authority over us." 16
His historical arguments were one-sided, and in the scholar's sense they are
no more than half-truths. His grounds were not historical after all; they
were moral. He lived in an age when philosophers as well as statesmen
quoted history for their purposes; and it is from his purposes, primarily,
that he must be judged. These were clear and, as human hearts go, they
were pure. His chief aim was to overthrow parliamentary authority which
had been unwise in practice and was wrong in principle, and at the same
time to safeguard self-government.
Like other patriotic pamphleteers he was most disturbed, not by restrictions
on trade, but by parliamentary meddling with the internal affairs of the
colonies. Violations of right were less alarming during the reigns
immediately before that of George III, he said, "because repeated at more
distant intervals than that rapid and bold succession of injuries which is
likely to distinguish the present from all other periods of American story."
He continued:
Scarcely have our minds been able to emerge from the astonishment into
which one stroke of parliamentary thunder had involved us, before another
more heavy, and more alarming, is fallen on us. Single acts of tyranny may
be ascribed to the accidental opinion of a day; but a series of oppressions,
begun at a distinguished period, and pursued, unalterably through every
change of ministers, too plainly prove a deliberate and systematical plan of
reducing us to slavery. 17
He used strikingly similar language two years later, then laying the onus
not on Parliament but on the King and thus becoming an open secessionist.
He cited the specific acts prior to 1774 which formed a "connected chain of
parliamentary usurpation," speaking at considerable length and with great
emotion about the suspension of the legislature of New York which had
occurred even before he became a burgess. "One free and independent
legislature hereby takes upon itself to suspend the
16 /£;i.,434. 17 /£/i.,435.powers of another, free and independent as itself; this exhibiting a
phenomenon unknown in nature," he said. 18 The measures against Boston,
which had precipitated the present conflict and provided the occasion for
his own pamphlet, he regarded as "acts of power, assumed by a body of
men, foreign to our constitutions, and unacknowledged by our laws." 19 He
admitted that the actions of the exasperated participants in the Boston Tea
Party were not strictly regular, that these men did wrong in destroying the
"obnoxious commodity," and that they were properly amenable to the laws
of the land, that is, to the laws of Massachusetts Bay. But the coercive acts
of Parliament which followed this famous event were wholly intolerable to
him. He entered solemn and determined protest against them, addressing
this to the King, "as yet the only mediatory power between the several
states of the British empire." At the same time he boldly pointed out the
King's own deviations from the line of duty.
Several of these charges reappeared in his draft of the Declaration of
Independence, and one of them was too strong for the stomachs of the
patriots even when they were ready to renounce allegiance to the King.
Jefferson erred on the side of optimism when he asserted in his Summary
View that the abolition of domestic slavery was the great object of desire in
the colonies. Speaking for Virginia, he was correct in saying that previous
attempts to prevent importations of slaves from Africa had been defeated
by the royal negative. No doubt he caused his more temperate colleagues to
shake their heads, however, when he termed this a shameful abuse of royal
power, which showed that His Majesty preferred the immediate advantage
of a few British corsairs to "the lasting interests of the American states, and
to the rights of human nature." *°
He really need not have bothered to address the King at this time, for his
language was so unconciliatory as to doom his appeal to failure. One of his
more positive proposals would have aroused the fears of the English Whigs
immediately, if they had been disposed to pay any attention to this rash
young man. He suggested that the King resume the exercise of his negative
upon parliamentary legislation, in order to prevent the passage of laws
injurious to other parts of the empire. This was one way of saying that the
colonies had just the same rights as England, and he hedged the King about
with restrictions, but it would have seemed to many that he was advocating
an increase of royal power. He said that fortune had placed the King in a
post where he held the balance in an empire; and that this empire would be
great if it were well-poised. The latter reflection was prophetic.18 Ibid., 436. 19 Ibid., 439. » Ibid., 440.
More important than his specific appeal to the King was the philosophy
which underlay it. This left no place for royal tyranny, or for tyranny of any
sort. He regarded himself as the spokesman of a free people who had
derived their rights from God and the laws. "Let those flatter who fear," he
said, "it is not an American art. To give praise which is not due . . . would
ill beseem those who are asserting the rights of human nature. They know,
and will therefore say, that kings are the servants, not the proprietors of the
people. Open your breast, sire, to liberal and expanded thought. Let not the
name of George the third be a blot in the page of history." 21 He revealed
his own moral emphasis but underrated the practical difficulties when he
said: "The whole art of government consists in the art of being honest." It is
doubtful if his chiding admonition ever reached the royal ear, but some of
his own countrymen remembered that he had subordinated the King
himself to natural law and had boldly charged him with specific offenses,
and within two years they gave him opportunity to base on this philosophy
a convincing justification of revolution.
He talked little of colonial concessions, but at the moment he claimed that
he did not seek independence of the Mother Country:
... It is neither our wish nor our interest to separate from her, We are
willing, on our part, to sacrifice everything which reason can ask to the
restoration of that tranquillity for which all must wish. On their part, let
them be ready to establish union on a generous plan. Let them name their
terms, but let them be just. Accept of every commercial preference it is in
our power to give for such things as we can raise for their use, or they make
for ours. But let them not think to exclude us from going to other markets
to dispose of those commodities which they cannot use, or to supply those
wants which they cannot supply. Still less let it be proposed that our
properties within our own territories shall be taxed or regulated by any
power on earth but our own.
Then he uttered a saying which of itself entitles this bold pamphlet to
immortality. It belongs, not to the American colonies, but to mankind; not
to the year 1774 merely, but to all the years thereafter.
. . . The God who gave us life gave us liberty at the same time; the hand of
force may destroy, but cannot disjoin them. 22From the beginnings of his conspicuous public career the blessings of
liberty were much dearer to Jefferson than those of empire. He
21 Ibid., 446. ™ Ibid., 447.
may be properly charged with failure to appreciate the practical problems
which the generally incompetent British officials of his time were facing,
and with insistence upon a degree of local self-rule which not even the
English friends of American liberties could have been expected to concede
in theory. The sort of empire he advocated, and the only sort he would have
been content with, was one composed of self-governing units, bound
together only by mutual benefits. In recognizing the King as the formal tie
he had no thought of substituting an omnipotent monarch for an omnipotent
Parliament. To his mind, ultimate authority lay in the laws of nature and the
human beings whom God had made free; day-to-day authority lay in the
various local legislatures, those of America and England itself. The King
was the mediator but he was subject to natural law. The ability of such a
loose-jointed empire to survive any serious crisis might have been gravely
doubted on both sides of the Atlantic.
Never in his life did Jefferson value political organization or governmental
power for their own sakes; his major concern was for the ends they served.
The net result might have been much the same if the legislative authority of
Parliament in external matters had been conceded by the colonists, and that
body in turn had sharply restricted itself in practice. Even if the alternative
had been clearly presented, however, Jefferson would have thought that this
would be to start at the wrong end. He placed his faith supremely in
individuals and in local units of a manageable size, and he believed that the
power to grant necessary practical concessions should be left with them.
There is no evidence that this pamphlet led to the threat of the author's
proscription in England, as he believed, or that it was utilized by the
opponents of the ministry. 23 If it had any immediate effect there it was to
play into the hands of the ministry, who were seeking
"Jefferson's statement in old age (Ibid., 13-14) contains several errors.
Since the text of the two English editions is identical with the American, it
could not have been "interpolated a little" by Burke. In the incomplete
record of parliamentary proceedings in the period I have been unable to
find a bill of attainder bearing Jefferson's name which was commenced ineither house. The pamphlet did not create a great stir in England but it was
talked about; see London Vublic Advertiser, no. 14089, Nov. 25, 1774,
communication signed "Corinlanus," who does not mention Jefferson by
name. There was a brief review of it in November, 1774, in the Monthly
Review; or Literary Journal (London), LI, 393; this is partially quoted in
Ford, I, 423. The pamphlet was attributed to Jefferson in the index, but the
boldness of the anonymous preface seems to have attracted m attention.
There is a much longer notice of a new essay by John Dickinson by the
same reviewer, who has been identified as Edward Bancroft; B. C. Nangle,
The Monthly Review, First Series, 1149-1189; Indexes of contributors and
articles (Oxford, 1934). For much of the above information I am indebted
to Y'crner \\ . Crane.
to justify their repressive policy by claiming that the Americans were going
to extremes. It was no service to the opposition for Jefferson to press his
theoretical claims, and he had definitely parted company with the handful
of English leaders who were still championing colonial liberties. Edmund
Burke had a liberal concept of empire and regarded the American love of
freedom as an inescapable fact, but that eminent conciliator begged the
philosophical question and sought a solution based on common sense. He
avoided a "refined policy," eschewed abstract ideas of right, and in this
crisis regarded the resort to "mere general theories of government" as
"arrant trifling." 2 * Jefferson's line of argument would not have appealed
to him. And certainly the young Virginian did not at this time see eye to
eye with Chatham, though in many ways he admired him, for that great
imperialist viewed the distinction between external and internal control as
sacred. He conceded to the colonies the right of taxation, but the supreme
power of Parliament to regulate commerce he would yield to the insistence
of no man. 25
Jefferson's first important political paper caused him to appear as a
champion of freedom and self-government who would yield little or
nothing to the exigencies of the moment. That is, he would yield practically
nothing to the far-distant Mother Country. To his brethren on the American
continent, on the other hand, he was quite prepared to make concessions.
Individual rights and local self-government came first in his thinking, but
he fully realized the necessity for concerted action on a continental scale
and had a clear vision of colonial union. In this sphere he was no
impractical theorist, nor merely a long-range prophet, but a realisticstatesman.
He had played an important part in the creation of the Virginia Committee
of Correspondence, and at successive stages of the imperial controversy he
had consistently made common cause with the Patriots of other provinces.
It would be improper to employ the term "nationalist" this early, but he was
a strong unionist from the start. No saying of his is as vivid as Patrick
Henry's at the first Continental Congress: "I am not a Virginian, but an
American." Neither he nor the fervid orator had any real thought of ceasing
to be a Virginian. But if his interests were not imperial they were far more
than provincial; they had assumed a continental scope.
In the year 1774 he gave a sign of this which could not have been expected
from Patrick Henry. Not long after the adjournment of the
24 Mar. 22, 1775; Pari Hist., XVIII, 484. "Jan. 20, 1775: Ibid., XVIII. 154
n.
Virginia convention, he received from another province a printed proposal
for a complete collection of American state papers. The man who sent it,
Ebenezer Hazard, then living in New York, became a pioneer editor of
historical records; while the patriotic gentleman who received it in
Albemarle County afterwards performed distinctive service as a collector
of Americana. The episode was prophetic. Jefferson proceeded to get an
impressive list of subscribers from his friends and neighbors and left
Hazard in no possible doubt of his enthusiastic patronage. 26
These actions had to do with the past — with "curious monuments of the
infancy of our country," as he afterwards described them. They illustrate at
this early date the lifelong Americanism which accompanied his loyalty to
Virginia and which, to his mind, conflicted with it in no way. Of more
immediate importance, as reflecting his unionism, was a private comment
which he made on the limited sovereignty of the Continental Congress. A
score of years later, when he sought to limit the centralizing tendencies
which Alexander Hamilton personified, his undiscriminating political foes
might have found this early observation of his surprising.
We are to conform to such resolutions only of the Congress as our deputies
assent to: which totally destroys that union of conduct in the several
colonies which was the very purpose of calling a Congress. 27This illuminating comment on the dangerous limitations of congressional
power was coupled with others of a critical nature on the Association
which Congress adopted in October. He did not wholly approve of that
famous nonimportation, nonconsumption agreement — not because it went
too far, though he disliked certain of its details, but because it did not go far
enough. He duly signed his printed copy, notwithstanding, and he had
others attach their names to it. Among these were his young brother
Randolph, who was now nineteen, his brother-in-law Francis Eppes, and
his violin teacher Francis Alberti. 23
He intended to be "a conscientious observer of the measures generally
thought requisite for a preservation of our independent rights," he said; and
he was much embarrassed in December by one of his own orders which
turned out to be in violation of them. The restrictions
26 Printed letter, Aug. 23, 1774, with list of subscribers; LC, 1:109-110.
Sec also Hazard to Jefferson, June 30, 1775 (LC, 1:144); Jefferson to
Hazard, Feb. 18, 1791 (L. & B., VIII. 127).
27 Ford, I, 448.
28 Printed copy of Association with six signatures (LC, 1:126).
came at an unfortunate time for him, since he was engaged in building
operations. Some months earlier he had ordered for use at Monticello
fourteen pairs of sash windows, and these were now en route despite his
countermand. He fully expected his glazed windows to be condemned
when they reached the Virginia shore, however, and he acquiesced in this
infringement on his liberty as an individual. 29
He bowed to virtual necessity beyond a doubt, for in Virginia the
provisions for the enforcement of the Association were rigorously carried
out. Congress had enjoined that every county, town, and city should choose
a committee to observe the conduct of all persons respecting the agreement,
to publish the names of offenders, and thus to cause the "enemies of
American liberty" to be condemned and outlawed. 80 This was high-
handed action which a theoretical advocate of personal freedom might have
been expected to condemn. But there is no indication that Jefferson
questioned its essential wisdom, and there is evidence that he played a
patriotic part in carrying the restrictions into effect. The Albemarlecommittee was not among the first to be elected; the earliest work of
organization in Virginia was done in the eastern counties. When a
committee was selected, however, his name was the first upon the list,
followed by that of his friend and fellow burgess John Walker. In late 1774
and early 1775, he was not only the first citizen of his County but its first
Patriot as well. 31 Meanwhile, in the neighboring County of Orange, young
James Madison had been elected as a member of a similar committee, and
service on it constituted his introduction to public life. 32
No less a person than Lord Dunmore is authority for the statement that the
county committees now constituted virtually the only government in the
Province. "There is not a Justice of the Peace in Virginia that acts, except
as a committee-man," he said. 33 Thus he testified to the suspension of the
county courts, as he also did to the great unwillingness of lawyers to attend
the General Court, which was now
29 Jefferson to Archibald Cary and Benjamin Harrison, Dec. 9, 1774 (Ford,
I, 449-451).
80 Journals Cont. Congress, I, 79.
31 List with vote in Account Book, 1775, without precise date. The
election probably took place before Dec. 8, 1774, when he recorded in his
Account Book the names of captains in Albemarle to whom Association
papers were to be sent. On the general subject, see Eckenrode, Revolution
in Va., ch. 4; C. W. Coleman, in W. & M., 1 ser., V, 245-255. There is no
reference to the Albemarle committee in either case. It should also be noted
that Jefferson's wife and children were at Elkhill in another county for
several months that winter and that he was generally with them there
(Account Book, Dec. 11, 1774; Apr. 7, 1775).
32 Brant, Madison, p. 155.
88 To Dartmouth, Dec. 24, 1774 (Force, 4 ser., I, 1062). This letter was
made available to Parliament and was afterwards printed in Dixon &
Hunter, Va. Gazette.
largely restricted to criminal cases. This was what Jefferson meant when he
said that the Revolution shut up the courts of justice and ended his own
career as a practising lawyer. The last case that he listed in his formalrecord was dated Nov. 9, 1774, and was numbered 939. This referred only
to an opinion on a will, anyway; so to all practical purposes his legal career
ended before that. He turned over his unfinished cases to young Edmund
Randolph, son of the Attorney General, apparently expecting to abandon
practice for good. He would have been fully warranted in doing so even if
times had been more peaceful, for the Wayles inheritance had greatly
increased his burdens as a man of business, while relieving him of any need
to supplement his income.
There is no reason to suppose, however, that he welcomed the closing of
the courts in order to escape his own debts to British merchants, as
Dunmore and some of his partisans asserted that many of the planters did.
84 He had provided for his debts, or so at least he thought. Nor did he have
the desire or occasion to apply tar and feathers as a local committeeman.
There was little violence or disorder among these people who were so
accustomed to self-government.
In the middle of March, 1775, Jefferson set out for Richmond to attend a
provincial convention as the first delegate from his County. He had no
reason whatever to suppose that his appeal to the King, or any other, had
been heeded. His knowledge of occurrences in England was at least two
months behind the events themselves; but, by the month of February, he
could have read in the Virginia Gazette a speech of George III at the
opening of Parliament and the addresses of the Lords and Commons which
strongly supported it. He undoubtedly knew that the opposition to the
policy of coercion had been ruthlessly beaten down. 35 The King had
complained bitterly of "violences of a very criminal nature" in
Massachusetts and of "unw arrant-able attempts" to obstruct commerce,
and had assured Parliament of his determination to withstand every attempt
to weaken or impair its "supreme authority." Such attitudes were
irreconcilable with the
^Jbid. See also James Parker to Charles Steuarr, Feb. 11, 1775, in Mag. of
Hittory, III, 158 (March, 1906). The reason commonly assigned by the
Patriots was that the Fee Bill had expired, that Dunmore would DOt let the
Assembly meet, and that no other power could establish fees. JcfTcrson
may have shared the earlier opinion of Pendleton that, in the temporary
absence of legislation, the General Court could determine fees or at least
continue the old schedule. Documents bearing on the matter arc in LC,
1:95-97. Presumably he himself rendered an opinion but I have not foundit. Sec Hilldrup, Vendlcton. pp. W-100.
35 Dixon & Hunter, Va. Gazette, Feb. 4, 1775; Part. Hist., XVIII. 13-47.
views Jefferson had expressed, and thus he must have reflected as he took
the Richmond road.
Before the convention assembled, however, a later item appeared in the
Virginia Gazette. This reported that the petition of Congress to the King
had been received in London the day before Christmas and had been duly
communicated to Lord Dartmouth. 36 The petition led to no change in
policy but the Virginians did not know that yet. Some of them seized upon
what appeared to be a fresh hope of conciliation, as Patrick Henry and
Thomas Jefferson soon found out.
The Virginia convention of March, 1775, amounted to a meeting of the
burgesses without the authorization of the Governor, and it was held at a
place where they were wholly free from his control. Richmond was a
central point, though by no means a city, and the sessions were held in the
structure known to history as Old Saint John's Church. It was a simple
white building, and its atmosphere befitted the solemnity of the occasion.
Here Patrick Henry uttered his most famous words: "Give me liberty, or
give me death." The clash of resounding arms had not yet been heard at
Lexington and Concord, but he believed war inevitable unless the colonists
should become abject. He said, "let it come." So far as is known, Jefferson
did not say that, but he strongly supported Henry's resolutions, even going
so far as to make a speech. 87
The just fame of Patrick Henry as a Revolutionary statesman is attributable
to his insistence upon decisive action in successive crises. No one else did
so much as he to give impetus to the ball of Revolution in the Province.
Jefferson said that several times but, unlike Henry's biographers, he did not
magnify the importance of this particular occasion; he did not regard it as
the beginning of the Revolution. Henry's audacity in urging defense
measures at this time, and Jefferson's in backing him, should not be
exaggerated. There had already been considerable military preparation in
Virginia and the citizens generally were in a resolute state of mind. Three
months before this, Lord Dunmore had reported that independent
companies of militia were being formed in the counties — to protect the
committees, he said. Dissatisfied with the colorless resolutions which hadbeen presented to the convention, Henry introduced more vigorous ones.
86 Dixon & Hunter, Va. Gazette, Mar. 18, 1775.
87 The proceedings of the convention of Mar. 20-27 were published in
Dixon & Hunter, Va. Gazette, Apr. 1, 1775, and afterwards in pamphlet
form. The traditional story is in Henry, Patrick Henry, I, 254-272, with the
orator's famous speech as reported long afterwards.
He moved that steps be taken by the Colony as a whole and that committee
be chosen to prepare a plan for embodying, arming, an< disciplining a
sufficient number of men. Since such action gave prom ise of greater unity
and effectiveness it was naturally favored by i realist like George
Washington. The support of this man of soli< worth was invaluable but he
was characteristically silent. The mor philosophical Jefferson was not. "He
argued closely, profoundly an< warmly" on the side of the redoubtable
Patrick Henry and eloquen Richard Henry Lee (otherwise designated as
Demosthenes and Cicero) his post in the debate being "that at which the
theories of republicanisn were deposited." 38 They managed to carry the
resolutions — but th< vote was dangerously close.
The opposing "conservatives" could hardly have been against arm ing the
Colony at a time when the citizens were already arming them selves; and
most if not all of these delegates were active in connectioi with the county
committees. Ostensibly, they objected to the timinj of the action. Men like
Robert Carter Nicholas, Edmund Pendleton Benjamin Harrison, and
Richard Bland still had hopes of conciliatioi and clung to the proprieties.
Beneath the surface of the resolutions furthermore, they suspected deeper
designs on the part of Henry Apparently he purposed that the committee
should assume the ful powers of government, many of which had already
slipped from th< Governor's hands. However, his scheme was scotched,
and thus i came about that this was not a revolutionary gathering, after all.
8
Jefferson was a member of the committee of twelve that was set u| to
prepare a plan for the militia, though his name was next to the las while
Henry's was first. The plan which was adopted was innocuou enough. In
general the convention regularized and provided for th< enlargement of the
county organizations which had already sprung up independently. More
picturesquely, it recognized the tomahawk a: standard equipment alongwith the rifle, and prescribed as uniforn the hunting shirt. The militiamen
were already good shots, and som< of them afterwards printed "Liberty or
Death" on their hunting shirts but they did not become an effective military
body under centralizec control because an orator made an immortal speech.
Jefferson may have wanted the Patriots to assume the full form oi
governmental authority at this time, since they had already assumec so
much of the substance. Yet, despite his radicalism on the imperial
88 Edmund Randolph, in Va. Mag., XLIII, 223.
89 Eckenrode, Revolution in Va., pp. 47-49; James Parker to Charles
Steuart Apr. 6, 1775 {Mag. of History, III, 158), reporting Henry's
"scheme" in a hostile spirit.
question and the uncompromising spirit he had manifested in his pamphlet
of the previous summer, the presumption is that he did not. His later silence
about the meeting suggests that there was something about it that he did not
like; and, even if he had favored taking this revolutionary step in advance
of actual bloodshed, he was willing to modify his natural pace in the
interest of unity.
A motion of his own in the convention reveals his continuing concern for
unity in the colonies. This merely called upon the Committee of
Correspondence to inquire about the state of sentiment in the Province of
New York, where, as the newspapers reported, there had been a defection
of the House of Representatives from the Association. It is the language not
the substance of Jefferson's resolution that is significant. To his mind, a
defection from the compact of Association was an atrocious perfidy, a
desertion of "the Union with the other American Colonies formed in
General congress for the preservation of their just rights." He was unwilling
to condemn the New Yorkers on the basis of hearsay, but he left no
possible doubt of his own determination that the Union should be
preserved. 40
One late action at this meeting turned out to be important to him,
personally. The convention re-elected its delegation to Congress, leaving
Peyton Randolph at its head. Next after the perennial presiding officer came
Washington and Henry, but until the last day of the session the name of
Jefferson was still absent from the list. Then he was appointed a deputy toserve in case of Randolph's nonattendance. If he had cared to be
mathematical, he might have regarded himself as one of the first eight or
ten leaders of Virginia. Despite his abilities and zeal he could hardly have
expected to stand higher than that as yet, for he was only thirty-two. He
went to Philadelphia in the summer after Peyton Randolph was called
home, and by that time the appeal to reason had given place to the appeal to
arms.
40 Ford, I, 451-452.
on
A Patriot Goes to Philadelphia 1775
IN 1775 news did not travel with the speed of sound. Jefferson heard the
report of the shots at Lexington and Concord about two weeks after the
embattled farmers fired them. This was in early May, more than a month
after the adjournment of the convention in Richmond. Meanwhile, he had
brought his little family from Elkhill on the James, where they had been
staying, back to Monticello, and there had observed with sorrow the
damage a late frost had done to his hillside orchard. 1 Soon, however, he
was gratified by events in his stable. Before he was plunged again into
public affairs he made this entry in his faithful Account Book:
"Allycroker's colt by Young Fearnought was foaled May 7." He named the
colt Caractacus and recorded his lineage with pride. On the paternal side it
was particularly distinguished, for Old Fearnought, sire of Young
Fearnought, was the most famous stallion of his time in the Province and
he and his sons were treated with royal deference. Caractacus was not only
the latest of the blooded horses at Monticello; he indisputably belonged to
the first equine family of Virginia. 2
On the same day in May that he acquired a future mount, Jefferson sat
down to write a letter to Dr. William Small in England. His ostensible
purpose was to tell his old teacher he was sending him three dozen bottles
of Madeira, but inevitably he spoke of the action between the King's troops
and his own "brethren" of the Bay Colony. He had learned of it just that
week and spoke of it as an accident, but he
1 Garden Book, p. 66.2 Account Book, May 7, 1775; genealogy inside cover of Farm Book;
Fairfax Harrison, "The Equine F F Vs," Va. Mtg-, XXXV, J2M7Q, csp. pp.
355-361 on Old Fearnought.
reported that a "phrensy of revenge" had seized upon all ranks of the
people. 8 The "phrensy of revenge" in Virginia was not wholly due to news
from the North. According to one of Lord Dunmore's few partisans the
brush at Lexington and Concord was only a Yankee trick, designed to
alarm and involve the other colonies. 4 Jefferson would have vigorously
disputed that assertion, but before he learned of events near Boston his own
Governor had aroused fierce local indignation. On the night of April 20-21
Dunmore removed from the magazine in Williamsburg the powder
belonging to the Colony that was stored there and placed it on a British
schooner in the James River. This high-handed action provided the
oratorical Patrick Henry with an opportunity to become a man of stirring
deeds. He led an independent company from Hanover toward the capital
and, although he did not restore the powder, he managed to secure its value
in money. Dunmore in turn fortified the Palace, put his wife and children
on a man-of-war, and declared Henry an outlaw, thus making him more
than ever the hero of the populace. 5
Jefferson was not that sort of man on horseback, even after Caracta-cus had
grown up, but he soon went to Williamsburg for important public reasons.
Lord Dunmore had called the Assembly to meet, ironical as that action
seemed. 6 The Governor gained some comfort from the thought that
Patrick Henry, whom he regarded as a man of "desperate circumstances,"
would be at a safe distance — in Congress, along with other leading Whig
characters of the Colony. Also, he had certain conciliatory proposals of
Lord North's to present.
Jefferson said that these constituted the major reason for calling the
Assembly, and that his own desire to answer them was the main reason
why he attended. Otherwise, he would have gone straight to Philadelphia to
replace Peyton Randolph, for that massive statesman had hastened back to
preside over the burgesses, being succeeded in the chair of the Continental
Congress by John Hancock.
Jefferson spent only ten days in the Assembly but these were busy
3 May 7, 1775, Ford, I, 453^54; entire letter LC, 1:140. He wanted Small toknow the real temper of the colonists.
4 James Parker to Charles Steuart, May 6, 1775 (Mag. of History, III,
158-159).
B Most of the documents about the powder episode and the independent
companies are in Force, 4 ser., II. A company from Albemarle, of which
Jefferson's friend George Gilmer was a lieutenant, also set out for
Williamsburg but it turned back after learning of Henry's action; see
Gilmer Papers, Colls. Va. Hist. Soc, ns., VI (1887), pp. 75-85. In his
Memoirs, pp. 209-212, Mazzei gives further details but many of these are
inaccurate. He says that Jefferson was enlisted as a private. The latter's
name appears on no list, but his brother Randolph was a member.
•Call dated May 12, 1775.
and exciting. The burgesses pressed the question of the gunpowder and
soon threw Dunmore into utter panic. On the eighth day of the session he
became so fearful of his personal security that he joined his family on the
man-of-war Fowey and transacted business thereafter on shipboard. To the
Virginians he was chiefly a nuisance after that.
Before the lord took flight Jefferson served on a committee which drafted
an address and confronted the short, dark man in person. The Governor had
called the Assembly to consider the "alarming situation*' of the country,
but the committee flung the words back in his teeth by blaming this
situation wholly on the British ministry. 7 The most interesting passage in
this address dealt with the courts, which Dunmore wished to reopen to civil
cases. By this time the debts to British merchants had become a major
consideration on both sides. Jefferson agreed with his fellows that debtors
should not be sued by their British creditors, since the cessation of
commerce had now made it impossible for them to sell their tobacco.
"Money, my Lord, is not a plant of the native growth of this country," the
committee said.
Jefferson drafted the reply to Lord North's motion, though this was not
adopted in final form until after he had left for Philadelphia. 8 The
proposal, in brief, was that any colony which should make such a
contribution to the defense of the Empire and such fixed provision for the
support of its own civil government as met the approval of Parliamentshould be exempted henceforth from imperial taxation for revenue. Lord
Dunmore was not notably acute but he was sufficiently so to expect little
enthusiasm for this plan in the Virginia Assembly, whose "violence of
temper" had already been manifested. The newspapers had prejudiced the
people against the proposal, he said; they called it a device to divide the
colonies, and insisted that no negotiations whatever be begun until all the
objectionable acts of Parliament had been repealed. 9 In England, Lord
Chatham had urged just such a repeal and Jefferson believed that the
rejected resolutions of that statesman would have offered real hope of
conciliation. 10 This he said despite the fact that they also called for the
express recognition of parliamentary authority, which he himself had
explicitly denied. The strong supposition was that this authority would be
exercised primarily if not solelv in the field of external relations, and as a
practical man he concluded that these terms might have been
accommodated with those offered by Congress.
7 June 5, 1775; Burgesses, Journals, 1773-1776, pp. 187-188.
8 North's and Chatham's proposals were reported about the same time.
Purdie, Va. Gazette, Apr. 28, 1775, supplement; Dixon & Hunter, Va.
Gazette, Apr. 29, 1775.
9 To Dartmouth, May 15, 1775 (Burgesses, Journals, 1773-1776, p. xxiii).
10 To Small, May 7, 1775 (Ford, I, 454).
The burgesses would have rejected Lord North's terms, even if Jefferson
had not been there, though he may have had to overcome the scruples of
Robert Carter Nicholas and others, as he said. 11 The admirable address
which was adopted was considerably more moderate in tone than the
Summary Vienjo, and it is possible that he was not responsible for the
whole of it. On the other hand, he had learned something about practical
statesmanship since the summer of 1774, as his comment on Chatham
showed, and the fact that this was an official pronouncement imposed
inevitable restraint.
Polite as the reply was, it was wholly firm and entirely without comfort to
Lords North and Dunmore. The proposal only changed the form of
oppression without lightening the burden, the committee said, and for half a
dozen reasons they would not accept it. The first one was that Parliament
had no right to meddle with the support of civil government in the colonies.The language of this objection showed clearly the JefTersonian touch: "For
us, not for them, has government been instituted here." The Colony of
Virginia was unwilling to saddle itself with a perpetual contribution that
was expendable by Parliament. Not merely was the mode of raising money
objected to; the freedom of granting it was also contended for.
Furthermore, the objectionable acts of Parliament were unrepealed, and
while asking for a gift the British were making dispositions to invade
America. This sort of procedure could not be reconciled with American
freedom. There was inconsistency, also, in asking for a proportionate
payment for imperial defence, without granting to the colonies a free trade
with all the world. This objection sounds just like Jefferson. So does the
last and most important one. "We consider ourselves as bound in honour, as
well as interest, to share one general fate with our sister Colonies; and
would hold ourselves base deserters of that union to which we have
acceded, were we to agree on any measures distinct and apart from them."
These
n The account in his "Autobiography" (Ford, I, 15) differs in detail from his
much earlier statement of September 13, 1786, to Francois Soules (Ibid.,
IV, 309), but in each instance he claimed the authorship of the reply. Also
he wrote "drawn by T. Jefferson" beside a quotation from this paper in his
copy of Marshall's Life of George Washington, II, 211. His memory was
somewhat confused about the events, however. The resolution of June 10,
which differed from the final addres* only in trivial details, was presented
by Archibald Cary for the committe* (Burgesses, Journals, 1773-1776, pp.
212-214). Presumably this was the same committee which was appointed
on June 2 to draw an address on the Governor's speech and of which
Jefferson was a member. A committee of eight was appointed on June 10 to
draw an address on the resolution, and this was adopted after Jefferson had
left for Philadelphia. (Ibid., pp. 219-221.) All the important work of
drafting had been done by June 10, and Jefferson may have taken to
Philadelphia a copy of the address in its final form, but this could not have
been an authenticated copy, as he claimed.
were unionist words, quite in line with Jefferson's convictions, and they
were also the language of common sense.
Before this strong, calm paper was finally approved Jefferson had set out in
his phaeton for Philadelphia. Nine years earlier he had gone to the colonial
metropolis to be inoculated against smallpox, but this was the first time heever left his native Province on a public mission. He made many other trips
to Philadelphia in later months and years, and the immediate results of
some of them were of much greater historical importance, but this one was
more memorable than any other in that it marked his entrance on the
continental stage as a public man. But for the challenge of political crisis he
would have continued to be a prosperous planter, a responsible local leader,
a humane and enlightened Virginian who operated of necessity within a
restricted sphere and spent most of his time at home.
When he ferried across the Potomac on his way to the Continental
Congress, he crossed his Rubicon. He did not at that time abandon local
responsibilities but he appeared unmistakably as an American, as a
champion of rights which were confined by no boundary line. The merger
of his private life with public pursuits was still incomplete, but there could
be no turning back, and from this date onward his story becomes an
integral part of the history of the Republic.
Not until another year did he and his fellow Patriots become open
revolutionaries, but he was determined to secure a redress of the colonial
grievances which he had already described so sweepingly. He afterwards
said that the Virginia planters were "a species of property annexed to
certain mercantile houses in London," but primarily his motives were
neither economic nor personal. 12 Actually, he was more prosperous now
than he ever was afterwards, and his happiness as a husband and father had
just come into flower. On purely personal grounds he ought to have been a
conservative. But, as he said, he was drawn into public affairs ''by
emergencies which threatened our country with slavery, but ended by
establishing it free." 13 This he said after he had paid the price of liberty
and knew how great it was. From the beginning to the end he regarded the
issues of these years as momentous. To him this was no mere local
struggle, but one of those great crises which come but once in a
millennium; or at least he thought that, until the vaster cataclysm in France
showed him that such things could happen twice in a single lifetime. Such
an emergency warranted the
12 Ford, IV, 155.
"To D'lvernois, Feb. 6, 1795 (Ford, VII, 2)j to Maria Cosway, Sept. 8,
1795. reproduced in Helen D. Bullock, My Head and My Heart, p. 142.neglect of his extensive private affairs, separation from his family, and any
other sacrifices which might be demanded.
The details of his important journey to Philadelphia are interesting and
informing. 14 On the day before he left Williamsburg he received from the
treasurer of the Colony ^315 for the use of the Virginia delegates. The
expenses of the various delegations were borne locally, and continued to be
until the Constitution of 1787 went into effect. As paymasters the
individual colonies, not Congress, called the tune. In Virginia these funds
were raised by subscription, and Jefferson himself had made a contribution.
He could well afford to do so, and he was in a generous frame of mind. The
future champion of democracy traveled impressively. By the time he
reached Philadelphia he had four horses. One of these, an animal named
General, sired by the noted Janus and six years old, he purchased for ^50 in
Fredericksburg, where he remained three days and also bought harness, a
postilion's whip, and swingletrees. He had at least two servants: Jesse, who
rode postilion, and Richard, apparently a body servant.
After he crossed the Potomac and came into another "country," he began to
keep his records in Maryland currency, the exchange fortunately being
favorable to Virginia. He may have been struck by the difficulties and
annoyances arising from the lack of a uniform intercolonial medium but the
problem was not serious the rest of the way, since the currency of
Pennsylvania and Delaware was on a par with that of Maryland. This sort
of information he invariably jotted down. In Annapolis he stopped long
enough to have the pole of his phaeton mended; he visited the seat of
government, as he had done nine years before; also, he availed himself of
the opportunity to purchase books. Beyond Wilmington, not being sure of
his way, he hired a guide and horse at no small cost. The total distance
from Williamsburg to Philadelphia by the common route was
approximately 325 miles, but because of his stops he took ten days to cover
it. That was a slow-moving age, and he never lived to see a fast one.
Soon he had to say good-by to one prominent delegate from his "country."
Two days after he arrived, grave news came from Bunker Hill, and on the
day after that George Washington, recently elected commander of the
Continental forces, set out for the camp before Boston. A troop of light
horse in uniform, numerous militia officers, all of the delegates from
Massachusetts, and many other delegates accompanied the General for a
little way. Jefferson was probably"Details from Account Book. He started on June 11, 1775.
among them, as John Adams was, hearing the martial music and viewing
the pomp of war. 15
Congress had been in session for about six weeks, and it sat for almost as
many more before recessing. During this period Jefferson and one or both
of his servants lodged with a cabinetmaker named Benjamin Randolph. The
cost of his lodgings, however, was only about half of that of keeping his
four horses. He had an account at the City Tavern and generally took
dinner and supper there. Probably he fell heir to the place of Peyton
Randolph or George Washington at the daily table which had been formed
earlier by them, along with Richard Henry Lee, Benjamin Harrison, and
four other delegates. 16 He bought all sorts of things in this enticing
market, including books and music, and he paid a barber for shaving him
by the week. The times were perilous but he faced them as a fine
gentleman.
Congressional duties left him little opportunity for pleasure, however. The
sessions in the State House, later known as Independence Hall, began at
nine and continued till four or five and sometimes until six, and committees
often met in the evening. As the hot summer wore on, attention to business
became more and more painful to all, and, as many remarked, the results of
the lengthy deliberations were small. 17 The sixty-odd delegates did not
comprise a numerous body — actually the House of Burgesses was larger
— but this was an unwieldy body. "Its progress must be slow," wrote John
Adams to his wife. "It is like a large fleet sailing under convov. The fleetest
sailors must wait for the dullest and slowest. Like a coach and six, the
swiftest horses must be slackened, and the slowest quickened, that all may
keep an even pace." 18 Unanimity among the delegations was necessary for
the passing of any motion or resolution, and even Samuel Adams realized
how hard it was to arrive at that.
Jefferson was constant in attendance, though he was a silent member in
debate. He felt no chagrin for that, saying later that Washington and
Franklin also disliked the disputation of the legislative floor. On
committees and in conversation, however, he was "prompt, frank, explicit,
and decisive." John Adams believed that not even Samuel Adams was more
so, and said that the young Virginian soon seized upon his heart. Thus he
dated the beginning of an historic friendship. 18 John15 June 23, 1775, John Adams to Mrs. Adams CE. C. Burnett, ed., Letters
of Members of the Continental Congress, I, 142). See also Ibid., 139.
16 George Reade to Mrs. Reade, May 18, 1775 (Ibid., 92).
17 Ibid., 96, 107, 118, 148, and elsewhere.
18 June 17, 1775 (Ibid., 132).
19 To Timothy Pickering, Aug. 6, 1822 (Works, II, 514 n.). See also
comment of C. F. Adams (Ibid., I, 616-617).
Adams remembered that Jefferson brought with him to Congress "a
reputation for literature, science, and a happy talent for composition," and
recorded, a few months after he first met him, the earliest known tribute to
his linguistic attainments and ambitions. He reported James Duane of New
York as saying that Jefferson was "the greatest rubber off of dust" that he
had met with, that he had learned French, Italian, Spanish, and wanted to
learn German. 20
The familiar statement that writings of his were passed around, remarkable
for their "peculiar felicity of expression" was not contemporary; but if the
reputation of his "masterly pen" was not firmly established in June, 1775,
he was clearly predestined to paper work from the beginning of his
congressional career. No other Virginian in attendance, except possibly
Pendleton, had like diligence or skill in it. Both Patrick Henry and Richard
Henry Lee were primarily speakers, and in the previous Congress they had
proved disappointing as draftsmen. 21 Benjamin Harrison was a large,
cheerful gentleman and something of a wit; but he had gained no laurels as
a writer. Obviously, the most populous Colony must be represented on
committees which drew important papers; and the youngest and most
literary member of the delegation was inevitably called on.
Only a few days after he had taken his seat, a committee reported a
Declaration on the Necessity of Taking Up Arms which Congress deemed
unsatisfactory. The original committee consisted of John Rut-ledge of
South Carolina, who is supposed to have done the drafting, William
Livingston of New Jersey, John Jay, Benjamin Franklin, and Thomas
Johnson of Maryland. To their number John Dickinson, the writer of the
well-known Letters from a Farmer of Pennsylvania, and Jefferson werenow added. 22
It is a pity that no photographer was present when he and Franklin first
bowed to each other, and that no stenographer recorded the first words they
spoke. The eminent Doctor had recently returned from England and his
conduct at this time was grave and modest, though he was bold in counsel
whenever his opinion was sought. 23 Jefferson, who liked the conjunction
of intellectual boldness with learning and modest manners, probably took
to him from the start. This was the beginning of Jefferson's important
association with John Jay, who was even younger than he was, and of his
long friendship with Rutledge.
20 Oct. 25, 1775 (Works, II, 422). It seems unlikely that Jefferson had
learned Spanish that early.
21 E. C; Burnett, Continental Congress, p. 51.
22 June 26, 1775 (Journals Cont. Cong., II, 107-108). See also Ibid.,
106-107.
23 John Adams to Mrs. Adams, July 23, 1775 (Burnett, Letters, I, 175).
His first clash appears to have been with John Dickinson, whom he always
regarded as an honest man, though he did not like the way his mind
worked.
Jefferson was asked to draft a new paper but, as he remembered, Dickinson
objected to this as too harsh. Committeeman Livingston commented on it at
the time. "We are now [July 4, 1775] working on a Manifesto on arming,"
he wrote. "The first was not liked by the Congress and was recommitted.
The second was not liked by the committee. Both had the faults common to
our Southern gentlemen. Much fault-finding and declamation, with little
sense or dignity. They seem to think a reiteration of tyranny, despotism,
bloody, &c. all that is needed to unite us at home and to convince the
bribed voters of the North of the justice of our cause." 24
Like all of Jefferson's writings about the imperial controversy, this paper
burns with a sense of injustice; but it was much less impetuous than his
Summary View and cannot properly be described as declamatory. He made
two drafts, and when set side by side they show that he weighed his words.25 He used alternative expressions, as he did when drawing the Declaration
of Independence, and afterwards struck out the ones that seemed less
desirable. He had now entered upon his most fastidious stage as a literary
craftsman. His arguments, however, were largely those he had used
previously, and the real objection of Dickinson was not so much to the
harshness of his phrases as to his basic theory of empire. The older man
was asked to draw another paper, and with minor amendments it was
adopted. He incorporated part of Jefferson's draft and used expressions of
his own which were almost if not quite as severe. He did not achieve as
logical a sequence of ideas or as smooth a literary effect, however, and he
begged the question of the precise authority of Parliament within the
empire, thus leaving a wider door to conciliation. 26
As Jefferson said and Dickinson repeated, the actions of the British
government had compelled the Americans to change the ground of
opposition and to accept the appeal from reason to arms. But Jefferson
sought approval "before supreme reason," spoke of charters of compact that
had been freely made, and again termed the King the link between the
several parts of the empire. He did not explicitly deny all parliamentary
authority as he had done previously, but he did so by implica-
24 Ford, I, 464 n.
25 Journals, II, 128-139.
26 Ibid., 140-157. The claim of G. H. Moore, in C. J. Stillc, Life and Times
of John Dickinson (1891), p. 363, that Dickinson drew the whole paper
seems untenable now that the drafts have been published.
tion. This was still too strong a dose for the Farmer of Pennsylvania. Some
of Jefferson's more striking expressions were retained in the final draft, and
can still serve as mottoes:
Our forefathers, inhabitants of the island of Great Britain, left their native
land to seek on these shores a residence for civil and religious freedom. 27
. . . our attachment to no nation upon earth should supplant our attachment
to liberty. 28
Other passages of his, which were omitted, contained strong and vividphrases:
To ward these deadly injuries from the tender plant of liberty which we
have brought over, and with so much affection fostered on these our own
shores, we have pursued every temperate, every respectful measure.
We have supplicated our king at various times, in terms almost disgraceful
to freedom; . . .
... to preserve that liberty which he [our Creator] committed to us in sacred
deposit. 29
Jefferson avowed the hope that civil war might be averted, but his more
conciliatory colleague was also more boastful. It was Dickinson, not he,
who said:
Our cause is just. Our union is perfect. Our preparations are nearly
completed. Our internal resources are great; and our Assurance of foreign
Assistance is certain. 80
Despite the fact that Dickinson watered down Jefferson's draft of the
Declaration upon Taking up Arms, the more resolute Patriots regarded it as
a spirited manifesto and it proved to be generally popular. 31 A second
humble petition to the King which that delegate drew, and which was
adopted practically without amendment out of deference to him, was
viewed differently by Jefferson. In connection with this he reported a sally
of wit from his corpulent colleague Harrison which was less than just to
Dickinson. The latter expressed his delight by saying: "There is but one
word in the paper, Mr. President, of which I
27 Journals, II, 129, 142.
28 Ibid., 134,147. 20 Ibid., 134,138.
*°lbid., 154; slightly modified in final version.
31 John Adams to James Warren, July 6, 1775 (Burnett, Letters, I, 152);
Stille, Dickinson, p. 358.
disapprove, and that is the word Congress." Then Harrison ponderously
arose and said: "There is but one word in the paper, Mr. President, of whichI approve, and that is the word Congress." It should be noted that this word
appeared only once, but it may be added that George III did not deign to
reply to the petition, despite its tone. 82
The reply to Lord North's conciliatory motion, which Jefferson drew soon
thereafter, was more vigorous. The committee itself was strong, consisting
of Franklin, John Adams, and Richard Henry Lee, along with Jefferson,
and, because of his association with the reply of the House of Burgesses to
the same proposal, he was the natural draftsman. One paragraph was
inserted at the suggestion of the sagacious Franklin, but the paper as a
whole followed the line of argument that had already been used in the more
polite paper of the Burgesses. It was an ad hoc document without the
quality of immortality, but there was power in its phrases. 33
A proposition to give our money, accompanied with large fleets and armies,
seems addressed to our fears rather than to our freedom.
We do not mean that our people shall be burthened with oppressive taxes,
to provide sinecures for the idle or the wicked, under colour of providing
for a civil list.
While parliament pursue their plan of civil government within their own
jurisdiction, we also hope to pursue ours without molestation.
We are of opinion that the proposition is altogether unsatisfactory, because
it imports only a suspension of the mode, not a renunciation of the
pretended right to tax us: . . .
He spoke of "indiscriminate legislation" and a "high breach" of colonial
privilege, described the proposition as "unreasonable and insidious," and
stated boldly that "nothing but our own exertions may defeat the ministerial
sentence of death or abject submission."
He labored under no illusions about the probable effect of these various
congressional papers on the British government. Soon after he arrived in
Philadelphia he wrote his brother-in-law, Francis Eppes, that war was now
"heartily entered into, without a prospect of accommodation but through
the effectual interposition of arms."* 4 To forthright John Adams these
petitions and addresses seemed like children's
32 "Autobiography," in Ford, I, 17-18. The petition was signed July 8,1775 (Journals, II, 158-162). For other comments, see Burnett, Letters, I,
158-159 n.
33 Journals, II, 202, 224-234.
34 June 26, 1775; Ford, 1,459.
play at marbles or push-pin, though he afterwards confessed that he had
underestimated their value. "I was in great error, no doubt, . . . for these
things were necessary to give popularity to our cause, both at home and
abroad; and, to show my stupidity in a stronger light, the reputation of any
one of those compositions has been a more splendid distinction than any
aristocratical star or garter in the escutcheon of every man who has enjoyed
it." 35
Jefferson hoped that a vigorous military campaign would force the enemy
to negotiate, but it was in connection with the war of words that he
rendered his chief contribution and gained his chief renown. He was not yet
the penman laureate of the Revolution; indeed, he was not crowned by
public opinion until these fateful years were viewed retrospectively; but by
the summer of 1775 he had clearly demonstrated his rare skill in what came
to be known generations later as "psychological warfare." He had relatively
little to do with the military proceedings of Congress, which led to the
actions of greatest immediate importance, though he followed the course of
external events with deep interest. It was the necessity of putting military
affairs in "good train" which caused the delegates to remain in tedious
session when some of them believed that they had been too long together
and all were possessed with "an impatience for home." 36
Jefferson's stay in the hot city was relatively brief but, like everybody else,
he welcomed the recess. He started south on August 1, though he was
unable to go straight to his mountaintop; first he had to attend another
Virginia convention in Richmond. 37 It had assembled two weeks earlier,
and Charles Lewis of Albemarle was sitting in his place. To all practical
purposes this body ruled the Province. In addition it passed certain military
measures to which Dunmore would not have consented. It elected officers
to command three regiments of militia. Patrick Henry, who had become a
symbol of bold action, was chosen first and was designated as commander
in chief. Peyton Randolph was again available for Congress but Henry, like
Washington, was regarded as ineligible and Pendleton asked to be excusedon grounds of health. The vote was as follows: 38
35 To Jefferson, Nov. 12, 1813 (Works, X, 78-80).
36 Burnett, Letters, I, 151, 171, etc.
37 The proceedings of the convention of July 17-Aug. 26, 1775, can be
conveniently seen in Force, 4 ser. Ill, 365-397. See also Lingley, Transition
in Va., ch. 6, passim.
38 Force, 4 ser., Ill, 379.
Peyton Randolph 89 Benjamin Harrison 83
Richard Henry Lee 88 Thomas Nelson, Jr. 66
Thomas Jefferson 85 Richard Bland 61
George Wythe 58
When Bland asked to be relieved on account of the infirmities of age,
Patrick Henry, with Jefferson and Colonel Carrington, headed a "strong
party" to elect George Mason, but for personal reasons that learned man
begged off, recommending Francis Lightfoot Lee, who was elected. 89 The
dominant attitude toward public service at the time was reflected in the
argument which Jefferson and others advanced to him: namely, that one
could not refuse to obey the orders of his "country," whatever these might
be. Election to office in Virginia was regarded more as a call to duty than as
a political reward, and the prevailing practice was to re-elect men whose
labors had been acceptable. It would not be proper to rank the leaders in the
Colony by the vote for delegates in which Jefferson stood third. From other
evidence it is clear that half a dozen others were more prominent than he.
Unquestionably, however, he was now regarded as a proved public servant.
He spent only a week at the convention, but he found time to attend to one
bit of unfinished personal business before he set out for home. He delivered
to Carter Braxton an order for /13 in favor of the Attorney General, John
Randolph. This constituted the purchase price for the latter's fine violin,
and by paying it Jefferson dissolved the bargain they had made more than
four years before. 40 Unlike his brother Peyton and his own son Edmund,
John Randolph could not go along with the Patriots, and, now that the linehad been sharply drawn, he purposed to remove to England, leaving behind
him the instrument he had expected to keep till death. The first fruits of
victory were Jefferson's, but it is doubtful if he felt triumphant. Soon after
his return to Monticello he wrote to his old friend:
... I now send the bearer for the violin & such music appertaining to her as
may be of no use to the young ladies. I believe you had no case for her. If
so, be so good as to direct Watt Lenox to get from Prentis's some bags or
other coarse woolen to wrap her in and then pack her securely in a wooden
box. 41
89 Mason to Cockburn, Aug. 22, 1775; Rowland, I, 206. He was practically
forced to accept appointment to the committee of safety, however.
Pendleton's experience was similar; see letter to Jefferson, Nov. 16, 1775,
LC, 2:184.
40 Account Book, Aug. 17, 1775; earlier agreement April 11, 1771, Ford I,
392.
41 Aug. 25, 1775; LC, 1:162. This passage is omitted from the printed
version of the letter in Ford, I, 482-485. Randolph replied Aug. 31, 1775;
LC, 1:165.
Randolph delivered over the cherished instrument, thus completing a
highly interesting transaction. Meanwhile, the younger violinist had clearly
revealed his personal attitude toward the public issue in his private letter.
I hope [said Jefferson] the returning wisdom of Great Britain will, ere long,
put an end to this unnatural contest. There may be people to whose tempers
and dispositions contention is pleasing, and who, therefore, wish a
continuance of confusion, but to me it is of all states but one, the most
horrid. My first wish is a restoration of our just rights; my second, a return
to the happy period, when, consistently with duty, I may withdraw myself
totally from the public stage, and pass the rest of my days in domestic ease
and tranquillity, banishing every desire of ever hearing what passes in the
world.
He urged Randolph to inform the British ministry of the true state of
colonial opinion, and, while claiming that he still favored conciliation,
expressed the belief that the Americans would demand better terms, nowthat blood had been spent.
... I wish no false sense of honor, no ignorance of our real intentions, no
vain hope that partial concessions of right will be accepted, may induce the
Ministry to trifle with accommodation, till it shall be out of their power
ever to accommodate. ... I am sincerely one of those [who wish for reunion]
and would rather be in dependence on Great Britain, properly limited, than
on any other nation on earth, or than on no nation. But I am one of those,
too, who, rather than submit to the rights of legislating for us, assumed by
the British Parliament, and which late experience has shown they will so
cruelly exercise, would lend my hand to sink the whole Island in the ocean.
. . . Whether Britain shall continue the head of the greatest empire on earth,
or shall return to her original station in the political scale of Europe,
depends, perhaps, on the resolutions of the succeeding winter. God send
they may be wise and salutary for us all. . . .
John Randolph contented himself with expressing a strong desire for the
continuation of personal friendship. "We both of us seem to be steering
opposite courses," he said; "the success of either lies in the womb of Time."
Jefferson had a respite of about a* month from public duties. During that
time occurred the death of his second daughter, Jane Randolph, who had
lived less than a year and a half altogether, but he has left only a bare
record of the event. He picked up some of the threads of plantation life at
Monticello, and in late September he was commissioned
by the Committee of Safety as county lieutenant and commander of the
militia of Albemarle, but the Colonel was unable to do much service at
home just then. 42 He had to set out again for Philadelphia.
He went by Orange Courthouse and Culpeper this time, remaining longer
within sight of the mountains, and he made a quicker trip than his previous
one from Williamsburg. He took at least one slave along, a boy named
Bob, whom he had Dr. Shippen inoculate before he returned. He returned
to his old lodgings with Benjamin Randolph but now shared the place with
other delegates and engaged with them in common-stock housekeeping.
These included Peyton Randolph, whose wife was with him, and Jefferson's
old friend Thomas Nelson, Junior, another fat man, though alert and lively
for his weight; and there may have been others. 43 The old Speaker had not
displaced John Hancock as presiding officer in the State House and he didnot linger long. Jefferson was with him in the October evening when he
died of apoplexy at a house outside of the city whither he had gone to dine.
The remains were removed to Christ Church from Benjamin Randolph's,
and Jefferson undoubtedly attended the elaborate funeral services with the
other members of Congress, wearing crape around his arm. 44
He was kept busy attending the sessions in the State House, which lasted
all day, though they did not accomplish much. The expeditions of
Montgomery and Arnold to Canada provided the most exciting news.
When he learned of the capture of Montreal he jubilantly declared that the
success of American arms corresponded with the justice of the colonial
cause, and he added an optimistic prophecy: "In a short time, we have
reason to hope, the delegates of Canada will join us in Congress, and
complete the American union, as far as we wish to have it completed." 45 It
will be recalled that they did not.
The delegates as a rule were too optimistic, but in the fall of 1775 they
generally recognized that the prospects of a peaceful settlement were
remote. In the second week after Jefferson's arrival one of them wrote: "In
one word all hopes of speedy reconciliation are given over, and we
unanimously determine to push the war with the greatest vigour." **
Soon thereafter, they learned that the King had proclaimed the
42 Sept. 26, 1775, LC, 1:168; other details from Account Book.
48 Various references in Account Book; Jefferson to Nelson, May 16, 1776
(Ford, II, 2; John Adams, Works, II, 422).
"Account Book, Oct. 22, 1775; Jefferson to Joseph Delaplaine, July 26,
1816 (Ford, X, 55); Journals Cont. Cong., Oct. 23, 1775, III, 302-303.
46 To John Randolph, Nov. 29, 1775 (Ford, I, 492).
"Samuel Ward to Henry Ward, Oct. 11, 1775; Burnett, Letters, I, 226,
colonies in a state of rebellion and had threatened dire punishment to
traitors. 47 This proclamation called for a strong answer, and Jefferson
might well have been asked to draft it, but actually he was not. Virginia
was represented on the committee by Richard Henry Lee, who spoke much
better than he wrote, but with him were two men who were regarded asgood penmen, James Wilson and William Livingston. 48
As Jefferson read their report he must have noted that Congress as a body
had caught up with his thinking in some respects — but not in all. "What
allegiance is it that we forget? Allegiance to Parliament? We never owed
— we never owned it." He had said that more than a year before.
Unquestionably he approved of this statement: "To support our laws, and
our liberties established by our laws, we have prepared, ordered, and levied
war." But he would not have contented himself with invoking the British
Constitution; he would have mentioned the higher law of nature. Also, if
left to his own devices, he would have spoken more sharply about George
III.
He did just that on the very day that this report was laid open to the
members. Ostensibly, he set out to inform his Loyalist friend, John
Randolph, of the death of the latter's brother Peyton which had occurred six
weeks before; but he seized the occasion to speak his mind about the King,
whom he now described as an immense misfortune to the entire Empire. 49
. . . We are told [he said], and everything proves it true, that he is the
bitterest enemy we have. . . . To undo his empire, he has but one truth more
to learn; that, after colonies have drawn the sword, there is but one step
more they can take. That step is now pressed upon us, by the measures
adopted, as if they were afraid we would not take it.
He himself would hate to take it but he left no doubt of his resolution.
Believe me, dear Sir, there is not in the British empire a man who more
cordially loves a union with Great Britain, than I do. But by the God that
made me, I will cease to exist before I yield to a connection on such terms
as the British Parliament propose; and in this, I think I speak the sentiments
of America.
47 Burnett, Continental Congress, pp. 115-116; Journals, Nov. 9, 13, 1775,
III, 343, 353. A copy of the proclamation of Aug. 23, taken from a
newspaper dated Nov. 13, was preserved by Jefferson; LC, 2:182-183.
48 Committee appointed Nov. 13; report presented Nov. 29; adopted Dec.
6 (Journals, III, 353, 392, 409-412).
49 Nov. 29, 1775; Ford, I, 491-493.He did not say that secession from the Empire was inevitable, but
unquestionably he thought that it was becoming so.
We want neither inducement nor power, to declare and assert a separation.
It is will, alone, that is wanting, and that is growing apace under the
fostering hand of our King. One bloody campaign will probably decide,
everlastingly, our future course; and I am sorry to find a bloody campaign
is decided on.
In the meantime, there was little that he could do except perform routine
tasks on committees. He served on half a dozen in one period of two weeks
in December; but no single assignment of his in the entire session turned
out to be important, and several of his reports were left languishing on the
table. The most spirited of his proposals came to nothing. Having been
informed that Ethan Allen, the hero of Ticon-deroga, had been captured
near Montreal, Jefferson drafted an impassioned protest against his being
taken in irons to England, to be punished for pretended treason. He
threatened retaliation to stop the progress of butchery and to compel the
enemy to respect the "rights of nations," but milder counsels prevailed
among the delegates, who merely instructed Washington to seek an
exchange. 50 Jefferson's opinions about British unscrupulousness were now
deep-seated, but the important thing to note here is that his own normal
mildness of manner completely vanished when he was speaking or writing
— especially when he was writing — about cruelty and what he regarded
as injustice. When aroused, this man who loathed contention could become
passionate indeed.
Toward the end of December, he left Congress for Monticello. No recess
had been ordered but the free movement of the members was characteristic
of this body. Since a colony had only one vote regardless of the number of
its delegates, not all of them needed always to be there. Jefferson had ample
reason to believe that Virginia would be adequately represented in his
absence. Throughout the fall he had been in an anxious state of mind about
his family. He had set aside one dav in each week, or the larger part of it,
for writing letters, but he did DOC receive the ones he wanted. In the
middle of the session he still had no word whatever about his wife and
daughter. "The suspense under which I am is too terrible to be endured," he
wrote his brother-in-law.
80 Journals, Dec. 2, 1775; III, 402; Ford, I, 494-495. Allen was exchangedafter two or three years' imprisonment.
"If anything has happened for God's sake let me know." 51 Patty and little
Patsy were not then at Monticello but were visiting Francis and Elizabeth
Eppes at the Forest. They were in the best of hands; but his fears about his
wife's health had started. Also, there were many things he wanted to do at
Monticello. It was high time that he went home. Fortune was with him
when he returned to Congress. Then there was something of real
importance for him to do.
51 To Francis Eppes, Nov. 7, 1775 (Randall, III, 570). See also letters of
Oct. 10, 24, and Nov. 21 to Eppes, and letter of Oct. 31 to Page in Ibid., Ill,
568-570; Ford, I, 488-489. Unfortunately, his correspondence with his wife
has not been preserved.
Herald of Freedom 1776
IN Virginia, Lord Dunmore ushered in the year 1776 by bombarding
Norfolk. Jefferson was on the homeward road by that time but before he
left Philadelphia he knew that war had actually begun in his own Province,
and, like practically everybody else, he placed the responsibility squarely
on the shoulders of the Governor. That dour Scot, after flitting from one
ship to another, had issued an emancipation proclamation from the William
early in November. 1 It was not destined to rank with Lincoln's. Despite the
fact that he retained only the shadow of authority he had declared martial
law; and he had summoned the slaves to revolt and join his banner. There
was some fighting in the coastal country but he did not have enough troops
to make much of a showing. He attracted some runaway slaves and
encouraged a few Loyalists, but he served chiefly to infuriate the
Virginians and to drive them along the road to independence.
Luckily, Jefferson and his family were remote from the scene of Dunmore's
activities, and he reflected that only such places as lay on the water's edge
were actually endangered. John Page was much concerned about his house
in the Tidewater county of Gloucester, but Monticello was still a haven of
peace and the contemporary records of its master reflect little
consciousness of a state of war. As county lieutenant he had duties to
perform, and it may have been at this time that he carefully listed the
volunteers from Albemarle; but he also broached a pipe of Madeira of thevintage of 1770, began to stock his park with deer, and welcomed to his
stable another foal of the proud line of
1 Nov. 7, 1775. Sec Dwrmore's Proclamation of Emancipation, with an
account by Francis Berkeley (McGregor Library, L'niv. of Va., 1941).
Fearnought. For four months he lived as a country gentleman in virtual
retirement. 2
He was quite prepared to resume his public duties as soon as he was really
needed, but he welcomed the opportunity to put his thoughts in order and to
remain with his wife, about whom he continued to be troubled. He was
urged by his friend Nelson, who had his own lady with him in Philadelphia,
to bring her with him but she was in no condition to go. It would have been
unlike him to give any further explanation, but the chances are that she
carried other children than those who finally appeared upon the record and
that there were mishaps which went unmentioned.
Jefferson had no special reason to be alarmed about his mother, then living
at Shadwell, but on the last day of March she suffered what was supposed
to be an apoplectic stroke, lingered for an hour, and died in her fifty-
seventh year. He left only a bald and unemotional record of the event,
partly through accident it may be, but also because of his consistent
reticence in all personal matters. 3 This was just about the date that he had
expected to return to Congress, but in the meantime he himself fell ill and
was incapacitated for some five weeks longer. The report got around that he
was suffering from an inveterate headache which had a hard name;
probably it was what we now call migraine. By early May he was over it,
and in the fullness of time he descended from the mountain. He would have
preferred to go to Williamsburg, where the last and most noted of the
Revolutionary conventions of Virginia was assembling, but duty called him
to Philadelphia and he was ready.
Accompanied by his servant Bob he went again by the upland route,
carrying with him funds he had collected for the purchase of powder for
Virginia and for the relief of the poor in Boston, and after a week's journey
he arrived at his old lodgings. 4 Eight days later he removed to a new brick
house, three stories high, on the southwest corner of Market and Seventh
Streets. This belonged to a bricklayer by the name of Graff (spelled "Graaf"
by him), then newly married. Jefferson's quarters on the second floorconsisted of a bedroom and parlor, which had the stairs between them. He
did his writing in the parlor and commonly used a folding writing-box
which his former landlord, the cabinetmaker Benjamin Randolph, had
made from Jefferson's own drawing.
2 Page to Jefferson, Nov. 11, [1775], LC, 2:178-181; list of volunteers, LC,
6:1063; Account Book, Jan. 28, Feb. 8, Mar. 26, 1776.
8 Account Book, Mar. 31, 1776; Jefferson to — Randolph, Aug.-Sept.
1776, MHS, UVA photostat.
* Details in Account Book, beginning May 7, 1776.
He still had it half a century later. "It claims no merit of particular beauty,"
he then said. "It is plain, neat, convenient, and, taking no more room on the
writing table than a moderate quarto volume, it yet displays itself
sufficiently for any writing." On this box and in this brick house he drafted
the Declaration of Independence. 5
The period of debate was over, as Thomas Paine had said. While Jefferson
was still at Monticello he received from Nelson in Philadelphia "a present
of 2/ worth of Common Sense," and thus became acquainted with Paine's
catalytic pamphlet. Furthermore, he went to great pains to sound out local
sentiment before he left home and became convinced that nine tenths of the
people in the upper counties favored independence. In Philadelphia he
found awaiting him a month-old letter from John Page in which this friend
exhorted him: "For God's sake declare the colonies independent and save
us from ruin." Also, he had one of the same date from another old college-
mate who said: "The notion of independency seems to spread fast in this
colony, and will be adopted, I dare say, by a majority of the next
convention." But Jefferson was only a delegate to Congress, and he had to
await specific instructions from his "country." 6
On May 15, 1776, the gentlemen in Williamsburg instructed their delegates
to propose to Congress that the united colonies be declared free and
independent states. Twelve days later these delegates presented their
instructions. While the resolution lay on the table in the State House in
Philadelphia, the people in Williamsburg generally assumed that Virginia
had already declared her independence. Ardent patriots hoisted a new flag,
that of the Continental Union, over the Capitol, and the conventionproceeded to create a new government. On June 28 it adopted a constitution
and there could then be no possible doubt that the Virginians had severed
their imperial bonds and embarked on an independent course. Whether the
states preceded the Union or the Union preceded the states is as futile a
question as that about the hen and the egg, but the historic primacy of the
oldest and strongest of the colonies in the cause of freedom was generally
and generously recognized. Thus, within a few weeks, this apostrophe
appeared in print:
6 On the box, see his letter to Ellen Coolidge, Nov. 14, 1825, Papers, M.I
IS., p. 361; on the house, the thoroughly documented account in J. H.
Ha/.clton, Declaration of Independence (1906), pp. 149-154.
6 From Thomas Nelson, Jr., Feb. 4, 1776, N.-Eng. Hist. & Gcncal.
Register, I VI, 54; from Page, Apr. 6, 1776, Ibid., LVI, 55; from James
McClurg, Apr. 6, 1776, LC, 2:216; to Nelson, Mav 16, 1776, Ford, II, 3.
And now, when Britain's mercenary bands
Bombard our cities, desolate our lands,
(Our pray'rs unanswer'd, and our tears in vain,)
While foreign cut-throats crowd th' ensanguin'd plain;
Thy glowing virtue caught the glorious flame,
And first renounc'd the cruel tyrant's name!
With just disdain, and most becoming pride,
Further dependence on the crown deny'd.
Whilst freedom's voice can in these wilds be heard,
Virginia's patriots shall be still rever'd. 7
During the months of May and June, 1776, one of "Virginia's patriots" was
feeling a little sorry for himself in Philadelphia. Jefferson had begun
immediately to serve on committees, and these filled up a good deal of
time. During this period he dealt particularly with the affairs of Canada,drafting several reports and referring frequently in letters to the misfortunes
the American expedition had suffered. 8 He was much more interested in
the affairs of Virginia, however, and he made more important use of his
new writing-box in drafting a constitution for his own Commonwealth.
This document, which he sent to the convention by George Wythe about
the middle of June, will be considered later. The main thing to be said here
is that Jefferson sent with it a list of charges against King George III, which
the convention attached to its new constitution as a preamble. His fellow
planters did not follow the precise wording in which he declared the King
"deposed," but they did declare that, because of the acts of misrule
enumerated by Jefferson, the government of their "country" as formerly
exercised under the Crown of Great Britain was totally dissolved. Thus
they joined with him in setting the backdrop for a more famous action.
One of his specific recommendations to his own countrymen ought also to
be mentioned here. He proposed that such colonies as should be established
in Virginia's domain west of the mountains should be "free and
independent of this colony and of all the world." 9 He did not intend them
to be subordinate. At this early date he advocated the policy which was
afterwards embodied in legislative acts of original states and in ordinances
of Congress, and which permitted the historic expansion of the American
Republic through the creation of new
7 July 27, 1776; Frank Moore, Diary of the Revolution (1876), quoting
Free-marts Journal.
8 See particularly reports of May 21, June 17, 1776 (Ford, II, 4-6, 30-39);
letters to Nelson, May 19, to Fleming, July 1, and to Eppes, July 15 (Ibid.,
II, 3, 39-40, 63-64).
9 Ford, II, 26.
states, equal in all respects to the old. His prophetic finger pointed to the
enlarged Union of the future.
In Philadelphia the pace was slower than in Williamsburg, but the tempo
was quickening. With customary care the denouncer of George III and the
prophet of an expanding confederation made certain notes on proceedings;
these he incorporated long years later in his autobiography with a glow of
satisfaction.In Congress, Friday, June 7, 1776. The delegates from Virginia moved in
obedience to instructions from their constituents that the Congress should
declare that these United colonies are & of right ought to be free &
independent states, that they are absolved from all allegiance to the British
crown, and that all political connection between them & the state of Great
Britain is, & ought to be, totally dissolved; . . . 10
This was the first of the famous resolutions presented for the delegation by
Richard Henry Lee.
Jefferson did not participate in the debate on the floor that took place a
couple of days later, though he noted the arguments. In the course of this
debate it appeared to him and others that the middle colonies and South
Carolina "were not yet matured for falling from the parent stem, but that
they were fast advancing to that state." 1X Accordingly, it was decided to
postpone the final decision until July 1, and to appoint a committee in the
meantime to prepare a declaration. This consisted of Jefferson, John
Adams, Franklin, Roger Sherman, and Robert R. Livingston. 12
Since Richard Henry Lee had presented the resolution for independence in
the first place, there has been much speculation about his failure to be
appointed to the committee instead of Jefferson. If this was because of his
unpopularity within the Virginia delegation and the desire to build
Jefferson up against him, as John Adams said, there was no sign of any
alienation of the two men at the time. Two or three days after the
committee was named, Lee set out for Virginia to sec his ailing wife and to
attend the convention in Williamsburg, as apparently he had intended doing
all along. There is more reason to suppose that Jefferson envied Lee this
opportunity than that Lee envied Jefferson. To both of them the
proceedings in Williamsburg seemed more vital at the moment than the
drafting of a document in Philadelphia. This
10 Ford, I, 18. Other resolutions related to foreign alliances and a
confederation.
11 Ibid., 24; see also 19-24.
12 June 11, 1776, Journals, V. 429.
particular document they undoubtedly regarded as important, but nobodythen knew it would turn out to be immortal. It might not have been if Lee
had drawn it.
At all events, it was inevitable that a Virginian should be appointed to the
committee and, despite his youth, Jefferson was a natural choice. His voice
was uncertain but his pen was known to be potent and there could be no
doubt that his mind was prepared. Presumably, the five members met at the
house on the Bristol pike where Franklin was confined with the gout, and
discussed the general form of the Declaration. Then Jefferson was asked to
draft it. Whether or not he and Adams were appointed to a subcommittee,
as the latter said and he himself denied, is unimportant; and even if the
conversation between the two men did not occur precisely as Adams
reported it long afterwards, the reasons which he then assigned were valid.
It was the part of wisdom to assign the lead to a Virginian, for the middle
colonies were lukewarm and the New Englanders were deliberately
keeping themselves in the background at this stage. Also, Jefferson bore no
such odium of mistrust and unpopularity as Adams attributed to himself
and he was doubtless regarded as the better writer. However, he appears to
have submitted his draft first to Adams and then to the ailing Franklin, and
an early copy of it in the handwriting of the forthright delegate from
Massachusetts survives as a priceless document. 13
In the seventeen days between June 11, when the committee was appointed,
and June 28, when they reported to Congress, Jefferson made his draft. He
consulted no book or pamphlet, though he felt entirely free to do so and had
no desire to be original. The purposes which he had in mind he afterwards
stated with unexcelled frankness and clarity:
. . . Not to find out new principles, or new arguments, never before thought
of, not merely to say things which had never been said before; but to place
before mankind the common sense of the subject, in terms so plain and firm
as to command their assent, and to justify ourselves in the independent
stand we are compelled to take. Neither aiming at originality of principle or
sentiment, nor yet copied from any particular and previous writing,
13 See the admirable study of J. P. Boyd, The Declaration of
Independence; pp. 9-12, 40, Document IV, etc. Later discoveries are
incorporated in an article by the same editor in N. Y. Times Mag., Apr. 13,
1947. These include a letter from Franklin to Benj. Rush, June 26, 1776,
discovered by Lyman H. Butterfield, implying that Franklin was confined
to the house of Edward Duffield on the Bristol Pike, during June. Thepartially conflicting accounts of Jefferson and Adams are in Ford, I, 24—27
n., and J. H. Hazelton, Declaration of Independence, pp. 141-146. See also
Carl Becker's brilliant work, The Declaration of Independence, ch. IV,
it was intended to be an expression of the American mind, and to give to
that expression the proper tone and spirit called for by the occasion. 14
He did copy a good deal from a particular and previous writing of his own.
Beside his writing-box he spread out the charges against the King which he
had sent to Virginia. These constituted the substantial foundation of the
longest section in the Declaration. Another paper, which his fellow
Virginians adopted before their constitution, was also available to him: the
Declaration of Rights, largely drafted by George Mason and afterwards
renowned. The phraseology of the even more famous philosophical
paragraph in the intercolonial Declaration is similar to parts of this and may
reflect its direct influence. Jefferson could have drawn on George Mason
for his own statement of fundamental human rights, and he would have
thought this not amiss, but the ideas were in his mind already. They
belonged to no single man but, in his opinion, were the property of
mankind. Certainly they were the property of the American Patriots, whose
mind he was trying to express, and it really made no difference where they
came from.
Jefferson's task was to impart the proper tone and spirit, and to do this he
labored long. He was a ready writer but he could also be a fastidious one,
and he never weighed his phrases more carefully than now. He even
corrected the paper after it was formally adopted, in order to get a better
word. He regarded capitalization and spelling with considerable
indifference in letters, but here he went to unusual pains to regularize them.
The history of the evolving text of the Declaration has been studied by
scholars with great care, in the effort to determine the authorship of every
phrase and to distribute credit with impartial hand. Certain minor changes
can be credited to Adams and Franklin; the authorship of others which
Jefferson inserted at a later time in his Rough Draft will probably remain
forever doubtful. In the first place he wrote: "We hold these truths to be
sacred and undeniable." VVc cannot be sure whether it was he or Franklin
who substituted "self-evident." 15 It is possible that the expression
"unalienable rights" was owing to a printer's error, for Jefferson himself
wrote "inalienable." The changes have been counted and recounted, but theones made by his colleagues on the committee appear to have been few,
and the document they approved and reported on June 28 was undeniably
Jefferson's. Then it
14 To Henry Lee, May 8, 1825; Ford, X, 343.
15 Boyd, p. 22; Document V, p. 1. Since the discovery of a still earlier
draft, he thinks the "Rough Draft" should really be called the "Committee
Draft."
ran the gamut of Congress — to his own deep chagrin but with results that
were generally beneficial.
Congress properly kept it on the table for a few days, for they still had to
reach a decision on the question of independence itself. It was on July 2
that this question, which John Adams described as the greatest that ever
was debated in America, was decided. 16 The resolution originally
presented by Richard Henry Lee was then adopted and the delegates as a
group were free to consider the precise form of the Declaration. They
examined it during the three days, July 2-4. Jefferson dutifully observed the
proprieties by listening in silence while less partial judges commented on
the merits and demerits of his work. John Adams loyally supported every
word of it, however, and Benjamin Franklin told him a comforting story
while he writhed. This was about a hatter, whose inscription for a
handsome signboard was subjected to such criticism that it was finally
reduced to his name and the figure of a hat. 17
Jefferson and some of his Virginia friends believed that Congress
weakened the Declaration, but there can now be little doubt that the critics
strengthened it. This they did primarily by deletion. The most important
single omission was the perfervid charge against the King about the slave
trade. In simpler form this had been accepted by Jefferson's fellow
Virginians, who had included it in the preamble to their constitution just as
he wrote it, even though they did not then outlaw the slave trade as he
desired. In Congress, the South Carolinians and Georgians favored the
continuance of the traffic; and certain of the Northern brethren were
dubious about such sweeping condemnation, being aware that some of their
people had engaged in the dirty business. Others besides George III were
blameable. From the literary point of view this omission was no loss, for
the charge was really out of character with the rest of the document. It wasone of those rare Jeffersonian passages which are consciously rhetorical
and betray a striving for effect. 18
Also, Congress rewrote and greatly reduced the final paragraph, attaching
to it, not Jefferson's assertion of independence, but the original resolution
of Lee. These changes contributed to directness and thus constituted an
improvement, but from Jefferson's Rough Draft certain touching
expressions may be resurrected and allowed to speak for themselves —
such, for example, as these: "We must endeavor to forget our former love
for them, . . . We might have been a free and
16 To Mrs. Adams, July 3, 1776; Works, IX, 418.
17 Ford, X, 119-120 n., 268.
18 Becker, Declaration of Independence, pp. 212-216.
a great people together; . . ." Plenty of felicitous phrases were left — more,
probably, than in any other of Jefferson's compositions and quite enough
for any single document. In the last sentence Congress inserted the phrase,
"with a firm reliance on the protection of divine providence," but left his
final words in their original form except for capitalization: "we mutually
pledge to each other our lives, our Fortunes, and our sacred Honour." They
could not improve on these.
The literary excellence of the Declaration is best attested by the fact that it
has stood the test of time. It became the most popular state paper of the
American Republic not merely because it was the first, but also because to
most people it has seemed the best. No other American document has been
read so often or listened to by so many weary and perspiring audiences.
Yet, despite interminable repetition, those well-worn phrases have never
lost their potency and charm. 10 So far as form is concerned, the continuing
appeal of the Declaration lies in the fact that it is clear and simple and that,
for all its careful craftsmanship and consummate grace, it was not so highly
polished as to lose its edge. Only in its reiterated charges against the King
does it even approach the declamatory. It may lack the stark grandeur of
certain passages from Lincoln, it may be almost too felicitous; but it has
notable elevation of spirit and solemnity of tone. Intended as an expression
of the American mind, it was also JefTerson at his litcrarv best. 20Its immediate purpose was to justify the secession of the colonies from the
Mother Country. Thus, as every American should know, the great
document begins:
When in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people
to dissolve the political bands, which have connected them with another,
and to assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station
to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God entitle them, a decent
respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the
causes which impel them to the separation.
It is hard to see how JefTerson could have combined in such compass a
larger number of important ideas or could have better imparted the tone of
dignitv, solemnity, respectful firmness, and injured virtue which the
circumstances required. It was necessary to dissolve these old political
bands. The American people were entitled to an independent
19 See M. C. Tyler, in Lit. Hist, of the Artier. Revolution (1897 F21.
20 The best discussion of the litcrarv qualities I know of is that of Carl
Becker. Declaration of Independence, ch. 5.
station under the laws of God and Nature, but they had a decent respect to
the opinions of mankind and were thus impelled to give reasons for their
course.
Before stating the specific reasons he took the whole controversy out of the
realm of petty and selfish squabbling by setting it on a high background of
philosophy. The philosophical passage in the Declaration, which he wrote
as a single brief paragraph, became the most famous part of the document;
and, as a summary of human rights and a justification of revolution in
behalf of them, it is doubtful if it has ever been excelled. Actually he
outlined a whole system of philosophy in a few sentences. 21 To this
epitome of current wisdom, which he himself regarded as a creed, we must
turn again as men have done through the generations. At the time, however,
attention was focused on the specific rather than on the general grounds of
revolution, for these were familiar to others besides enlightened gentlemen
and the statement of them awakened echoes in more minds.
The charges in the Declaration were directed, not against the British peopleor the British Parliament, but against the King. There was definite purpose
in this. Jefferson, and the great body of the Patriots with him, had already
repudiated the authority of Parliament, and in his Summary View he had
made a futile appeal to the Monarch. Now, this last tie was to be cut and
the onus must be put on George III himself. Such a personification of
grievances was unwarranted on strict historical grounds. This was the
language of political controversy, not that of dispassionate scholarship.
Nevertheless, in these charges Jefferson gave an extraordinarily full
summary of the whole controversy with the Mother Country. He included
the major grievances against Parliament by a clever literary device which
avoided even the mention of that name.
... He [the King] has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction
foreign to our constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his
Assent to their Acts of pretended Legislation.
Certain acts of "pretended" legislation were then specified.
At the bar of history these charges now seem extreme. Almost any modern
historian can make a better case for the British authorities than Jefferson
did, for he really granted them no case at all. This is not to say that he made
any charge which could not have been backed by facts. These grievances
were actual not imaginary; they recalled in every instance specific policies
and events. They constituted a "long
21 Well summarized in R. B. Perry, Puritanism and Democracy, p. 125-
train of abuses" and certain of them could properly be termed
"usurpations," but historians of a later generation, who have been in
position to study this controversy calmly, assign most of them to official
stupidity or to helplessness in the face of the larger imperial problem, rather
than to a deliberate design to reduce the colonics "under absolute
despotism." By implication, certain of these charges were manifestly
unjust. The causes of the American Revolution cannot be adduced from the
Declaration alone, and Jefferson may be charged with over-simplifying an
exceedingly complicated situation. This would have been a fault in an
historian but under the circumstances it may be regarded as a virtue in a
statesman.
He carried this over-simplification even further in another paper, which waswritten five years later and has remained obscure. In an address to an
Indian chief, toward the end of his governorship of Virginia, he described
the causes of the Revolution as a teacher might to a child.
. . . You find us, brother, engaged in war with a powerful nation. Our
forefathers were Englishmen, inhabitants of a little island beyond the great
water, and, being distressed for land, they came and settled here. As long as
we were young and weak, the English whom we had left behind, made us
carry all our wealth to their country, to enrich them; and, not satisfied with
this, they at length began to say we were their slaves, and should do
whatever they ordered us. We were now grown up and felt ourselves
strong; we knew we were free as they were, that we came here of our own
accord and not at their biddance, and were determined to be free as long as
we should exist. For this reason they made war on us. 22
This sounds much too simple. But Jefferson's failure to allow for the
complexities of the imperial problem and to grant any credit to British good
will cannot be attributed to the fact that he had a simple mind or
conspicuously lacked a sense of historical justice. The relativity <>t
circumstances must always be remembered. On the verge of revolution
Jefferson and his colleagues could not be expected to be dispassionate; he
had long since weighed the conflicting arguments, and the preponderance
on the Patriots' side seemed so great that he-saw no need for apothecary's
scales. He was wandering in no mist of doubt, seeking the totality of truth.
His task as i state sm an was to grasp the essence of the controversy, and as
the penman of independence to set it forth — not in neutral shades but in
bold contrasts of black and white.
"Address to Brother John Baptist dc Coignc, June 1781 (L. & B., XVI.
To his mind the fundamental issue was simple: British policy constituted a
perilous threat to liberties that were dearer to him than life itself.
Furthermore, he was convinced that British policy centered in the
personality and was inseparable from the determination of a stubborn King.
To him George III was not merely a symbol but a powerful personal
obstacle to the sort of self-government he and his fellows were claiming as
a natural human right. In his own mind he coupled the monarch with ill-
fated Charles L That year Jefferson heard from Benjamin Franklin a motto
which he attributed to one of the regicides: "Rebellion to tyrants is
obedience to God." He seized upon this immediately, put it on his own seallater, and made it a personal slogan throughout life. 23 In 1776 especially
this was a stirring call to action, for the historical circumstances seemed to
him strikingly analogous to those that had led to the successful revolt
against the Stuart King, Jefferson was not a complete historian; and if a
philosopher is one who can never quite make up his mind, he was no
philosopher. If passionate devotion to causes one deems fundamental is
partisanship, he was very generally a partisan, and certainly was one at this
stage. But at no time afterwards did he ever doubt that his general estimate
of this situation was correct.
He did not change his opinion about George III when he met him ten years
later; but, considering the Declaration toward the end of his own life, he
himself valued the "principles of the instrument" more than his wholesale
indictment of British policy at the age of thirty-three. 2 * Such, also, has
been the judgment of history. It is not for the charges against the King but
for the brief philosophical paragraph that posterity has been most grateful
to him. Said Abraham Lincoln when the author of the Declaration had been
dead for a generation: "All honor to Jefferson — to the man, who in the
concrete pressure of a struggle for national independence by a single
people, had the coolness, forecaste [sic], and sagacity to introduce into a
merely revolutionary document an abstract truth, applicable to all men and
all times, and so to embalm it there that to-day and in all coming days it
shall be a rebuke and a stumbling-block to the very harbingers of
reappearing tyranny and oppression." 25 These words from Lincoln could
have been echoed with eminent appropriateness during the latest and
greatest of wars, for the doctrines of the
23 Franklin suggested the motto for the seal of the United States in the
summer of 1776; see references to this and to Jefferson's own seal in the
following chapter. For Jefferson's crediting the motto to a regicide, see his
letter to Edward Everett, Feb. 24, 1823 (L. & B., XV, 415).
24 To Madison, Aug. 30, 1823; Ford, X, 269.
25 Apr. 6, 1859, to H. L. Pierce and others, responding to an invitation to
attend a celebration in honor of Jefferson's birthday in Boston (L. & B., I,
xvii).
Declaration stand in complete antithesis to those which the totalitarian of
the twentieth century proclaimed. Jefferson's words should make tyrannytremble in any age.
They have alarmed conservative minds in his own land in every generation,
and some compatriots of his have regretted that the new Republic was
dedicated to such radical doctrines at its birth. Whether it would have been
thus dedicated, amid such incense of universalism, if Jefferson had not
officiated at the altar, no man can say. At the dawn of American
independence Congress made his words official and held "these truths to be
self-evident; that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their
Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness; that to secure these rights, governments are
instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the
governed."
The immediate deduction was the right of revolution against a government
which was destructive of these ends. Another deduction was inescapable:
the governments to be established here must aim first of all to secure these
rights. American democracy might have developed as the resultant of other
forces, geographical and economic, but the fact is that this passage became
its major charter. "The history of American democracy," as has been wisely
said, "is a gradual realization, too slow for some and too rapid for others, of
the implications of the Declaration of Independence." 28
It will require a long book to show in convincing detail what Jefferson
himself sought to realize, how he tried to do it, how he both succeeded and
failed; but two important questions of implication should be raised here.
One is about property, which he did not mention in this famous passage;
the other is about the natural equality of men, which he proclaimed.
Was there any significance in his omission of the word "property," which
had been used by John Locke, and his substitution for it of the phrase
"pursuit of happiness"? It is exceedingly doubtful that his contemporaries
thought there was. Locke presupposed the pursuit of happiness, and
Jefferson always assumed as basic the right of an individu.il to hold
property. He did not anticipate communism. Nevertheless, his use here of a
more inclusive phrase than the word "property" was probably deliberate,
and if it does not clearly indicate a philosophical distinction between
different sorts of rights it docs suggest the characteristic shading of his
thought. From his later statements and actions there can be no doubt that
such rights as freedom of mind, conscience, and person were the ones he
cherished most. These unquestionably28 Ralph Barton Perry, in Vuruanlmi and Democracy, p. 131.
were inalienable, and also desirable in themselves; property was
indispensable, just as government was, but, like it, was a means to human
happiness and not an end. 27
Other expressions then seemed much more significant. At the Virginia
convention shortly before this, during the discussion of George Mason's
Declaration of Rights, certain "aristocrats" objected to the statement that
men are by nature equally free and independent, "as being the forerunner or
pretext of civil convulsion." The revolutionary character of the doctrine
was recognized. The objectors were calmed down, however, by the
observation that this was mostly talk and that the generalization did not
apply to slaves, at any rate. 28 If Jefferson had been present and had been
questioned on this point he would have said that the general statement did
apply to slaves, and that these unfortunate creatures had lost their freedom
and all semblance of equality through the operation of human law, which in
this respect was in conflict with the higher law of Nature. His own
recommendations to that convention do not reveal him as an impatient
reformer, and in reality he never became one, but they leave no doubt that
he took his own philosophy seriously. Slavery in his native region was one
of the contradictions he always had to face; it was one of the tyrannical
forms he was unable to abolish. The natural equality he talked about was
not that of intellectual endowment, but, as Lincoln so clearly perceived, he
proclaimed for all time the dignity of human nature.
At a crucial moment in 1776, Congress was under the control of men who
were willing to adopt, under the pressure of imperial circumstances, what
amounted to a charter of individual liberty and human rights, and to
inscribe it indelibly on the page of history. This was translated into
democratic terms as soon as men began to employ them widely. Thus a
sensitive and fastidious gentleman, who prized privacy
27 This question is ably summarized and discussed by Perry, Ibid., pp.
184-186, with citations. Gilbert Chinard holds to the position that Jefferson
made a definite distinction between inalienable rights and rights of a second
class, though he sees in him no hostility to property; Thomas Jefferson (2
ed., revised, 1939), pp. 80-85. Adrienne Koch finds ample proof for
Jefferson's recognition of the right to property as a basic natural right;
Philosophy of Thomas Jefferson, p. 175. The claim made by Partington thatJefferson's action marked a complete breach with the Whiggish doctrine of
property rights is extreme; Main Currents in American Thought, I, 344. A
good statement of Jefferson's later attitude toward different sorts of rights is
in his letter to Noah Webster, Dec. 4, 1790, in Ford, V, 254-255.
28 Hilldrup, Pendleton, pp. 169-170, citing Rowland, Mason, I, 240. The
original authority for the observation, however, is Edmund Randolph; see
Va. Mag., XLIV, 45. The inapplicability of the Declaration of Rights to
slaves and free Negroes was affirmed by the Virginia courts at a later time,
in disagreement with Jefferson's friend George Wythe; Margaret V. Nelson,
A Study of Judicial Review in Virginia, 1189-1928 (New York, 1947), p.
184.
and disliked the rabble, became a major prophet not only of freedom but
also of democracy. He himself was slower to use the latter term than to
realize the implications of his doctrine, and his actions at this time were not
motivated by personal political ambition. Nor had he proceeded in a mood
of sentimentality. He felt with his mind and his mind left him in no doubt
that what he had said was right.
On July 4 this thoughtful and observant man arose at dawn according to his
custom, noting in the back of his Account Book that the temperature was
68° Fahrenheit at 6 a.m. On his way to or from the State House that very
day he paid for a thermometer, but undoubtedly he had used this or another
one already. His record of the temperature from this time forward,
wherever he happened to be, was practicallv unbroken. He never ceased
being interested in climate, though he believed that likes and dislikes in this
respect were largely a matter of habit. To one of his upbringing this day
must have been quite comfortable. His highest reading of the thermometer,
76°, was at one o'clock. His thoughts were not wholly of the place and
season, however, for on that day he also paid for seven pairs of women's
gloves, destined for Monticello.
On July 4, 1776, at Oxford, where Lord North was chancellor, honorary
degrees were conferred by that ancient and honorable univcrsirv on
Thomas Hutchinson, late Governor of Massachusetts Bay, and Peter
Oliver, late Deputy Governor. 29 In England they could not be expected to
know just what was happening in Congress, and not even the delegates in
Philadelphia thought of this as the birthday of the American Republic.The great decision was made on July 2, when the resolution of
independence was adopted. What actually happened on July 4 was that
twelve states agreed to the written Declaration embodying this resolution,
while the delegates from New York refrained from voting. The action did
not become unanimous until July 15, when the resolutions of the New York
convention were laid before Congress. In the meantime, the Declaration
was authenticated by the bold signature of President John Hancock, and by
that of Secretary Charles Thomson; it was printed and transmitted to the
various assemblies, conventions, committees, and commanding officers;
and on July S in Philadelphia it was first proclaimed by the local
Committee of Safety. John Adams has left a brief account of this event,
which occurred in the State I louse yard in the presence of a great crowd of
people. 80
29 Annual Register, 1116 (4 cd., London, THS), p. 159.
30 To Samuel Chase, July 9, 1776; Works, IX, 420. For an admirable
summary' of chronology, see Burnett, Continent jl Congress, pp. 188-197.
Jefferson must have been present but he was not in the spotlight; nobody
announced that he was the author of this paper or led him forward upon the
stage to take a bow. Cheers mounted to the sky; battalions paraded on the
Common; and the bells rang all day and most of the night. This was in
celebration not of a document but of an event. The tie with the Mother
Country had been cut and Congress as a body was responsible for that
dangerous and fateful action. Not until July 19 did Congress order that the
Declaration be engrossed on parchment and signed by the members.
Jefferson himself could not have affixed his own name until August 2. The
names of the delegates were well known, but the signatures themselves
were not made public until the following January and Jefferson's was one
of many, even then.
This is another way of saying that his chief fame from the Declaration lay
in the future. As he poked around the shops of Philadelphia bystanders may
have pointed him out as an influential delegate, but they did not hail him as
the author and he probably would not have wanted them to. At the moment,
in fact, his pride in authorship was slight, for he believed that Congress had
manhandled his composition and marred its strength. He cared little for
general applause but he wanted to guard his own literary reputation among
the select. He made copies of his own draft as it had emerged from thecommittee, and sent these to some of his friends; they could compare it
with the final version and judge whether it was better or worse for the
critics. 31
Richard Henry Lee, who was entitled to a copy on other grounds, believed
that the critics had "mangled" the paper, and most of Jefferson's friends in
Virginia sent comments which were gratifying to him personally.
Pendleton thought the charges against the King an improvement over those
in the preamble to the Virginia constitution, and John Page was highly
pleased with the Declaration as a whole. But these friends did not
differentiate sharply between the act of asserting independence and the
document in the case. Thus Lee said that the "Thing itself — that is,
independence — was so good that no cookery could spoil the dish for the
palates of freemen. Nobody regarded the paper as in any sense a private
affair and Page's prayer was the natural and proper one: "God preserve the
United States." 32
31 To R. H. Lee, July 8, 1776; Ford, II, 259. In The Declaration of
Independence, Boyd reproduces all the known drafts and copies in
Jefferson's hand. These include the copies made for Lee and Wythe and an
unidentified copy which may have been sent to Pendleton or John Page.
32 To William Fleming, July 1, 1776, Ford, II, 41; from R. H. Lee, July 21,
1776, Letters, I, 210; from Page, July 20, 1776 (N.-Eng. Hist. & Genealog.
Reg., LVI, 152); from Pendleton, July 22, 1776 (LC, II, 277). For general
comments on contemporary indifference to the Declaration as a document,
see J. C. Fitzpatrick, Spirit of the Revolution, esp. ch. 2.
Nobody except Jefferson himself took his wounded pride as nn author very
seriously and he proceeded to dismiss the paper from his mind. He kept his
contemporary record of events, but not until later did he put them in their
present form and by that time his memory was confused. Because of an
ambiguous statement in what passed for the official record, he, like nearly
everybody else, forgot the exact date at which he affixed his signature. As
an old man he talked much about such antiquarian matters, because they
were so often referred to him, but in July, 1776, the most important fact
was that independence had been proclaimed in the name of the officers of
the Continental Congress. This was political revolution and it brought
grave dangers in its train. Jefferson did not forget, however, that in a
moment of high faith he had formulated a creed for himself and theRepublic. His dominant concern henceforth was to translate this into legal
institutions and to make it a living reality. During the next three years in
Virginia he devoted himself more impressively to this task than to the more
immediate one of winning the war and the equally imperative one of
establishing a more perfect Union.
Framing a Government 1776
JEFFERSON remained in Congress from the middle of May, 1776, until
the beginning of September, and his devotion to the general American
cause did not slacken, but his heart was always in Virginia. He had hardly
arrived in Philadelphia before he expressed the hope that he might be
recalled for a time to attend the convention in Williamsburg. This was not
primarily because the fateful question of independence would be raised
there. He could anticipate what the answer to that would be, and as things
turned out his presence would not have affected the decision. What he
wanted was a share in framing the new government of his Commonwealth.
"It is a work of the most interesting nature and such as every individual
would wish to have his voice in," he wrote to his friend Nelson, who was
back in Virginia at the time. "In truth it is the whole object of the present
controversy; for should a bad government be instituted for us, in future it
had been as well to have accepted at first the bad one offered us from
beyond the water without the risk and expense of contest." '
Obviously he was not one of those who would rest content with freeing the
Province from external control. He regarded political independence not as
an end but as a means, and was more deeply concerned about what should
follow the formal separation than about the action itself. Furthermore, what
he said and did about the constitution of Virginia made it abundantly clear
that he was no mere purveyor of philosophical generalities, but a man of
practical purpose who was formulating a definite program.
At the outset he questioned the right of the convention to create a
a To Thomas Nelson, Jr., May 16, 1776 (Ford, II. 1 : , Italics mine, as well
as a minor change in punctuation.
permanent constitution, believing that such a document should be the work
of deputies specially elected for that purpose and thus be based moreindubitably on the popular will. 2 His objections, which were presented by
Edmund Randolph in his absence, were overborne on practical as well as
theoretical grounds, and there would have been no point in his pressing
them further at this juncture. But the fact that he raised them again
afterwards showed that he was very serious about them; and anyone who
looked behind the scenes could see that he was already a more
thoroughgoing champion of popular government than Edmund Pendleton
or George Mason or Patrick Henry.
The draft of a constitution that Jefferson made before the middle of June
and sent to the convention by George Wythe was not considered as a
whole, for the ostensible reason that it arrived too late. To Wythe himself
this seemed a sufficient explanation. The weather in Willams-burg was hot,
the delegates were tired, and a draft for which George Mason was chiefly
responsible had been accepted by the committee and presented on the floor.
The only feasible procedure with regard to Jefferson's draft seemed to be to
draw upon it for purposes of amendment. 3 That the delegates were willing
to do this and to adopt his preamble (containing charges against the King)
practically as he had written it, was all he could have reasonably expected.
What the result would have been if he had been able to throw his plan into
the hopper at the beginning and to urge it in person is a matter of sheer
speculation. The fact is that George Mason, not he, became the major
architect of the new government and that he was not satisfied with the
results. The differences between his draft and that of the committee did not
seem great at first glance, and a first glance was all that most of the
delegates gave to Jefferson's document, but some of these differences were
important.
The convention adopted a Declaration of Rights before it did a constitution,
thus establishing a theoretical foundation in advance. Jefferson himself
soon did much the same thing by placing the philosophical section at the
beginning of the Declaration of Independence. His countrymen, who had
expressed the rights of men as human beings and not merely as
Englishmen, had made history. The Virginia Declaration of Rights, often
incorrectly called the Bill of Rights, exercised great influence both at home
and abroad and was regarded in later years as an epoch-making document.
Said Lafayette: "The era of the American Revolution, which one can regard
as the beginning of a new2 Edmund Randolph, in Va. Mag., XLIV, 43. 8 Wythe to Jefferson, July
27, 1776 (LC, 2:284).
social order for the entire world, is, properly speaking, the era of
declarations of rights." *
Jefferson was always proud that the first notable American paper of the sort
emanated from his own Commonwealth. Certain of its articles did not go
quite as far as he desired. For example, freedom of religion was only
vaguely described in it, whereas in his proposed constitution he included
freedom from the requirement to frequent or maintain any religious
institution. He already favored the disestablishment of the Church and he
soon drew a better statement of the ideal of religious freedom. As far as it
went, however, he thought the Declaration of Rights admirable and he
regarded its chief author, George Mason, as a sincere republican and a man
of the first order of wisdom.
In Jefferson's opinion the new Commonwealth had the first requirement of
a good government: it was based on a sound doctrine of human rights. The
next question was just how the Declaration of Rights was to be interpreted
and applied. The immediate answer was given in the constitution that was
adopted and the machinery that was actually set up. The convention was
dominated by moderate men, not radicals, and they had no desire to usher
in a political and social revolution. The plantation aristocrats had led the
revolt against Great Britain, with some dissent on the part of extreme
conservatives; and, having brought about this break, they sought to
maintain their own political and economic position. They were willing to
do lip service to human rights and as a group they were humane men, but
most of them would probably have been content to restore local conditions
as they had existed before 1763, when the British government changed its
policy. Jefferson himself was no wild radical in practice, but he looked
forward, not backward, and was more determined than the other leaders to
carry his ideas about human rights to their logical conclusion.
This determination was not strikingly manifest in the proposals about the
structure of the state government that he included in his draft of a
constitution, for these were almost if not quite as conservative as the ones
actually adopted. Referring to the entire era of the American Revolution, he
afterwards said: 'in truth, the abuses of monarchv had so much filled all thespace of political contemplation, that we imagined everything republican
which was not monarchy. We had nor yet penetrated to the mother
principle, that 'governments are republican only in proportion as they
embody the will of the people and execute it.' Hence, our first constitutions
had really no leading principles in them." : The course of development was
natural enough and really called for
*Memoires (1837), II, 305.
8 To Samuel Kercheval, July 12, 1816 (Fold, X, 37).
no apology. Like the other state governments established in this period, that
of Virginia grew directly from the one that already existed, and he himself
had no strong inclination to fly in the face of experience at the time.
What his countrymen actually did was to substitute for the royal governor
one who was elected by the Assembly and, in the reaction against executive
authority, largely to shear him of power. The same sort of thing soon
happened in other provinces, and Jefferson may have been adjudged
conservative in wanting to grant to the governor a larger share of the
appointive power. The other major existing agencies were continued in
slightly different form. The old Governor's Council had served in both an
executive and legislative capacity. The convention accordingly provided
for an executive Council of State, chosen by the Assembly, and an upper
legislative house elected by the people, which, following Jefferson's
suggestion, they called the Senate. He himself had no objection to a long
term for senators. The Assembly selected the judges as well as the
governor, and the net result was that it dominated the government.
Jefferson did not intend to go quite that far, for he wanted the governor,
whom he called "the administrator," to appoint many of the judges, and he
favored a higher degree of executive and judicial independence. In his plan
the legislative control centered less in the Assembly as a whole than in the
more representative lower house, to which he assigned the election of both
the governor and the Senate. 6
The degree in which the new government was democratic or representative
depended less on its external form than on the provisions for the election of
the members of the legislature. It was in connection with the basis rather
than the structure of the government that Jefferson showed himself to be
more forward-looking than any of the other contemporary leaders, and anoutstanding advocate of popular rule on the basis of just representation. He
did not advocate the abandonment of property qualifications for voting, but
he favored extending the suffrage to freeholders possessing a quarter of an
acre in town or twenty-five acres in the country, and coupled with this the
proposal that fifty acres of land be granted to every person of full age who
did not already have that many. Under existing conditions the result would
have been practically universal white male suffrage. Also, he would have
forbidden the granting of free land to others. Thus he sought to extend
economic opportunity and to lessen special privilege. Furthermore, he
6 Drafts of Jefferson's proposed constitution in Ford, II, 7-30; admirable
discussion by D. R. Anderson, Am. Hist. Rev., XXI, 750-754, replying to
W. C. Ford in Nation, LI, 107-109; excellent account of general alignment
in Abernethy, Western Lands, ch. 11, esp. pp. 158-161.
recommended that representation be based on the distribution of voters,
that is, practically on the population, and not on the county-unit system
which was continued. His desire to bring about a more equitable system of
representation may be explained in part by his residence in the growing
Piedmont region, which was discriminated against, but it was rooted in the
conviction that the overrepresented Tidewater was the seat of privilege and
unjust power.
Jefferson took little pride in his proposals to this convention, for these
afterwards seemed conservative and he doubted if he himself had
penetrated to the true republican principle at the time. But no other leader
in Virginia then went so far as he in the advocacv of popular representative
government. Until the eve of the Civil War the constitutional struggles in
the Commonwealth centered in the questions of the suffrage and the basis
of representation, and at the very outset he ranged himself on the
democratic side. Also, he proposed that the importation of slaves should
cease, and he saw no place for an Established Church in a free society.
George Wythe said the system that was set up in Jefferson's absence
required reformation and that he was the man who must effect it. T What
was established was in reality an aristocratic republic, bottomed on
inheritance. It is true that Patrick Henry, the popular idol who was still
regarded as an upstart by some of the wealthiest planters, was elected
governor, but the ruling group as a whole viewed him without alarm. 8 To
say that he had been a radical in imperial relations would be to beg thequestion. His personal power lay chiefly in the realm of the emotions and,
although he had a keen sense of public opinion, he had no domestic
program worthy of the name. Furthermore, he \\ ;is indolent by nature and
during the year 1776 his health was bad. His physical incapacity threw an
added burden on John Page, who received the highest vote for the Council
of State and became its president. The latter could be counted on to remain
an agreeable gentleman while dealing with vexatious routine, but unlike his
friend Jefferson he had not wholly emancipated his mind from his inherited
privilege. In domestic matters he must be characterized as a conservative
The supremely important legislative department hid nor been organized as
yet, but anvone could have predicted that Edmund Pendleton, who had
fallen heir to the position formerly occupied by Peyton Randolph, would be
elected speaker of the new I louse of Delegates when it assembled in the
fall. No one symbolized better than he the
7 To Jefferson, July 27, 1776 (LC, 2:284).
8 His election has'been attributed to a tacit alliance with the conservatives
Abemethy, Western Lands, p. 158.
ruling group, for this delightful man and highly effective leader clung to old
ways and feared drastic change. There were others of more liberal temper,
like George Mason, who had been very prominent of late and might be
induced to share the public councils again, but if there was to be a
reformer's role Jefferson was much the likeliest candidate for it. Both by
inheritance and association he belonged to the ruling group, but he already
envisaged a more rational and progressive society and was eager to move
toward it.
During the summer of 1776 he was deeply concerned lest his influence in
Virginia would be weakened by his absence in Congress. He had been
elected for a term of one year which would expire in August, and by the
middle of June he had concluded that he did not care to be re-elected. He
was already a strong believer in the principle of rotation in office, anyway.
He expressed his personal wishes to his neighbor Dr. George Gilmer, who
was acting in his stead in Williamsburg, and also wrote to Pendleton, the
president of the convention. The second letter had not been received when
the ballot for delegates in Congress took place, and Gilmer was absent on
that day. Jefferson's plea for relief was presented by Edmund Randolph butthe convention re-elected him, nevertheless.
He might have viewed this disregard of his wishes as a compliment, but as
a matter of fact he was greatly disturbed by the bald report of the vote
which he got in Philadelphia about July 1. He learned that the delegation
had been reduced from seven to five; that Benjamin Harrison and Carter
Braxton, who were in Congress with him, had been dropped entirely, and
that his own name stood next to last on the list. He naturally presumed that
the existing delegation had been discredited. "It is a painful situation to be
300 miles from one's country, and thereby opened to secret assassination
without a possibility of self-defence," he wrote to his friend William
Fleming. "I am willing to hope nothing of this kind has been done in my
case, but yet I cannot be easy." 9
Afterwards he learned that the reduction in the size of the delegation was
owing chiefly to Patrick Henry and that the political maneuvers were not
directed against him. His friend Fleming assured him that the decline in his
vote was attributable solely to the report of his letter to Gilmer, that
otherwise scarcely anybody would have voted against him, and that he was
as high in the estimation of his countrymen as ever. 10
9 Force, 4 ser., VI, 1582, giving vote; E. Randolph to Jefferson, June 23,
1776 (LC, 2:260); Jefferson to Fleming, July 1, 1776 (Ford, II, 41).
10 Fleming to Jefferson, July 27, 1776 (LC, 2:283).
Numerous stories had been circulated about Braxton and Harrison, and
some may also have been told about Jefferson, but Flemings statement in
regard to his standing is convincing. There was considerable intrigue at the
convention but he was definitely aligned with no faction. He dwelt in the
lofty realm of ideas and was on the best of personal terms with leaders of
every complexion. The election of delegates to Congress took place before
his proposed constitution for Virginia had been presented, but that
document was probably not regarded by many people as dangerously
radical. He had not aroused the serious disquietude of the conservatives.
He did not want his vote reduced if he was voted for at all; nobody would
have, and he was more sensitive than most men. His chief immediate
concern, however, was to get out of Congress. The reasons which he gave
to Edmund Pendleton were personal, not political, and they were generallyregarded as sufficient though no formal action was taken on them until the
Assembly met in the fall. This is what he said:
... I am sorry the situation of my domestic affairs, renders it indispensably
necessary that I should solicit the substitution of some other person here, in
my room. The delicacy of the House will not require me to enter minutely
into the private causes which render this necessary. I trust they will be
satisfied. I would not urge it again, were it not unavoidable. I shall with
cheerfulness continue my duty here till the expiration of our year — by
which time I hope it will be convenient for my successor to attend. 11
His friends were in no doubt about the "private causes." His wife was
staying with Francis and Elizabeth Eppes at the Forest until he could return
home. He did not get as many letters from that quarter as he wanted, but
every one he did get brought him such an account of her health that he
found it painful to remain in Philadelphia. He had promised to stay until
August 11, and he actually stayed about three weeks longer. The reason
was that neither Braxton nor Harrison had the legal right to start another
term, as he had; and they did not hesitate to go home when they wanted to.
He had to wait until Richard Henry Lee arrived, for otherwise Virginia
would have been without a quorum. 12
n Burk, Hist, of Va. } Vol. IV, App. 13; thence taken by Ford and
published with minor changes, II, 61. Both Girardin, who prepared this
volume of Burk, and Ford date it July 1776, and it may have been a second
letter. It s<>, the- rettOOl were almost certainly the same as in the one read
to the convention after the cle^ of June 20, 1776.
"To Page, July 20, 1776; to Eppes, July 23, 1776 (Ford, II, 71-73).
Meanwhile, he was busy enough. Throughout his service as a delegate he
gave close attention to queries and commissions which came from his
"country." These included such diverse matters as the supply of salt, about
which he could do little or nothing; the new state seal, for which he sent
suggestions; and the disputed boundary with Pennsylvania, on which the
Virginia delegates vainly invited conference. For Congress he helped draw
up rules of procedure, anticipating in some degree his important service as
a parliamentarian twenty years later; he received and recorded numerous
depositions dealing with the sad course of events in Canada; and he shared
with his congenial colleague John Adams the thankless task of proposing arevision of the articles of war. Most of this was tedious business but it was
conscientiously attended to. 13
The collaboration of the famous trio of the Declaration of Independence
was continued in another matter which had no immediate public results but
is of considerable interest in itself. On July 4, 1776, Franklin, Jefferson, and
Adams were appointed as a committee to bring in a device for the seal of
the United States, and from their deliberations that summer two historic
mottoes emerged. The design recommended by them in August was by
Pierre Eugene Du Simitiere, a Swiss artist living in Philadelphia from
whom Jefferson also procured a design for Virginia; but all three of the
committeemen made suggestions and they approved a modified version of
Franklin's for the "other side" of the seal of all the states. The motto,
"Rebellion to tyrants is obedience to God," was in Franklin's proposals.
Jefferson liked it so much that he added it to Du Simitiere's design for
Virginia and, as has already been said, adopted it at some time himself,
stamping it on the wax with which he sealed his own letters. He had no
doubt of the appropriateness of the saying at that hour. 14
The over-elaborate design of Du Simitiere, which fortunately was not
accepted by Congress, contained an even more famous motto,
13 Report of committee to draw up rules for Congress, July 10, 1776,
Papers Cont. Cong., 23:19-22; comment of Adams on revision of articles of
war in "Autobiography," Aug. 19, 1776, Works, III, 68; on Pennsylvania
boundary question, Ford, II, (A-66.
u Jour. Cont. Cong., V, 517-518 (July 4, 1776) and 689-691 (Aug. 20,
1776), the latter containing lengthy editorial note with quotations;
suggestions of Franklin and Jefferson, LC, 2:291; Coat of Arms of the
States of America designed by Du Simitiere, LC, 2:230. The coat of arms
for Virginia is in LC, 2:291. Into this Jefferson wrote "Rebellion to tyrants
is obedience to God," with an alternative, "Rex est qui regem non habet."
His own seal is well reproduced in B. J. Lossing, Pictorial Field-Book of
the Revolution (N. Y., 1852), II, 548. The motto is attributed to Franklin by
Randall, III, 585-586, but see Jefferson's letter to Edward Everett, Feb. 24,
1823. L. & B., XV, 415. For the latest full discussion see J. P. Boyd, ed.,
Papers of Thomas Jefferson, I (1950), 677-679.
"E Pluribus Unum," and this was adopted at a later time. It was taken,presumably by the artist, from the motto of the Gentleman's Magazine. As
used by the London periodical during the generation before the Revolution
it meant that one magazine was made up from many newspapers, and the
thought of applying it to the American federation of states was an
inspiration. As a member of the committee Jcfl\ shares the credit of
sponsorship, and both mottoes reflected his sentiments, but at this time and
place he and his colleagues were stressing "Rebellion to Tyrants" more.
This was a period of unpropitious military events but Jefferson expected a
brief war. Shortly before the adoption of the Declaration he said that the
opinion was universal that the trial would be severe only during the next
three months. 16 From George Wythe and others he learned of the
movements of Lord Dunmore, who was still hovering off the Virginia
coast; but he had nothing but contempt for the Governor and was confident
that the Americans could never be conquered, though they probably would
have to give up places lying on the water's edge. 16
He was less hopeful about the working-out of an acceptable framework of
government for the federation, which was a far more difficult undertaking
than framing the constitution of a single state. He kept notes on part of the
debate on the Articles of Confederation. 17 These dealt particularly with
the crucial questions of quotas of contribution and the manner of voting in
Congress. It was proposed that state contributions should be based on
population, and the question arose whether or not slaves should be counted.
On this issue Northern delegates voted in the affirmative and Southern in
the negative, the latter being outvoted. Jefferson did not enter into the
debate.
On the other question the clash was between the large and small states, the
former favoring a vote based on population, and the latter an equal voice
for every state. In this dilemma Jefferson proposed a plan privately to John
Adams, and he recalled it to the latter seven] months later when the
Confederation was again on the carpet and the situation seemed desperate.
It was "that any proposition might be negatived by the representatives of a
majority of the people of America, or by a majority of the colonics of
America;" and he believed that this plan would safeguard the interests of
both large states and small. At the time, however, his contribution to the
cause of union seemed to be
15 To William Fleming, Julv I, 1776; Ford, II. 41.16 From Wythe July ^27, 1776, LC, 2:284; to Randolph fAug.-Scpt.
MHS, 1:49.
17 Ford, I, 38-47.
negative, for as a spokesman of Virginia he made it perfectly clear that his
State would not now agree that the Confederation should dispose of lands
that Virginia claimed. 18
It was this question of western lands, more than anything else, which
afterwards delayed the ratification of the Articles of Confederation; and
Jefferson himself manifested no spirit of narrow provincialism in later
years when he formulated policies of western expansion. For both of these
reasons the attitude he took in 1776 is a matter of considerable historical
interest. The best clue to it is probably to be found, not in his local
patriotism, nor in any abstract doctrines of state rights, but in the actualities
of the land question itself. In his mind this was not primarily a question of
rivalry between one state and another, for he claimed that he was
indifferent to that and at a later time the vast extent of Virginia's domain
made it relatively easy for him to be generous in spirit. His major concern
was not for the land but for the people who settled on it; and at this time he
believed that the interests of the pioneers could be better safeguarded by
states than by Congress, which seemed more susceptible to the pressure of
speculative land companies. He was deeply sympathetic with squatters, but
had little patience with absentee groups who came seeking special favors.
What he most relied on for the protection of individuals was local self-
government, and he was already on record as favoring the early
development of it in Virginia's outlying lands; but until he could be
reassured about the attitude of Congress toward the small landholders he
preferred to depend on the states to protect them — particularly on his own
State, for he had good reason to believe that he could be influential there.
At this stage he did not stand out as specially local or particularistic; almost
all his colleagues were that, to a considerable degree. He was willing to
concede much to the cause of union, and if he minimized the military
dangers so did practically everybody else. But it was characteristic of him
to lay major stress on human values and to think in long-range terms. He
had no doubt that in the states, not in Congress, one could do most for men
as men. This was the most important public reason why he himself was soanxious to go home.
While he waited impatiently for Richard Henry Lee to arrive, he discussed
with Wythe and Pendleton the problem of developing the legal institutions
of his Commonwealth. The latter suggested that he
18 On his plan, see letter to Adams, May 16, 1777 (Ford, II, 130). For his
statement of Virginia's position about lands, see Jour. Continental Cong.,
VI, 1083, and VI, 1077. See also Jefferson to Pendleton,'Aug. 13, 1776
(Ford, II, 80). His general attitude is well discussed by A. M. Lewis, in
"Jefferson and the Kentucky Pioneers," an article scheduled for early
publication in the Miss. Valley Hist. Rev., to which I am especially
indebted.
become a judge, and was unwilling to accept all the reasons Jefferson
assigned for declining. Pendleton could not assent to his being considered
unqualified, but, as he added, "I readily do to your usefulness in the
representative body, where, having the pleasure of Mrs. Jefferson's
company, I hope you'll get cured of your wish to retire so early in life from
the memory of man, and exercise your talents for the nurture of our new
constitution." 19 This was precisely what Jefferson purposed to do. He
would not withdraw from the public service but he would enjoy his wife's
company; he would enter the House of Delegates, and he would nurture the
new constitution. His ideas on the latter subject, however, were more
advanced and more constructive than those of Pendleton or anybody else.
In late August he wound up his affairs in the Quaker City. He reimbursed
Mrs. Nelson, wife of his fellow delegate, for sundry articles bought by her
for Mrs. Jefferson; he settled accounts for his two horses and bought guitar
strings; he purchased a hat for himself and another for Colonel Thomas
Mann Randolph; he paid Mrs. Graff in full for his lodgings. 20 On
September 3 he left Philadelphia and, proceeding by Lancaster, Frederick,
and Leesburg, he arrived six days later at Monticello.
About a month after that he received notice from John Hancock that he had
been appointed a commissioner to the Court of France, to serve with
Benjamin Franklin and Silas Deane. Under other circumstances he would
have been strongly tempted to accept this confidential appointment. He had
previously told Franklin he would like to go with him, and Franklin
afterwards very much wished he had had Jefferson's companionship insteadof that of his colleague Arthur Lee. But, as Jefferson wrote to the President
of Congress, circumstances peculiar to the situation of his family
compelled him to decline an alluring mission. The trouble was that he
could neither leave them behind nor take them with him. 21 Europe would
have to wait.
Public service could be adjusted to the exigencies of domestic life far more
easily in Virginia than in France or Pennsylvania. When the Assembly met
in October, George Wythe, who was now attending Congress and had his
own wife with him, made available to the JcfTcr-sons his house in
Williamsburg. Accordingly, the senior delegate from Albemarle took his
lady with him to the place which he ! ttcn
19 From Pendleton, Aug. 10, 1776; LC, 2:289.
20 Account Book, esp. Aug. 27-Scpt. 3, 1776.
21 Resolutions of Congress, Sept. 26. 1776, Hid letter of Hrocock, Sept.
10, 1776* MHS; Jefferson's reply. Oct. 11, 1776 (Ford, II, 91-92); Franklin
to Jdfa Dec. 21, 1777, Yale Univ., courtesy J. P.
visited in student days. 22 Judging by the doctor's bills he paid for her that
fall she was not wholly recovered, but at least she was near him. Never
again during her lifetime did he go so far away as Philadelphia. He was not
sacrificing his career on the altar of domestic necessity, however. The local
role he had chosen was admirably suited to his talents, and in playing it he
performed some of the most significant of all his public services.
22 From Wythe, Nov. 18, 1776; LC, 2:313-314.
CxviiO
The Way of a Legislator: Freeing the Land
1776-1779
THE years during which Jefferson was a legislator in his own
Commonwealth comprised his most creative period as a statesman during
the American Revolution, and there was no part of his entire career that he
afterwards looked back upon with greater satisfaction. The incompleteautobiography he wrote in old age is a generally modest and unpretentious
document, but deep pride shines through his account of his services to
Virginia during the critical early years of independence, when, as he
reflected, he was striving to eradicate every fiber of aristocracy and to lay
the foundation for a.truly republican government. 1 Never were his
purposes clearer nor his motives purer, and at no other time, perhaps, was
the essence of his philosophy and statesmanship so unmistakably revealed.
No wonder he looked back on this period with the emotions of nostalgia.
His own pride was in his program as a whole rather than his immediate
accomplishments, but some distinction must be made between them.
Strictly speaking, his period of legislative activity in the State of Virginia
lasted less than three years — from the time that he took his seat in the
House of Delegates in October, 1776, until he became governor at the
beginning of June, 1779. Most of his most important proposals were still
pending at the latter date; some of them were afterwards adopted through
the agency of other men when he himself was viewing other scenes; and
some of them were never adopted at all. He was pre-eminently a political
architect, looking to the future, not a short-range reformer; and the plans
that were still in the blueprint
1 Ford, I, 48-69, especially 68-69. Owing to the careful records he kept, he
made few serious errors of fact in this later account, but greater reliance
must be placed on contemporary records.
stage when he left the House of Delegates have contributed far more to his
immortal renown than the specific measures of his that were adopted in the
triennium.
This is certainly not to say that in the years 1776-1779 the deputy from
Albemarle was a prophet without honor in his own Commonwealth. A
mere list of the motions he made, the bills he drafted, and the committees
he served on in his first session is an index of his prominence. It would be
too much to claim, as often has been claimed by his later admirers, that he
dominated the legislative scene; but unquestionably he assumed a position
of great influence at the outset and largely maintained it during the sessions
that followed. This he was able to do because he had effected in his own
person a rare blend of the qualities of a prophet and those of a practical
statesman. The prophetic role appears the greater in the perspective of
history, and his contemporaries could hardly have failed to glimpse it. Tothem, however, he also appeared, and appeared much more frequently, as
one who was engaged in the humdrum tasks of legislation.
To the outward eye he was far from being an impractical visionary. He was
ceaselessly industrious and bore his full share of legislative routine. The
details of such activities as drawing bills for the raising of additional
battalions of infantry and for changing the value of copper coin, and of
such services as reviewing the action of a county committee which had
fined an unintentional violator of the continental Association, need not
concern us here. 2 It is important, however, to note his prominence in these
day-to-day affairs and his recognized leadership in matters of legislative
prerogative and procedure. 8
He generally managed to steer clear of factional quarrels in which issues
were chiefly personal. The line between progressives and conservatives in
the Virginia government frequently shifted and often was indistinct. He
was more consistently on the progressive side than any other prominent
leader, and in fundamental thinking he stood farthest to the left. To a
notable degree, nonetheless, he continued to maintain cordial personal
relations with all groups and to retain their confidence. Thus in 1777, when
it was alleged that the conservative Harrison faction was trying to legislate
the more pro-
2 Illustrations drawn from first session; Ford, II, 109-116, 118-119.
8 The latter may be illustrated by the part he played during his second year
in a disagreement between the two houses about the course to be followed
in making appropriations. Two reports of the conference committee which
he presented are given in Ford, II, 135-142; see Journal of the House of
Delegates of Virginia (hereafter cited as Delegates, Journal) Dec. 4, 1777;
Jan. 8, 1778; Jan. 23, 1778, This matter was still pending at the end of the
session.
gressive Richard Henry Lee out of the Continental Congress by limiting
length of service there, it was Jefferson who was asked to draw the bill. In
doing so he followed his own previously expressed convictions about the
desirability of rotation in office, and he appears not to have offended Lee. 4
An even better illustration of his amiability can be drawn from the
continuing cordiality of his personal relations with Pendleton, whom he
sharply opposed on important questions of policy. Pendleton himselfdeserves much of the credit for this, however; he never ceased to be a
gentleman.
The strength of Jefferson's position at this stage did not lie in political
organization. It lay in his personal effectiveness, his conciliatory manners,
his enduring friendships, his disinterested patriotism, and the intrinsic
forcefulness of his ideas. He carried with him to the House of Delegates a
more definite and comprehensive program of reform than anyone else had
formulated, but he realized that certain desirable ends could not be
immediately attained and was willing to be patient. It seems unlikely that
he was as deeply disturbed about the defects of the constitution while a
member of the dominating legislative department as he was during and
after his governorship; but even if he had been, he was convinced that a
specially chosen convention was necessary for a revision of the frame of
government. The prospect of such a convention became more not less
remote as the war went on. 5 Accordingly, he had to content himself with
operating within the existing framework.
He judged, however, that the general spirit of the times was more favorable
to political change than it was likely to be after the military conflict was
over, and he tried to take full advantage of every opportunity to translate
human rights into legal forms. He was a long-range optimist and had a high
degree of general confidence in human nature, but he was never disposed to
leave human rights to chance. In regard to political rulers he was a
consistent pessimist, for he was convinced that if left to themselves they
would become tyrannical and corrupt. Also, he was convinced that
rebellions and convulsions were inevitable if crying abuses were not
corrected. This was not pessimism precisely, but it reflected a more acute
consciousness of wrong and injustice than is common among men,
particularly among men who themselves are privileged.
4 For Jefferson's draft of May 12, 1777, see Ford, II, 128-129. He would
have limited continuous service to two years. In the bill that was adopted
the limitation was made three years; Hening, IX, 299. In the October
session, 1777, the bill was amended, so that no person should be eligible to
serve more than three years in any term of six; Hening, IX, 388.
6 See his comment in Notes on Virginia (Ford, III, 229).
Most of his local contemporaries were more complacent and, unlike him,some of them were greedy; but it was not because of conspicuous lack of
integrity or patriotism on their part that he raised and bore forward the
standard of enlightened liberalism during these years. In general he thought
well of his colleagues, but he was acutely aware of the dangers of apathy
and he believed in striking while the iron is hot.
Somewhat later, in his Notes on Virginia, he said:
... It can never be too often repeated, that the time for fixing every essential
right on a legal basis is while our rulers are honest, and ourselves united.
From the conclusion of this war we shall be going down hill. It will not
then be necessary to resort every moment to the people for support. They
will be forgotten therefore, and their rights disregarded. They will forget
themselves, but in the sole faculty of making money, and will never think
of uniting to effect a due respect for their rights. The shackles, therefore,
which shall not be knocked off at the conclusion of this war, will remain on
us long, will be made heavier and heavier, till our rights shall revive or
expire in convulsion. 6
As a political strategist Jefferson sought to take advantage of the general
spirit of a time when conservatives had not become deeply alarmed, and
when lip service at least was rendered the liberal and humane ideas of the
Enlightenment. Also, as a legislative tactician he recognized the importance
of seizing the initiative. This is one reason why his first session was such a
busy one.
His earliest recorded action could hardly have been termed radical, though
it was typical of him in its emphasis on legal regularity: he asked leave to
bring in a bill for the establishment of courts of justice. 7 A measure of this
sort might have been expected to appeal to men of conservative temper,
concerned to restore orderly processes, but the immediate opening of all the
courts was opposed by landed gentlemen on other grounds. Numerous
planters were included among the debtors who feared legal action at a time
when tobacco was almost valueless as a commodity. Jefferson himself was
aware of the difficulty and became reconciled to the enforced delay. He had
to wait for the opening of most of the courts. 8 He also had to wait for
6 Ford, III, 266, in the section on religion.
''Delegates, Journal, Oct. 11, 1776; Ford, I, 48.8 As Ford notes, Jefferson's statement in his Autobiography about later
events is erroneous. It amounts to a telescoping of the developments of at
least two years. He was the first-named of a committee of ten to draw the
bill, but on Nov. 1, 1776, as shown by the Journal, the committee was
instructed to divide the subject into five different bills. In this session
certain acts were passed that dealt with the
f
THE WAY OF A LEGISLATOR 251
the removal of the seat of government from Williamsburg to a more central
place. His bill calling for this was ostensibly designed for the convenience
of the members and citizens. But it bore a progressive stamp, for it was
primarily a move against Tidewater dominance. Interest combined with
inertia to defeat it, a month after he introduced it. 9
During the first week of his first session, however, the stage was set for the
most important of his immediate activities as a legislator and reformer. The
date, October 12, 1776, was significant in his history, for on that day the
House of Delegates gave leave for the preparation of two bills. One of
these was to enable tenants in fee tail to convey their lands in fee simple,
while the other called for the general revision of the laws. Of the two
actions the latter was the more important. As a result of it he was enabled
to set forth in due course a long-range program emphasizing humane
criminal laws, complete religious freedom, and the diffusion of education,
and thus to appear on the page of history as a major prophet of intellectual
liberty and human enlightenment. But it was his bill against entails,
introduced on October 14, that he afterwards described as the first blow
against the entrenched aristocracy. He regarded it as a radical action and
always prided himself on being the wielder of the ax. 10
His primary objection to the continuance of the old ruling group in power
was not that it had ruled badly, for, as contemporary governments went, it
had not. What he most disliked about the existing system was its essential
irrationality and injustice. In the light of history the Virginia aristocracy
was notable for its sense of responsibility, but Jefferson believed that it
could not long maintain its high
places of holding county courts, and a court of admiralty was set up;Hening, IX, 202-206, 227-233, 242-243. On Nov. 25 he presented for the
committee bills for establishing a court of appeals and a high court of
chancery, but on Dec. 13 both were referred to the next session. The major
actions in regard to the courts were taken at the October session, 1777,
except for the court of appeals which was not established until still another
year; Hening, IX, 368-369, 388-399, 401-419, 522-525.
9 Delegates, Journal, Oct. 14, Nov. 11, 1776; Ford, II, 106-109.
10 To John Adams, Oct. 28, 1813; Ford, IX, 427. From the bare record in
the Journal, Oct. 12, one cannot be sure that Jefferson in person asked leave
to prepare this bill, as he afterwards claimed; Ford, I, 49. The committee
consisted of Bland, Jefferson, Starke, and Bullitt, and from the order it
might be supposed that Bland was the mover. The bill was presented by
Jefferson on Oct. 14, however, and he was undoubtedly the leader from that
time on. He was also the second-named member of the committee to
prepare a bill for the revision of the laws, and it was Bland, not he, who
introduced it on Oct. 15. It would have been like Jefferson to get somebody
else to make the original motion, but his later prominence in the matter
leads to the strong supposition that he stimulated the action in this case.
sense of public obligation on its existing foundation. The trouble was that it
was based, not on merit, but on inherited privilege. It was this basic
privilege that he sought to undermine for the benefit of the future. He had
no desire to reduce government to the dull level of mediocrity, but he did
try to restore what he called the natural order of freedom and to give talent
and virtue, which were scattered through all ranks of society, a chance to
rise. His purposes may now be regarded as democratic, and he himself
described them in current terms of natural philosophy, but they may also be
thought of as the purposes of a man who joined faith in human beings with
common sense.
He had already manifested deep interest in the fundamental question of the
distribution and tenure of land. He was thoroughly aware that the granting
of large tracts* to influential men during colonial times had furthered the
development of great estates, and that the power of the ruling group was
based on these. He was opposed to the granting of more acres to persons
who already had them in abundance; he wanted land for the landless. He
had proposed to the convention of 1776 that men who did not own fifty
acres should receive grants enabling them to attain that acreage, and thatnobody else be entitled to a free grant. He had shown great sympathy for
the squatters in outlying districts. He was sure they would settle the land in
spite of everybody; he favored making grants to them in small quantities,
rather than sales; he wanted them to hold theii lands without having to
make even a token payment to the State like the old quitrent to the King.
He had already recommended the prevention of irresponsible purchases
from the Indians, such as had been made by western land companies. 11 He
himself was not appreciably involved in western speculation. He had
inherited from his father a share in the Loyal Company, in which his
neighbor Dr. Thomas Walker was the moving spirit, but nothing came of it.
He afterwards said that, with trivial exceptions, he never was interested in a
foot of land off the waters of the James River. 12 Many of his
contemporaries saw in the vast unallotted domain of the Commonwealth an
opportunity to build up and perpetuate individual fortunes, but he saw in it
the opportunity to create a stronger society of small farmers.
In the course of his legislative career he concerned himself with the land
question in all its more important phases, and he viewed all phases with the
same eyes; but the victories over landed privilege
11 See especially his proposals to the convention (Ford, II, 25) and his
letter to Pendleton, Aug. 13, 1776 (Ford, II, 78-81), replying to Pendleton's
of Aug. 3 (LC, 2:286). See also letter from Pendleton, Aug. 26, 1776 (LC,
2:296).
12 To Madison, Nov 11, 1784 (Ford, IV, 3).
that he remembered most vividly in other years were the abolition of entails
and primogeniture. The two reforms were widely separated in time, since
one of them was effected immediately and the other was not finally brought
about until nearly ten years later, but he coupled them in his own mind. The
terms themselves are relatively unfamiliar in the twentieth century, and
Jefferson thought them already archaic in the last quarter of the eighteenth.
They signified artificial methods of restricting inheritance, and were
objectionable to him on rational no less than social grounds.
It must not be assumed that all Virginia estates were entailed: Peter
Jefferson's was not, and even in Tidewater the practice was by no means
universal. Nor should it be supposed that they descended necessarily to the
eldest son, for this they did only in the absence of a will, and it was unusualfor a man of large property to die intestate. Randolph Jefferson had been
provided for, as well as Thomas. However, the entailing of land was
permitted by the English law which was extended to the Colony, and by
Virginia law it was further extended to the slaves annexed to the land. Thus
a wealthy planter could bequeath all or any part of his estate to his son and
the heirs of the latter's body begotten, or to the heirs begotten by a
particular marriage, or he could restrict its transmission in some other
special way. Such an entail, once made, was protected by law and could be
defeated only by an Act of Assembly. 13 Numerous petitions for the
docking of entails were presented at sessions of the House of Burgesses
before the Revolution. Jefferson himself presented one on behalf of his
wife, asking permission to sell certain entailed lands and to entail others
instead. Such petitions were commonly granted, but the procedure was
troublesome, and wealthy planters had frequent occasion to regret the
restrictions on the disposition of property which dead hands had imposed.
This was probably one of the reasons why Jefferson's bill for the abolition
of entails was passed so promptly. Only those who clung most tenaciously
to ancient establishments strongly objected to the removal of this relic of
mediaevalism after it was seriously proposed by a forward-looking man.
Among these traditionalists he named Pendleton as his chief opponent.
According to his later account this
13 See comments on the Virginia situation by St. George Tucker in his
edition of Blackstone's Commentaries (Philadelphia, 1803), III, 119 7Z.
Most writers on the subject until recently have laid too much emphasis on
the legal forms and too little on actual practice. Clarence R. Keim,
"Influence of Primogeniture and Entail in the Development of Virginia,"
University of Chicago Abstracts of Theses, Humanistic Series, V (1928),
289-292, concludes that their importance has been overestimated.
adroit parliamentarian, finding that he could not maintain the general
principle of entails, proposed and almost carried an amendment which
would have left to the landholder himself the choice whether he should
convey his lands in fee simple or fee tail. The important clash was probably
between him and Pendleton on this issue, as he remembered, but the
contemporary record shows that he himself introduced a moderate
proposal, much like the one he afterwards attributed to Pendleton. Then,
apparently growing bolder as he felt out the opposition, he proposed and
carried amendments which abolished entails altogether. Thus Jefferson notonly simplified an exceedingly complicated situation; by the same stroke he
facilitated economic change and furthered social mobility. 14
He made his successful attack on primogeniture later in connection with the
general revision of the laws, when he drew a bill directing the course of
descents. 15 He was elsewhere when this was finally adopted, so his
struggle can only have been in the committee. He said that Pendleton again
opposed him, yielding ground amiably when forced to, and finally urging
that at least a double portion be allowed the eldest son. 16 Even after the
passage of Jefferson's bill there was nothing to prevent anyone from
making just that provision by will; and he may have exaggerated the effects
of this particular reform. A famous foreign commentator on American
democracy, Alexis de Tocqueville, afterwards pointed out that the very
existence of a law of partible inheritance deprived fathers of the inclination
to discriminate unfairly between children. 17 Even in this region of
plantation seats, however, such inclination had been far from general.
Jefferson did not destroy the country gentry as a group with the blows of
his mighty ax, and there is insufficient reason to believe that he wanted to,
but he did remove legal vestiges of Old World aristocracy.
The abolition of entails, unlike that of primogeniture, occurred
immediately, but it appears to have aroused relatively little resentment. 18
One arch-conservative, Landon Carter, expressed himself about it violently
in a contemporary letter to George Washington which is
14 Later account in Autobiography, Ford, I, 49-50; drafts of his bill of Oct.
14 and amendments of Oct. 18, 1776, Ibid., II, 103-105; bill as passed by
the Delegates on Oct. 23 and accepted by the Senate on Nov. 1, in Hening,
IX, 226-227. It should be noted that Pendleton was not on the committee.
15 The Report of the revisors will be discussed in the following chapter.
This bill comprised chapter 20 of it; as adopted in the October session,
1785, it is in Hening, XII, 138-140.
16 Ford, I, 60.
17 P. Bradley, ed., Democracy in America, I, 49-50, and ch. 3, passim. 18
Lingley, Transition in Virginia, p. 181, following Randall, I, 200-202,
overestimates this, in my opinion, as most other writers on the subject have
done.noteworthy in another respect — in the course of it the Westmoreland
planter addressed the General as "my dear George." Few people were ever
that familiar with the stately commander, and few people then were equally
alarmed. 19 This embittered proprietor interpreted the movement against
entails as an attack on the "right to do as we please with our own property,"
which he regarded as the "very basis of the American contest." That was to
reduce the causes of the revolt to a narrow compass indeed. The bill was
then pending in the Senate, after having passed the House, and Carter's
prayer that at least ten persons could be found to reprobate and detest such
a crying injustice shows that he regarded the continuing opposition to it as
slight. Then he vehemently exclaimed:
... It is called docking all entails; but is it not entailing one they cannot
dock? The curses of posterity on them who must in that very contest for
liberty entail a load of debts upon those who are to come, after they have
robbed them of their very estates to pay that debt from, by overturning the
very principles of justice on which they built their very claim of freedom.
This is what I call sowing the seeds of contention, which must spring up
sooner or later, and all from the poisoned soil of popularity. 20
As this observer saw it, the greatest danger lay in the craving of political
leaders for popularity, and he heaped his most unflattering comments on
Patrick Henry, speaking of him ironically as "this great man." In
connection with the "cursed bill," however, he specifically mentioned
Jefferson, and obviously he found that propertied gentleman quite
incomprehensible, except on the ground that he was a "midday drunkard."
Thus he wrote to Washington:
. . . Was any man in your camp to say who is the greatest drunkard and
most pernicious to society, he who only drinks at night and is perhaps
ashamed of it in the morning, or he who gets drunk (sub die) at mid-day, as
old Bacchus used to say, I dare say the midnight drunkard would be the
most to be respected. ... It is not usual for those who are against a bill to be
the bearers of it, and this bill (as cursed in its nature as the removal of a
neighbor's landmark, his will and pleasure in giving his own property
away) borne about by the famous T. J—n!
The bearer of the bill against entails was no sort of drunkard, and he
doubtless included Landon Carter among the "half-dozen aristo-cratical
gentlemen, agonizing under the loss of pre-eminence," who19 Oct. 31, 1776, Force, 5 ser M D, 1304-1307.
20 Ibid., p. 1307.
had ventured sarcasms on the otherwise peaceful transition from a
monarchy to a republic. In the summer of 1777 it seemed to Jefferson that
the people in general had simply taken off an old suit of clothes and put on
a new one. He wrote Benjamin Franklin: "Not a single throe has attended
this important transformation." 21 Long afterwards one of his implacable
foes said that the bill for cutting off entails "was of obvious necessity from
the form of our new institutions, and the prevailing temper of the people,
and had only to be proposed by any member, in order to be adopted by a
large majority, as it was in others of the States." " This was an
understatement, designed to belittle Jefferson, just as his own contemporary
remark to Franklin was too sanguine. He had aroused some fears, and
eventually he raised up a host of bitter enemies, but he does not appear to
have angered many people before his governorship of Virginia. This was
partly because of the temper of the times. It was also because his own
program had not yet fully unfolded. Never during this period did it become
a clear issue in itself.
His land reforms were part and parcel of a movement which swept through
the other states and resulted in the abolition of primogeniture and entail in
practically all of them within ten years of the Declaration of Independence.
23 It would be too much to claim that he was the initiator of a general
movement which was actually the resultant of many forces, but he
undoubtedly took the lead in the large and influential Commonwealth of
Virginia. There he attempted to set an aristocratic society in the current of
democracy by broadening its economic base. In the next decade no less a
person than George Washington observed that the distinction of classes had
begun to disappear in the Old Dominion, and there were later laments
because historic plantation seats had passed into alien hands. 24 The
decline in the fortunes and power of the prerevolutionary land barons may
be attributed to deeper causes than formal legislation, however, and the
blame that was laid on Jefferson by disgruntled aristocrats was
considerably greater at a later time than during the early years of the
Revolution. It is doubtful if many then viewed this landed gentleman as a
traitor to his class because he had effected th? abolition of entails. The
danger really lay in his implacable hostility to artificial privilege of every
sort. That was sure to cause him trouble sooner or later.21 Aug. 13, 1777; Ford, II, 131-132.
22 Henry Lee, Jr., Observations on the Writings of Thomas Jefferson
(1832), p. 115.
23 Allan Nevins, American States during and after the Revolution, pp.
441-445.
24 Citations, Ibid., p. 442.
because he was certain to tread on the toes of many sorts of men. The
whole record of his thought until this time shows that his policies were
motivated by philosophical rather than niiTowly political considerations,
and there is no evidence that he was ambitiously courting favor with the
multitude. Nevertheless, in actions like these he laid the firm foundation of
his great popularity in later days. He was not one to crack jokes around a
campflre like Patrick Henry, but he had ideas that were sure to appeal to
common men. His conception of the free movement of property was quite
in accord with the philosophy which was fated to become dominant among
ordinary Americans. The expression "three generations from shirtsleeves to
shirtsleeves" sums it up roughly. Jefferson did not say this, so far as is
known, but in any age he would have disliked any and all schemes
designed to perpetuate wealth without regard to the capabilities of the
possessor. He believed in freedom to acquire property, which to him was
largely identified with land; and, for all his generosity, he was tenacious of
his own; but he also believed in the freedom to lose it. The way must be left
open for the fit to rise, and, by unavoidable implication, for the unfit to fall.
In such a philosophy there is relatively little comfort for the sentimentalist
or the paternalist, but to Americans of enterprise it has sounded like fair
play and common sense.
Jefferson contributed directly to the development of representative
government in Virginia's western country during his first session as a
delegate, thus aiding the small settlers in the way he regarded as most
fundamental. He strongly supported the movement to set up Kentucky as a
new county which succeeded late in 1776. Also, he played a characteristic
part in the continuing conflict over the granting of western lands, though he
did not afterwards mention this among the important services that he
rendered his State. His silence on this subject may have been partly
protective, for the implementation of his progressive ideas was faulty andthe results of the policy he finally approved were disappointing. 25 In the
perspective of history, however, his concern for the squatters and his
hostility to the speculators is probably more significant than his attitude
toward outmoded primogeniture and entail. This was a more controversial
question and, being also more confused, it required greater vision.
25 On the new counties see Abcrnethy, Western Lands, pp. 165-166, and
references cited; on the whole question of policy, Ibid., ch. 17. A. M.
Lewis, "Jefferson and the Kentucky Pioneers," is specially valuable for
relations with George Rogers Clark.
The complex problem was in essence twofold: settlers had filtered into the
unoccupied lands and remained there without title; and various land
companies were making vast claims in the region beyond the mountains.
Jefferson's fear that the latter would be supported by Congress was a major
reason for his insistence at this stage that Virginia maintain her western
claims. In his own legislature he and George Mason tried to bring order out
of chaos, to safeguard the small holders, and to defeat the excessive claims
of the speculative companies. They may have differed somewhat in
emphasis, but they collaborated in bills which were presented in January,
1778, and were the undisputed leaders of the liberal faction. 28 By this time
they were forced to regard the western lands not merely as a seat of
settlement but also as a source of revenue, for the currency was rapidly
depreciating and there was need to support the credit of the State by
proceeds from sales. As we have seen, Jefferson preferred to give lands in
small portions. They were specially anxious to defeat the purposes of
outside speculators, though Jefferson's policy was not dictated primarily by
motives of local self-interest nor even by theories of state rights. It was
based fundamentally on human grounds.
In 1778 Mason and Jefferson were defeated by the conservatives, whom
Pendleton and Benjamin Harrison led. 27 The latter were not disposed to
expedite the influx of small settlers into the West, for they feared that the
value of eastern property would be thereby reduced. George Washington
agreed with them that soldiers or prospective soldiers would be drawn off,
and for this reason opposed the measure. The conservative leaders also had
a tender feeling for the land companies, in which they were personally
interested in varying degree. To use modern terms, they upheld private
business interests—for business with them centered in land. On the other
hand, Mason and Jefferson — especially Jefferson — stood primarily forthe public interest, sought to further actual settlement, and supported
unprivileged common men.
In consultation with Jefferson, Mason redrew the bills establishing a land
office and settling the western claims; these were passed in June, 1779,
after Jefferson became Governor. 28 They took care of persons who had
actually moved in before January 1, 1778, by granting them four hundred
acres at a nominal price, along with a pre-emption
26 Mason to Jefferson, Apr. 3, 1779 (LC, 3:460). Because of his relations
with the Ohio Company, Mason's disinterestedness is less certain that that
of Jefferson.
27 Abernethy, pp. 218-219. The position of Governor Patrick Henry was
uncertain, though he supported the bills of 1779.
28 Hening, X, 35-65.
of one thousand more at the regular price of forty pounds per hundred
acres. Provision was made for those who had moved in since that date, by
granting them pre-emption to four hundred acres at the regular price; but,
unhappily, nothing was done for future settlers. What amounted to a
compromise was worked out with the most Virginian of the land
companies, and provision was made for the future sale of the remaining
lands at the regular price without limit of acreage.
Some degree of order was thus brought out of chaos, but events proved that
the solution as a whole was more favorable to men of means than to small
settlers, and that the opportunity to establish a genuinely democratic land
policy for Virginia had been lost. Absentee owners gobbled up huge tracts,
paying for them in depreciated currency, and poorer farmers soon began to
complain. 29 Certain of Jefferson's long-range purposes had been sacrificed
to the attainment of immediate results, but to him, doubtless, the future
prospects did not seem unpromising. At the time it looked as though there
was plenty of land for everybody; poor men as well as rich could take
advantage of the depreciation of the currency; and if large estates were not
buttressed by artificial laws of inheritance, nature might be expected to set
centrifugal forces to work. Such forces were actually operating among the
aristocrats of Virginia already, for other than legislative reasons. War and
debt threatened to exact a toll which Jefferson himself did not regard as justor desirable.
His efforts to solve the problem of the outstanding obligations of Virginians
to British merchants proved as futile as any human attempt to stay a storm,
and in his own case they were positively harmful, but there can be no doubt
of his honorable intentions. In his first session, when his plans for the
immediate reopening of the courts were blocked by fears of executions for
debt, he had drafted a compromise proposal which would have suspended
such executions whenever suitable security should be given for the
eventual payment of the money. 80 Even this was too much for the debtors.
The matter was deferred, and not until January, 1778, did Jefferson return
to it. The bill he then presented was regarded as part of the liberal program,
just as the land-office bill of that session was, but it would have been better
for him if it had been defeated. 81
29 Abernethy, Western Lands, pp. 228-229.
80 Dec. 6, 1776; Ford, II, 122-223.
81 Delegates, Journal, Jan. 13, 1778; Hening, IX, 377; Ford, II, 199-201,
giving the bill that was incorporated in the report of the revisors;
Abernethy, p. 219; Randall, I, 215-216.
His bill provided for the sequestration of the property of British subjects in
Virginia, which was proper enough in principle. It also provided that suits
between British subjects and citizens of Virginia should be continued in the
same condition as they were before the courts were closed, and to this no
valid objection could have been raised during the war. The unfortunate
provision was for the discharge of debts to British subjects through deposits
in the loan office which was set up. A debtor could make payment in the
lawful money of the Commonwealth, the supposition being that the State
would assume responsibility from that point and settle accounts with the
British after the war. The trouble was that eventually the depreciated
currency of Virginia, as Jefferson said, had no more value than oak leaves.
82
Without going into the tangled story of the postwar period, when these
obligations were adjudged to be still binding, it is sufficient to say that
Jefferson availed himself of this law. He had received bonds (notes, we
should say) from the purchasers of the Wayles lands he had sold, and hisown British creditors had declined to take these. If they had accepted them,
events proved that they would have been protected by the treaty of peace,
but at the time they preferred to have Jefferson continue in their debt. He
was afterwards paid for these bonds in Virginia currency and he says that
he took this very currency to the loan office. 33 He had what satisfaction
there was in the thought that it was used by the State in the conduct of the
war, but he had to pay his own debts all over again. The full effects of this
error of judgment on his part, both as a statesman and as the manager of his
own affairs, did not burst upon him until after the war was over; he then
bore them like the philosopher he was. 34
His other important activities in this legislative period can be discussed best
in connection with the general revision of the laws, which occupied a large
part of his attention during nearly the whole of it. In that great task he
showed himself to be a statesman in the best sense of the term, but he was
freed from the necessity of adjusting himself to the exigencies of the day in
the House of Delegates. This notable work of legal draftsmanship provides
a surer index of his intelligence and prophetic vision than any he gave as a
leader on the floor. Also, by means of it he commended himself far more to
distant generations.
82 In the May session, 1780, the part of the act allowing the payment of
debts into the treasury was repealed; Hening, X, 227.
83 He made a large payment into the treasury as late as Feb. 2, 1780;
Account Book. '
84 See Appendix II, B, 3.
Architect of Laws: Slavery and Crime
IT IS doubtful if many of Jefferson's colleagues in the Virginia Assembly,
when they passed the bill calling for a revision of the laws, had any such
far-reaching and philosophical purposes in mind as he did. Now that the
King and his minions no longer stood in the way, he believed that the code
should be corrected "with a single eye to reason, and the good of those for
whose government it was framed." * The legislators were prompt,
however, and they showed their willingness to give him the lead by naming
him first on the committee of five to make recommendations. 2 It was a
distinguished list. After him came Pendleton and Wythe, the learnedGeorge Mason, and the liberal-minded Thomas Ludwell Lee. George
Wythe resigned from Congress in order to accept what he regarded as a
more important appointment. They met for a preliminary conference in
Fredericksburg in January, 1777, and the final report was submitted two
and a half years later, after both Pendleton and Wythe had become judges
and Jefferson had begun his term as governor. The best account of the
procedure has been given by him himself, and it shows that he intended to
be practical in action despite his larger philosophical purposes.
... At the first and only meeting of the whole committee, (of five persons),
the question was discussed whether we would attempt to reduce the whole
body of the law into a code, the text of which should become the law of the
land? We decided against that, because every word and phrase in that text
would become a new subject of criticism and litigation, until its sense
should have been settled by numerous decisions, and that, in the meantime,
the rights of property would be in the air. We concluded not to meddle with
the common law, i.e., the law preced-
1 Ford, I, 57-58.
1 Delegates, Journal, Oct. 26, Nov. 4, 1776.
ing the existence of the statutes, further than to accommodate it to our new
principles and circumstances; but to take up the whole body of statutes and
Virginia laws, to leave out everything obsolete or improper, insert what
was wanting, and reduce the whole within as moderate a compass as it
would bear, and to the plain language of common sense, divested of the
verbiage, the barbarous tautologies and redundancies which render the
British statutes unintelligible. From this, however, were excepted the
ancient statutes, particularly those commented on by Lord Coke, the
language of which is simple, and the meaning of every word so well settled
by decisions, as to make it safest not to change words where the sense was
to be retained. 8
Oddly enough, Pendleton, who generally supported ancient things, favored
the preparation of a new and complete Institute on the model of Blackstone.
He was backed by Lee but the other three members opposed, for the reason
already mentioned and the further reason that such an undertaking would
have been too arduous and bold. Even the more limited task which was
agreed upon seemed too arduous for Mason, who claimed that he was notwell enough read in the law and asked to be relieved. Soon thereafter Lee
died, so the work was distributed among the remaining three. 4 Jefferson's
assignment consisted of the common law, insofar as they thought of
altering it, and the statutes to the legal beginning of the Colony; the
remainder of the English statutes were committed to Wythe, and the
Virginia laws to Pendleton. The division threw into Jefferson's part the laws
concerning crimes and punishments, descents, and religion. He also
considered the question of public education, and ventured far into the
domain of the Virginia laws, though these were specifically assigned to
Pendleton.
One reason for this was that he did a good deal of editing in connection
with Pendleton's portion. The revisors worked separately but in the spring
of 1779 they met in Williamsburg and went over the first two sections,
"weighing and correcting every word, and reducing them to the form in
which they were afterwards reported." When they got to the third part,
however, they found that Pendleton, instead of simplifying the language of
the Virginia laws, had copied the acts verbatim, only omitting what was
disapproved. Being called home by a family matter, he asked the two
others to put his draft in the form they desired and authorized them to
report him as concurring.*
8 To Skelton Jones, July 28, 1809 (L. & B„ XII, 298-299).
4 Ford, I, 58-59.
6 Jefferson to Skelton Jones, July 28, 1809 (L. & B., XII, 300). In his later
accounts Jefferson may have exaggerated the differences between him and
Pendleton. During the final stages of the revision this conservative friend
accepted him
ARCHITECT OF LAWS: SLAVERY AND CRIME 263
The report finally submitted to the General Assembly included one hundred
and twenty-six bills. A few of these which were of immediate importance
were translated into law at that very session, but amid the exigencies of war
the report as a whole was deferred. It languished for five years longer.
Then, when Jefferson was back in the Continental Congress for a spell, it
was printed, at the instance of James Madison. Certain conservatives at that
time opposed the code on general principles, but Madison found it morepopular in the Assembly than he had expected, and during the next two
years, as the result of persistent pressure on his part, approximately half the
bills became law without serious amendment. The remainder were referred
to a new committee, and in the course of time approximately as many more
were enacted in substance. Jefferson himself was in France while his friend
Madison was struggling so valiantly; he was Secretary of State in George
Washington's first administration before the last of the British laws had
been repealed and the legal transition from Colony to Commonwealth had
been completed. 6
After he went to Europe and began to circulate in philosophical circles
there, Jefferson remarked to a friend that only three or four bills in the
Revisal would strike the attention of foreigners. 7 The bulk of it was indeed
local in its nature. He could hardly expect European savants and illuminati
to be interested in measures dealing with the organization of the militia, the
prevention of the infection of horned cattle, the improvement of the breed
of horses, and the apprehension of horse stealers. Insofar as Jefferson
himself dealt with such matters, he was the philosopher come to earth and
performing a useful mundane function. The three or four bills that he
deemed generally interesting, however, were broadly philosophical in
concept and still command attention after a century and a half. They can be
easily singled out as the ones dealing with citizenship, crime and
punishment, religion, and education; and the credit for all of these belongs
to him. Before considering them, however, we must first mention the
important question of slavery.
as the final arbiter in minor matters of disagreement with Wythe. The
implication is that there was now no disagreement between him and
Jefferson. Sec Pendleton to Jefferson, May 11, 1779 (LC, 3:484, partly
quoted in Ford, II, 195).
6 Report of the Conmnttee of Revisors Appointed by the General Assembly
of Virginia in 1116 (Richmond, Nov. 1784); Delegates, journal, chiefly
October session, 1785; Hening, chieflv vol. XII; Jefferson to Madison, Feb.
20, Apr. 25, 1784 (Ford, III, 396, 473); Madison to Jefferson, Julv 3, 1784,
Jan. 9, 1785, Jan. 22, 1786, Dec. 4, 1786, Feb. 15, 1787 ( Writings, Hunt
ed., II, 60, 118-119, 215-216, 291, 308-309); Ford, II, 196; Linglev,
Transition in Va., pp. 184-188.
Jefferson would not have placed on any select list the bill on this subject,for it was merely a digest of existing laws. By the time that the revisors
submitted their formal report they did not need to recommend that the
importation of slaves be prohibited. The Assembly had already seen to that,
and, according to Jefferson's later account, the action was taken on his
motion. In this instance he seems to have fallen into the not unnatural error
of confusing the general with the particular. He favored the discontinuance
of the slave trade before the Revolution and definitely proposed it as early
as 1776, but the successful measure of 1778 was introduced by another at a
time when he was not present in the House. 8 However, there can be no
possible question that he favored the bill; and his general attitude was so
well known that even a bitter enemy attributed this salutary reform to him
in later years. 9
Also, he strongly favored emancipation. The revisors had a plan, he said,
and had embodied it in an amendment which was to be presented whenever
the bill on slaves was taken up. It was not taken up until after he had gone
away, and those who were then on the ground concluded that the public
mind would not bear the proposition. 10 He himself was acutely aware of
the difficulties of the situation, but he abundantly revealed the depth of his
own feeling on this dark subject in certain passages in his Notes on
Virginia. He wrote these before the revisors' report had been printed, and
without knowing that they would ever meet the public eye.
He had perceived an encouraging change in attitude since the beginning of
the Revolution, he said. The harshness of masters was abating, the spirit of
the slaves was rising from the dust, and the condition of the latter was
being mollified. But no one could find in his words any ground whatsoever
for the opinion that slavery in eighteenth-century Virginia was or would
ever become a beneficent institution. He regarded it as fundamentally cruel,
and was in no possible doubt that it undermined the morals and destroyed
the industry of the masters while degrading the victims. Worst of all, it
sapped the
8 Ford, I, 51-52; Hening, IX, 471-472. As given in the Delegates, Journal,
the legislative history is as follows: On Oct. 14, 1778, it was ordered that
leave be given to bring in a bill to prevent the future importation of slaves,
and that the committee of trade prepare and bring in the same. On Oct. 15,
Richard Kello of Southampton presented a bill. This passed the House of
Delegates on Oct. 22, under a slightly different title. On Oct. 27, as
amended by the Senate, it was agreed to. Jefferson did not appear in theHouse until Nov. 30. I have found no evidence of his intimacy with any
member of the committee of trade.
9 Henry Lee, Jr., Observations, pp. 122-124. His own claim was made as
early as 1800; Ford, VII, 476.
10 Ford, III, 243; much later comment, Ibid., I, 67.
foundation of all liberties by denying that freedom was the gift of God and
the birthright of all men, regardless of their color or condition.
All this he said, much better than anyone can paraphrase it, in a passage
which became deservedly famous.
. . . There must doubtless be an unhappy influence on the manners of our
people produced by the existence of slavery among us. The whole
commerce between master and slave is a perpetual exercise of the most
boisterous passions, the most unremitting despotism on the one part, and
degrading submissions on the other. Our children see this, and learn to
imitate it; for man is an imitative animal. ... If a parent could find no motive
either in his philanthropy or his self-love, for restraining the intemperance
of passion towards his slave, it should always be a sufficient one that his
child is present. But generally it is not sufficient. The parent storms, the
child looks on, catches the lineaments of wrath, puts on the same airs in the
circle of smaller slaves, gives a loose to the worst of passions, and thus
nursed, educated, and daily exercised in tyranny, cannot but be stamped by
it with odious peculiarities. The man must be a prodigy who can retain his
manners and morals undepraved by such circumstances. And with what
execrations should the statesman be loaded, who permitting one half the
citizens thus to trample on the rights of the other, transforms those into
despots, and these into enemies, destroys the morals of the one part, and the
amor patriae of the other. . . . With the morals of the people, their industry
also is destroyed. For in a warm climate, no man will labour for himself
who can make another labour for him. This is so true, that of the
proprietors of slaves a very small proportion indeed are ever seen to labour.
And can the liberties of a nation be thought secure when we have removed
their only firm basis, a conviction in the minds of the people that these
liberties are of the gift of God? That they are not to be violated but with his
wrath? Indeed I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is just: that
his justice cannot sleep forever; that considering numbers, nature andnatural means only, a revolution of the wheel of fortune, an exchange of
situation, is among possible events: that it may become probable by
supernatural interference! The Almighty has no attribute which can take
side with us in such a contest. 11
The accuracy of his startling picture of the actual operations of slavery was
afterwards questioned by reputable observers; he must have witnessed such
scenes of fury as he described, but passionate
11 Notes on Virginia, from answer to Query XVIII, Ford, III, 266-267.
despots were probably less common than he implied, especially in the
household. John Taylor of Caroline, for one, thought that slaves called
forth feelings of benevolence far more often than angry violence. 12 But
Jefferson's opposition to slavery was primarily on moral grounds; and he
combined compassion for the victims with an even deeper concern for the
character of the masters and the dignity of human nature.
In his Notes on Virginia he also gave currency to the plan of gradual
emancipation which was drawn by the revisors to remedy the highly
undesirable situation. 13 This provided that all slaves born after the passing
of the act should be freed, that they should remain with their parents for a
time, that they should be trained at public expense for useful employment,
and that they should be colonized as soon as they reached maturity. He
purposed to send them somewhere, probably into the vast interior of the
continent, and to aid them in the establishment of a free and independent
society. They were to remain in alliance with the white man's state,
however, until they should be strong enough to stand alone. Meanwhile, an
equal number of white settlers should be brought from Europe to replace
them. It was a humane plan and he regarded it as realistic.
According to his own estimate there were considerably more than two
hundred thousand slaves in Virginia at this time, comprising almost half of
the total population. 14 The immediate removal of that many inhabitants,
comprising the bulk of the laborers, would have disrupted the economy,
and Jefferson himself did not regard it as either feasible or desirable. Even
the colonization of an annual crop and the bringing of white replacements
from abroad was an undertaking which would have staggered a more timid
mind. It was much simpler to leave well enough alone and to retain the
laborers Virginia already had. He did not want them kept as slaves,however, so he had to face the alternative of incorporating them into the
state after they had been freed. This he rejected for reasons which to him
seemed sufficient: "Deep rooted prejudices entertained by the whites; ten
thousand recollections, by the blacks, of the injuries they have sustained;
new provocations; the real distinction which nature has made; and many
other circumstances will divide us into parties, and produce convulsions,
which will probably never end but in the extermination of one or the other
race." " His humane mind could not contem-
12 U. B. Phillips, Life and Labor in the Old South (1929), p. 362, citing
John Taylor's comments on this very passage from Jefferson. * 8 Ford, III,
243-244.
14 Ford, III, 187-192.
15 Ford, III, 2*4.
plate such a prospect with composure, and he never ceased to favor a
policy of colonization.
Because of the vividness of his contemporary comments on the Negroes,
and even more because of his historic eminence, they have been frequently
drawn upon for quotation. Detached from their context, however, they can
easily give a false impression. In comparing the blacks and whites to the
great disadvantage of the former, as he did in his Notes on Virginia, he was
not endeavoring to sum up the common talk of the countryside. 16 He
provided, unquestionably, a valuable index to local opinion and to this
opinion in its most enlightened form. If his judgment on the Negroes was
unfavorable, that of his local contemporaries generally was probably far
more so. His observations were less notable in themselves, however, than
in the spirit in which he made them.
His comments on the race were those of a scientific mind, softened by
humanitarianism. Or, to put it more precisely, they represented the tentative
judgment of a kindly and scientifically minded man who deplored the
absence of sufficient data and adequate criteria. There were more distinct
traces of sentimentalism in his attitude toward the Indians, whose native
eloquence he extolled extravagantly, but he felt the need of a more
scientific procedure in both cases. Thus he commented: "To our reproach it
must be said that, though for a centurv and a half we have had under oureyes the races of black and red men, they have never yet been viewed by us
as subjects of natural history." Furthermore, he thought it "a circumstance
of great tenderness" that an unfavorable conclusion about the Negroes
might "degrade a whole race of men from the rank in the scale of beings
which their Creator may perhaps have given them." Though he expressed
his own judgment frankly he did so with great diffidence.
... I advance it, therefore, as a suspicion only, that the blacks, whether
originally a distinct race, or made distinct by time and circumstances, are
inferior to the whites in the endowments both of mind and body. It is not
against experience to suppose that different species of the same genus, or
varieties of the same species, may possess different qualifications. Will not
a lover of natural history then, one who views the gradations in all the races
of animals with the eye of philosophy, excuse an effort to keep those in the
department of man as distinct as nature has formed them? This unfortunate
difference of colour, and perhaps of faculty, is a powerful obstacle to the
emancipation of these people. Many of their advocates, while they wish to
vindicate the liberty of
1<J Ford, III, 244^250.
human nature, are anxious also to preserve its dignity and beauty. Some of
these, embarrassed by the question, 'What further is to be done with them?'
join themselves in opposition with those who are actuated by sordid avarice
only. Among the Romans emancipation required but one effort. The slave,
when made free, might mix with, without staining the blood of his master.
But with us a second is necessary, unknown to history. When freed, he is to
be removed beyond the reach of mixture. 17
He was not talking to the unlettered and inarticulate slaves, nor to their
distant descendants, thousands of whom now bear the marks of physical
mixture. It would have been truly "a circumstance of great tenderness" if he
had been. He was not even addressing his countrymen, who were obviously
not ready for the dose of emancipation and personal restraint he would
have prescribed. He was thinking aloud in the invisible presence of the
world's humane philosophers, propounding the gravest of social questions
and giving his own answers with tentativeness and becoming modesty. He
did not want the problem to go by default but there was little he could do
then and there except think about it.As an observer he maintained an open mind about the abilities and
potentialities of the subject race. Years later he learned with great pleasure
that there was in the United States a "very respectable" Negro
mathematician. On receipt of some of his work Jefferson wrote: "Nobody
wishes more than I do to see such proofs as you exhibit that nature has
given to our black brethren talents equal to those of the other colors of men,
and that the appearance of a want of them is owing merely to the degraded
condition of their existence, both in Africa and America. I can add with
truth that nobody wishes more ardently to see a good system commenced
for raising the condition both of their body and mind to what it ought to be,
as fast as the imbecility of their present existence, and other circumstances
which cannot be neglected, will admit." The Negro mathematician found
him deeply sympathetic with his aspirations, but Jefferson as a philosopher
and statesman never veered from his pessimism with respect to the
fundamental problem. He was nearing eighty when he wrote these words:
"Nothing is more certainly written in the book of fate than that these people
are to be free. Nor is it less certain that the two races, equally free, cannot
live in the same government." In the next decade after that the judgment
was echoed by Alexis de Tocque-ville. 18 A volume would be required to
assess it in the light of later
"Ford, III, 250.
18 Democracy in America, I, 373. He cites the very words of Jefferson in
his
ARCHITECT OF LAWS: SLAVERY AND CRIME 269
history, hence all that can be said here is that Jefferson intended his
judgment to be both kindly and realistic.
Jefferson's bill declaring who should be deemed citizens was a part of the
Revisal. This was passed soon after he became governor, and it did not
include freed slaves. However, it did include all white persons who should
afterwards migrate into the State and give proof of intent to reside there. It
contained a strong assertion of the "natural right which all men have of
relinquishing the country in which birth or other accident may have thrown
them, and seeking subsistence and happiness wheresoever they may be
able, or may hope to find them." He thought it important, and when he was
combatting both the Federalist party and the British on the question ofexpatriation, he listed this act among his more signal achievements. Liberal
provision for naturalization was quite in character with his later policy, and
his pride in this measure was wholly justifiable. 19
The bill for proportioning crimes and punishments is better known, and it
turned out to be much more controversial. It was not considered until the
whole report was brought up, and it then encountered such fierce
opposition that the whole Revisal was endangered. The hostility to it had
not subsided a year later, when despite mollifying amendments it was
defeated by a single vote. "Our old bloody code is by this event fully
restored," wrote Madison to him in France. 20
Jefferson had reason to be disappointed, for, during the years 1776-1779,
he gave more time to this bill than to all the rest together. It required him to
go through the Saxon period of the law, consulting authorities like Bracton,
and to study the chief writers on criminal law, such as Beccaria. The bill he
drew after all this labor is notable for its studied simplicity, and the draft he
submitted in advance to George Wythe represents, probably, the highest
point he had yet attained in craftsmanship. This is certainly true of its
physical form, for it is an extraordinarily beautiful document. 21 For the
benefit of his own memory, he attached notes in Anglo-Saxon characters, in
Latin, old French, and English, attesting the meticulous carefulness of his
procedure. In printed versions these are naturally put at the bottom
Autobiography, begun in 1821; Ford, I, 68. Jefferson's letters to the Negro
mathematician, Benjamin Banneker, and to Condorcet about him, Aug. 30,
1791, are in Ford, V, 377-379.
19 Report of Revisors, ch. 55; Hening, X, 129-130; Ford, VII, 476.
20 Madison to Jefferson, Jan. 22, 1786, Feb. 15, 1787, Writings, II, 215,
308.
21 It may have escaped attention because it is filed in one of the last
volumes of his papers; LC, 232:42,052-058.
of the pages, but Jefferson himself placed them in columns, parallel with
the text, after the manner of his old lawbook, Coke upon Littleton; and, as
in the work of the old master, they frequently encroach upon the text. The
penmanship is beautifully clear, and no other document that Jefferson everdrew better exhibits his artistry as a literary draftsman.
The main significance of Jefferson's proposals lay in his attempt to relax the
severity of punishments, and to make them at the same time more humane
and more rational. This was quite in the spirit of the enlightened liberalism
of the age which he so well embodied. His purpose had been formed before
the beginning of his official labors as a revisor and had aroused some
forebodings in the mind of Pendleton. In the late summer of 1776 that
realistic observer wrote him: "I don't know how far you may extend your
reformation as to our criminal system of laws. That it has hitherto been too
sanguinary, punishing too many crimes with death, I confess and could
wish to see that changed for some other mode of punishment in most cases;
but if you mean to relax all punishments, and rely on virtue and the public
good as sufficient to prompt obedience to the laws, you must find a new
race of men to be the subjects of it, but this I dare say was not your
meaning." 22
This was not Jefferson's meaning, and when the time came all of the
revisors agreed with him that capital punishment should extend only to
treason and murder. 23 As reasonable men they had been satisfied by the
writings of Beccaria and others that extreme punishments were neither
rightful nor effective. Jefferson's summary of this humane and rational
philosophy in Section I of his bill was masterly, and much of it could be
appropriately quoted in the twentieth century in a textbook of penology. It
is no longer necessary, as it was then, to point out that a member of society,
"committing an inferior injury, does not wholly forfeit the protection of his
fellow citizens, but after suffering a punishment in proportion to his
offense, is entitled to their protection from all greater pain." Jefferson aptly
described capital punishment as "the last melancholy resource against those
whose existence is become inconsistent with the safety of their fellow
citizens"; and he called attention to the social desirability of reforming
offenders instead of exterminating them. It was not on grounds of
sentimental humanitarianism, however, that he objected to extreme
severity. He believed the experience of all ages and countries had shown
that cruel and sanguinary laws defeated their own
22 Aug. 10, 1776; LC, 2:289, modernized for punctuation. 28 Ford, I, 60,
62; bills as presented, Ibid., II, 203-220.
ARCHITECT OF LAWS: SLAVERY AND CRIME 271purpose. Long before William S. Gilbert had conceived the comic operatic
figure of the Mikado he sought in deep seriousness to make the punishment
fit the crime. He proposed that the death penalty be no longer exacted
except in cases of treason and murder; and, with the advice of the
committee, he tried to set up a scale of just punishment in other cases.
He was notably successful in attaining his purpose to frame a bill that
would be comprehensible to laymen. He wrote George Wythe about it:
... In it's style I have aimed at accuracy, brevity & simplicity, preserving
however the very words of the established law, wherever their meaning has
been sanctioned by judicial decisions, or rendered technical by usage. . . .
Indeed I wished to exhibit a sample of reformation in the barbarous style
into which modern statutes have degenerated from their antient simplicity.
And I must pray you to be as watchful over what I have not said as what is
said; for the omissions of this bill have all their positive meaning. I have
thought it better to drop in silence the laws we mean to discontinue, and let
them be swept away by the general negative words of this, than to detail
them in clauses of express repeal. 24
His bill was finally rejected in his own country, largely because it mitigated
penalties in advance of general public opinion — as, for example, in the
case of horse stealing. From the point of view of contemporary
philosophers and from that of enlightened opinion today, its chief weakness
lay in the particular penalties he substituted for death. He had recourse to
the lex talionis in certain cases. Afterwards he said that he could not
remember just why this was; but contemporary records show that it was
partly because of his own general policy of going back to simple ancient
precedents, and partly because of the judgment of his fellow revisors. Thus,
when speaking of his draft to Wythe, he said:
I have strictly observed the scale of punishments settled by the Committee,
without being entirely satisfied with it. The lex talionis, altho' a restitution
of the Common law to the simplicity of which we have generally found it
so advantageous to return will be revolting to the humanised feelings of
modern times. An eye for an eye, and a hand for a hand will exhibit
spectacles in execution whose moral effect will be questionable; and even
the membrum pro membro of Bracton, or the punishment of the of-
fending member, altho' long authorised by our law, for the same offense ina slave, has you know been not long since repealed in conformity with
public sentiment. This needs reconsideration.
The matter may have been reconsidered but the scale appears to have been
left without material change. At all events, the following section appeared
ultimately in cold print:
Sect. XIV. Whosoever shall be guilty of rape, or sodomy with man or
woman, shall be punished; if a man, by castration, if a woman, by boring
through the cartilage of her nose a hole of one half inch in diameter at the
least.
Within ten years, when he was in Paris and copies of the Revisal had been
circulated among the intelligentsia, he reported that the principle of
retaliation was much criticized, and that in the case of rape, particularly, the
punishment was regarded as indecent and unjustifiable. He himself was
then in favor of altering this section of the bill, though for another reason:
"the temptation women would be under to make it the instrument of
vengeance against an inconstant lord, and of disappointment to a rival." 25
He was willing to leave the more unnatural sex crimes largely to public
opinion. Thus, in his own mind he divided the genus "buggery" into the
species sodomy and bestiality. He provided a severe penalty for the former
but of the latter he said in a note: "Bestiality can never make any progress;
it cannot therefore be injurious to society in any great degree, which is the
true measure of criminality in foro civili, and will ever be properly and
severely punished, by universal derision. It may, therefore, be omitted. It
was anciently punished with death, as it has been latterly." " This was one
of those offenses which, in Jefferson's opinion, should be pitied rather than
formally punished. He felt much the same way about excusable homicide
and suicide.
In the effort to find a substitute for the death penalty, he and the other
revisors had chief recourse, not to retaliation — which actually was
invoked in relatively few cases — but to public labor. 27 This was to be
performed on roads, canals, and other public works; and he afterwards
concluded that it would not have reformed the offenders. When tried
elsewhere the experiment proved unsuccessful. The exhibition of criminals
as a public spectacle on the highroads with shaved heads and mean clothing
produced in them an abandonment of self-respect which plunged them into
the most desperate and hardened25 To Madison, Dec. 15, 1786; Ford, IV, 334.
26 Ford, II, 211 n.
27 See his own summary in Notes on Virginia, Ford, III, 250-251.
ARCHITECT OF LAWS: SLAVERY AND CRIME 273
depravity. 88 Before the Virginia Assembly got around to passing a law, he
had become convinced that the methods of confined labor being tried out in
Europe, as they were later in Philadelphia, constituted an improvement, and
he himself aided his countrymen in their plans for a prison. The
penitentiary afterwards built in Virginia was hardly an ideal institution by
modern standards, but at least it was preferable to the chain gang. Jefferson
expressed only mild dissatisfaction with the fresh bill that was adopted by
the Assembly in 1796. By then the legislators were willing to limit capital
punishment to treason and murder, as he had advocated almost twenty
years earlier. Instead of the distinctions of murder and manslaughter, which
he had preserved in his bill, they introduced the new terms of murder in the
first and second degree, and he did not regard himself as competent to
judge whether or not this constituted an improvement. 29 He continued to
be convinced that the general principles he had enunciated were right, but
he was dubious about the specific penalties he had prescribed and he never
regarded the bill on which he labored most as his greatest contribution to
the Revisal. At last, he gave that honor to his bill for establishing religious
freedom.
28 Ford, I, 63.
29 Ford, I, 65; VII, 476^77; to Skelton Jones, July 28, 1909, L. & B., XII,
301; Lingley, Transition, p. 189.
M
Church and School
OF all the contests in which Jefferson engaged as a member of the
Assembly of Virginia the one on the subject of religion was the most bitter.
He himself said it was the severest of his entire life. 1 Much more detailed
information is available about other struggles of his career, such as hispolitical duel with Alexander Hamilton, and he may have overestimated the
rancor that persisted in his own State after the disestablishment of the
Church. By championing the cause of freedom he probably gained more
friends at home than he lost, for the dissenting sects were grateful. Most of
the attacks from which he suffered in later years, when he was a more
conspicuous target, originated elsewhere. He regarded these later attacks as
clerical rather than religious, claiming that they emanated from church
groups closely associated with state governments (as in New England) or
otherwise moved by political considerations. At all events, the religious
controversy persisted in some form to the end of his life and even pursued
him beyond the grave. Viewing it in the large, he exaggerated neither its
intensity nor its duration.
As a member of the committee on religion he was in the thick of the local
fight from the outset, and he framed his famous bill for religious freedom
early in his work as a revisor. It was not actually introduced until after he
had become governor, however, and was not enacted until seven more
years had passed. 2 This was at the end of a full
1 Comment in old age, in Ford, I, 53. My opinion that this was the most
controversial subject before the Assembly is based on the petitions
presented on both sides, and the communications in the papers. During the
period, October-December, 1776, for example, there were far more
communications on the subject of religion in Purdie, Va. Gazette, and
Dixon and Hunter, Va. Gazette, than on any other that was under legislative
consideration. These show that public opinion was sharply divided. I found
no reference to entails.
decade of legislative conflict in which many men were engaged, and
important victories had already been won for freedom. The credit was not
wholly his, but in 1776 he probably was the foremost advocate of the entire
separation of Church and State in Virginia, and unquestionably he became
the major symbol of complete religious liberty in connection with his own
measure. Such he remained during the years that he played on a larger
stage. Then he was properly acclaimed as a prophet, correctly judged to be
a free thinker, and unjustly charged with impiety.
He always regarded religion as a strictly private affair, like marriage and
domestic life. He said little about it in his early letters and he undoubtedly
thought in 1776, as he did in 1800, that his personal views had no bearingon any public conflict. While retaining a profound belief in the moral
foundation of the universe, he had long since freed his mind from the
shackles of man-made ecclesiasticism and doctrine, and he viewed
departures from orthodoxy and the rise of dissenting groups with complete
equanimity. Indeed, his respect for the honest opinions of all men caused
him to look with entire tolerance on other forms of religion than
Christianity itself. When asserting that the legitimate powers of
government extend to only such acts as are injurious, he said: "But it does
me no injury for my neighbor to say that there are twenty gods, or no god.
It neither picks my pocket nor breaks my leg." 8 He made no parade of his
own free thinking; he neither flouted nor derided conventional observances;
and he was a scrupulously moral man. It was not on questions of private
morals and personal beliefs that his thought centered during the Revolution,
however; it was on religious freedom and the relations between particular
groups and the State.
He read Locke and Shaftesbury among others, and transcribed notes which
leave no doubt about the trend of his thinking, even though these have been
transmitted to us in scraps. 4 He was convinced that complete religious
freedom should be recognized by human law because of the very nature of
religion. The care of every man's soul belongs to himself; no one can
prescribe the faith of another; God himself cannot save a man against his
will; and any form of spiritual compulsion is doomed to inevitable failure.
State religion, therefore, was to him a contradiction in terms. The State
should neither support nor oppose any particular
summary of the whole controversy to the end of the century in Lingley,
Transition in Virginia, pp. 190-211.
8 Notes on Virginia, in Ford, III, 263.
4 "Notes on Religion," in Ford, II, 92-103; and in LC, 2:323-327, in a
different order. See Ford's comments on uncertainties about these notes.
form of church but should leave all of them strictly alone. In the course of
time this became the official American position.
Despite the musings of a philosophical statesman, the position of the
Established Church in Virginia would not have been seriously challenged
but for the rise of the dissenting sects. 5 The first of these to flourishconsisted of the Presbyterians. They were followed by the Baptists, who
were the most severe critics of the Establishment, and by the Methodists,
who had a low opinion of the spiritual state of the Anglicans but still
regarded themselves as part of the Mother Church and had little to do with
politics. The complaint that the parsons of the Establishment were cold and
formal, which was made by the fiery Evangelicals, did not impress
Jefferson, for he made a point of keeping his own emotions under strict
control. He had long ago observed that some of the official clergymen were
immoral and slothful, and he did not condone any of their carnal lapses.
They were probably as good as most of the clergymen in England,
however, and their alleged "infidelity" was not alarming to a disciple of the
Enlightenment who did not even admit the validity of the term. 6
Jefferson expressed far greater bitterness in later life against the
Presbyterians of his own State and against the clergy of New England than
he ever did against the colonial Anglicans as a group; and he found out that
the alliance between Church and State was stricter in Connecticut and
Massachusetts. He wrote John Adams: "Our clergy, before the Revolution,
having been secured against rivalship by fixed salaries, did not give
themselves the trouble of acquiring influence over the people." 7 What he
objected to, on rational grounds, was the preferred status and special
privileges which had caused them to become an artificial aristocracy and
enabled them to exercise an unwarranted degree of authority. He believed
in a free society.
Furthermore, he noted that the dissenters now outnumbered the Anglicans.
He had seen plenty of them in Albemarle, and they were specially strong in
the Piedmont country generally. He did not assert that they were
persecuted. On the contrary, he observed that after a century of dominance
the spirit of the Anglicans had subsided into moderation. The laws
remained oppressive, however, and the spirit of the dissenters "had risen to
a degree of determination which commanded respect." 8 This observation
suggests, at the same time, his own attitude. His friendships continued to be
chiefly among the An-
6 Eckenrode, Separation of Church and State in Virginia, ch. 3.
6 Good discussion of character of clergy in E. L. Goodwin, Colonial
Church in Virginia, pp. 92-94.
7 Oct. 28, 1813 (Ford, IX, 426).8 Notes on Virginia, in Ford, III, 262.
glicans, who were moderate on the whole, and he had respect rather than
regard for the dissenters; but he was unalterably opposed to oppressive
laws. He regarded uniformity of religious opinion as no more desirable
than that of face and stature. On the other hand, he saw distinct advantages
in differences of opinion, for the various sects would act as censors of one
another. He rightly concluded that in this matter there was safety in
numbers. 9
The Assembly of 1776 did much to relieve the dissenters. 10 As Jefferson
himself said, it got rid of statutory oppressions insofar as these were
contained in acts of Parliament. Furthermore, it exempted dissenters from
taxes in support of the Established Church. The act providing a fixed salary
for ministers was suspended at this time, and three years later it was
definitely repealed. 11 The latter action was taken after Jefferson had
framed his famous bill, however. There were unsolved problems relating to
the power of vestries, and some questions about the disposition of church
buildings and glebe lands were not finally answered for a generation, but
the most important political question that remained was one of policy.
Should there be a general assessment for the support of religion or should
the churches be supported wholly by voluntary contributions? For a time
some of the dissenters favored this degree of connection with the State; but
Jefferson believed that even forcing a man to support a minister of his own
persuasion was a deprivation of liberty, and it was in reaction against the
movement for assessment that his bill was finally passed.
At the common law, he said, heresy was still a capital offense; and by act of
Assembly denial of the Trinity or the divine authority of the Scriptures was
punishable by disabilities and even by imprisonment. He believed that the
public was still secured against this residue of "tyrannical laws" by the
spirit of the times; and he doubted whether the people would suffer an
execution for heresy or a sentence of imprisonment "for not comprehending
the mysteries of the Trinity." 12 Being himself unwilling, however, to rely
on a temper of tolerance which might prove temporary, he sought to sweep
away all such laws. The method he employed was not one of detailed
specification but of inclusive statement. He summed up everything in a
single comprehensive section of his bill.
9 Ibid., 264-265. This same idea reappears in fuller form in one ofMadison's papers in the Federalist, where it is extended to civil rights (P. L.
Ford, ed., 1898, no. 51, p. 347).
10 Act of Dec. 9, 1776 (Hening, IX, 164-167); well summarized by
Lingley, pp. 200-201.
11 Session of Oct., 1779 (Hening, X, 197-198).
12 Notes on Virginia, in ^ord, III, 265.
Sect. II. We the General Assembly of Virginia do enact that no man shall
be compelled to frequent or support any religious worship, place, or
ministry whatsoever, nor shall be enforced, restrained, molested, or
burthened in his body or goods, or shall otherwise suffer, on account of his
religious opinions or belief; but that all men shall be free to profess, and by
argument to maintain, their opinions in matters of religion, and that the
same shall in no wise diminish, enlar -e, or affect their civil capacities. 13
He went the whole way. He did not limit liberty to Protestant sects or to
Christian groups, but extended it to all without any qualification
whatsoever. Also, he sought to give to this act the quality of eternity. In the
third and final section, after admitting that no Assembly could pass an
irrevocable law, he included a declaration that the rights which had been
asserted were "of the natural rights of mankind."
In the philosophical preamble he expressed the same sort of thoughts that
he had already jotted down in the course of his reading. His sharp
condemnation of past rulers, civil and ecclesiastical, who in "impious
presumption" had "assumed dominion over the faith of others," and thus
had established and maintained "false religions" throughout all time over
most of the world, represented his historical judgment; and his objections
to enforced contributions to any church were directed particularly against
the assessment bill. To him, however, it seemed that practically everything
he said was timeless. He was not merely expressing thoughts or even
convictions, but what he regarded as eternal truths. Nor were these limited
to the subject of religion; they constituted an assertion of complete
intellectual liberty. The mind is by nature free and altogether insusceptible
of coercion; the opinions of men are not under the jurisdiction of civil
government; truth will prevail if left to herself; errors cease to be dangerous
when one is permitted freely to contradict them.Some of these maxims of his own faith did not appear in the final act. His
bill was first introduced soon after he became governor, and enough people
then regarded it as a "diabolical scheme" to prevent its passage. 14
Sentiment had changed by the end of the year 1785, after he had crossed
the Atlantic and James Madison had persuaded the legislators to give
belated attention to the recommendations of the revisors. They were then
ready to go as far as Jefferson desired in statutory enactment, but a
considerable number of them demurred at his philosophical preamble. It
was then proposed that a brief statement
"Ford, n, 239. 14 Ibid., 237 n.
from the Declaration of Rights be substituted for it. This amendment was
defeated by a large majority in the House of Delegates, but it bobbed up
again in the Senate and would not down. In the end Madison agreed to the
deletion of some of the more sweeping statements about the supremacy and
illimitability of reason; and, as a result, the statute did not rest on quite so
broad a base as the one its author had designed. Nevertheless, Madison
dared believe that in Virginia "the ambitious hope of making laws for the
human mind" had been forever extinguished. 15
The Assembly did not weaken the bill enough to mar Jefferson's pride in
authorship; and, before a year was out, he was rejoicing over the favorable
notice of it in the Old World. He naturally wrote to Madison, who had
presided as midwife at its legislative birth.
The Virginia act for religious freedom has been received with infinite
approbation in Europe & propagated with enthusiasm. I do not mean by the
governments, but by the individuals which compose them. It has been
translated into French & Italian, has been sent to most of the courts of
Europe, & has been the best evidence of the falsehood of those reports
which stated us to be in anarchy. It is inserted in the new Encyclopedic, &
is appearing in most of the publications respecting America. In fact it is
comfortable to see the standard of reason at length erected, after so many
ages during which the human mind has been held in vassalage by kings,
priests & nobles: and it is honorable for us to have produced the first
legislature who had the courage to declare that the reason of man may be
trusted with the formation
C 1 • inof his
own opinions
The immediate attention this statute received abroad may be attributed
partly to Jefferson's own activities, for he promptly had it printed and he
circulated it as widely as he could. Its importance in his own history is
owing partly to the emphasis he himself always gave it. He rated it as
second in importance only to the Declaration of Independ-
15 To Jefferson, Jan. 22, 1786; Writings, II, 216. The amendment to strike
out the preamble, made on Dec. 16, 1785, was defeated 66 to 38. This is
one of the rare cases in which the ayes and noes on one of Jefferson's bills
were inserted in the record. Among those favoring the amendment were
Benjamin Harrison, John Tyler, Joseph Jones, and Jefferson's old friend
John Page; among those opposing it were Madison, John Taylor, and W. C.
Nicholas. It was defeated a second time on Dec. 29, 1785; Jefferson's old
playmate and friend, Thomas Mann Randolph, then appeared on the
conservative side. The two houses finally agreed on Jan. 16, 1786, and the
bill was signed three days later. Ail the above is from Delegates, Journal;
the act is in Hening, XII, 84-86.
16 Dec. 16, 1786 (Ford, IV, 334).
ence in such lists of his own achievements as he afterwards drew up. 17 As
an official pronouncement it emanated from a single Commonwealth, not
from the federal Union, but he undoubtedly believed that he had spoken for
the human race. Despite the deletions made by the Assembly it was a
proclamation of both the intellectual and the religious independence of the
individual, and as such it deserves to be ranked with the declaration of the
political independence of a group of states. Its fame was not fortuitous.
After more than a century and a half it remains an ineffaceable landmark of
human liberty; and men in any land would do well to turn to it at any time
that persecution for opinion may raise its ugly head.
Before he knew what the fate of his bill for the more general diffusion of
knowledge would be, Jefferson went so far as to say that it was the most
important one in the entire report of the revisors. 18 He did not quite mean
that, but if it had been enacted as he drew it and proved effectual in practice
it probably would have been listed with the statute for religious freedomamong his greatest achievements. Unfortunately, however, it was not
passed until almost the end of the century, and he could take little pride in
the truncated statute which then emerged from the legislative mill. The
most constructive part of his program of reform remained in the blue-print
stage, and for long years it looked as though his efforts to illuminate the
minds of the people generally had been crowned with futility. In the light
of history, however, nothing else that he did or proposed during his entire
career showed him more clearly to be a major American prophet. By the
time that the report of the revisors was submitted, when he was thirty-six,
he had ceased to be a mere disciple of enlightenment; he had become an
apostle, even though his full stature was not yet perceived everywhere. 19
In long retrospect, Americans have come to regard him as the chief prophet
of public education in the first half-century of the Union;
17 In the summary which he drew in September 1800, the earliest I have
found, he lists first his services in rendering the Rivanna River navigable,
possibly because he started out with the idea of following a chronological
order, as in general he continued to do. This summary is in LC, 219:39,161.
It is printed, with approximate date, in Ford, VII, 475-477. The brief
description on his tombstone is generally known.
18 To George Wythe, Aug. 13, 1786; Ford, IV, 268.
19 Bill in Ford, II, 220-229. Jefferson's comments in his Notes on Va.,
Ibid., Ill, 251-256, are contemporary; his brief comments in his
Autobiography, Ibid., I, 66-67, were made much later. The documents on
the subject are reprinted as appendices in the excellent monograph of R. J.
Honeywell, Educational Work of Thomas Jefferson (Cambridge, Mass.,
1931).
and it is doubtful if any other American name has been so often cited in
popular addresses and writings on this perennially interesting subject. This
is owing in part to the political eminence he attained, and partly to the apt
sayings that are scattered through his collected writings. Some of the most
famous of these quotations are from private letters, such as one to George
Wythe from Paris in which he said: "Preach, my dear Sir, a crusade against
ignorance; establish and improve the law for educating the common
people." 20 Not until after his death could such sayings as these gain wide
currency, and they might have remained forever unknown if he had beenpolitically obscure.
The most important reason for the recognition of his importance as an
educational prophet, however, is that his fundamental ideas have withstood
the test of time. Some of them became so generally accepted that they can
almost be taken for granted, and one is tempted to believe that they were
indigenous to the American soil. They found fertile ground on the new
continent, beyond a doubt, but before they took root they had to be
seminated. Jefferson started sowing his seed in the early morning of the
Republic. There have been other conspicuous crusaders against ignorance,
but he anticipated the great American doctrine in the bills he drew in
Virginia. Also, he added refinements and qualifications that were
distinctive of his own discriminating philosophy, and even now the larger
public is not fully aware of these.
His greatest services were rendered to posterity, but his immediate
activities stand out in sharp relief against their specific background of place
and time. In colonial and Revolutionary Virginia formal education was
largely a private matter and its benefits were almost wholly restricted to the
gentry. Judging from its fruits, including Jefferson himself, the system was
better than he thought it. Its chief merit was that it produced capable
leaders, and he was concerned that it should continue to do this, on the
basis of a more rational plan. He was unquestionably correct in concluding
that the existing system rested on a dangerously narrow base.
The preamble to his historic bill does not lend itself to detached quotation,
as the sayings in his letters do, but it contains a clear statement of purposes
he continued to cherish throughout his life.
His emphasis was on public purposes. The most important of these was to
guard the freedom and happiness of individual members of society, but he
did not describe education here in terms of personal refinement and culture.
Fear of tyranny, even though this was only incipient tyranny, was
prominent if not predominant in his thought,
20 Aug. 13, 1786 (Ford, IV, 269).
He saw the most effective preventive in the illumination of the minds of the
people at large. He was particularly anxious to give them knowledge of the
facts of history, in order that they would recognize dangerous politicalambition in any shape.
Second only to his purpose to prevent tyranny and safeguard freedom was
the desire to assure wise and honest government. This necessitated the
training of leaders. Nothing in his plans called for the diminution of the
educational opportunities of those whose parents were able to pay for them.
However, he expected that some of these fortunate persons would prove
unworthy to receive and unable to guard "the sacred deposit of the rights
and liberties of their fellow citizens"; and he was convinced that it was
folly to leave the public welfare dependent on the accidental circumstances
of wealth or birth. Accordingly, he sought to make higher schooling
available without charge to selected youths of marked native ability who
would emerge from the unprivileged groups.
From our point of view Jefferson's specific proposals represented a modest
compromise between public and private education, but in contemporary
Virginia they seemed both comprehensive and revolutionary. By means of
this bill for the diffusion of knowledge he sought to establish, throughout
the State, schools of two levels. The "hundred" schools, which we should
call primary, were to serve relatively small districts or "hundreds," and
were designed to effect his purposes of general public enlightenment. Three
years of education were to be given gratis to all white children, male and
female. However, these schools were not to be wholly public, for any child
whose parents could pay for him might stay longer if he liked.
On the next level there were to be "grammar" schools, set up in districts
including several counties. Provision was made for the lodging and
boarding of the students. The State was to own the grounds and buildings,
but most of the running expenses were to be met by the parents, and to a
much greater extent than the "hundred" schools these were to be private.
Only the youths of great native ability "raked from the rubbish annually,"
and subjected thereafter to specified processes of elimination, were to be
supported by the State. A final survivor of the competition was to be sent
annually to the College of William and Mary, at the charge of the
Commonwealth.
Not very long after he drew the bill, Jefferson summarized his own
expectations from it:
. . . The ultimate result of the whole scheme of education would be the
teaching all the children of the State reading, writing, and commonarithmetic; turning out ten annually of superior
genius, well taught in Greek, Latin, geography, and the higher branches of
arithmetic; turning out ten others annually, of still superior parts, who, to
those branches of learning, shall have added such of the sciences as their
genius shall have led them to; the furnishing to the wealthier part of the
people convenient schools at which their children may be educated at their
own expence. 21
These proposals reveal him as a realistic and discriminating demo-ocrat, or
as an informed and critical aristocrat — whichever term may be preferred.
His concern was to broaden the educational base of society and, at the same
time, to search out and utilize for the public good the aristocracy of worth
and genius which he afterwards described as "the most precious gift of
nature." M He tried to frame a comprehensive program. "The general
objects of this law," he said, "are to provide an education adapted to the
years, to the capacity, and the condition of every one, and directed to their
freedom and happiness." M He expected no Utopia overnight but he was
convinced that he was on the right track. In later years his American
countrymen had no doubt he was, though they were more disposed than he
to emphasize quantity for its own sake and more reluctant to apply
selective standards at any stage of the educational process.
According to Madison, the Assembly gave Jefferson's bill indulgent
consideration when they took it up in 1786, but they deferred it because
they regarded the financial requirements as beyond the powers of the State.
24 The author himself believed that the necessary tax would be only the
"thousandth part" of what would be paid to the kings, priests, and nobles
who would rise up if the people were left in ignorance. He afterwards said
that wealthy men were reluctant to assume the burden of educating the
children of the poor, but other practical difficulties may be recognized
which reflect less on human nature. 25
The geographical problem was particularly difficult. Naturally and
properly, Jefferson devised a system for the entire State, but this was really
an imperial domain, including a vast and sparsely settled region beyond the
mountains. Virginia was not like Massachusetts, and the setting up of
primary schools which would be within walking distance of every house
would have been difficult and costly even in Tide-21 Notes on Virginia, Ford, III, 252.
"To John Adams, Oct. 28, 1813 (Ford, IX, 425).
28 Ford, III, 252.
2i To Jefferson, Dec. 4, 1786 {Writings, II, 292). See also Delegates,
Journal, Dec. 21, 1785.
28 To Wythe, Aug. 13, 1786 (Ford, IV, 269); reference to the later history
of the act of 1796 {Ibid., I, 67).
water. 26 Jefferson himself stated that it would not have been proper for
him to specify details of organization, but actually he did devise and
incorporate a rather complicated general plan. Certain features of this came
in for valid criticism, and amendments of some sort were necessary. After
he had finally emerged from the shackles of public life he amended his own
plan, but that is another story. The only part of his bill that became law in
the eighteenth century was the portion dealing with the primary schools,
and the establishment of these was left to the will of the localities. As
things turned out, the will proved lacking. All he was able to do, therefore,
was to set up a guidepost for the future.
He already envisaged a system of public education which had as its apex an
institution of the highest learning, but his legislative efforts to transform the
College of William and Mary were unavailing. In the bill he drew he was
sharply critical of his alma mater, baldly asserting that it had not answered
expectations. 27 He regarded it as subject to public direction, however, and
believed that its charters could and should be so altered and amended as to
render the institution publicly advantageous, in proportion as it was
publicly expensive. Furthermore, he thought it the peculiar duty of the
legislature at this crucial time to aid the seminary where the future
guardians of the rights and liberties of their country might be "endowed
with science and virtue, to watch and preserve the sacred deposit." The
specific amendments proposed by him looked toward the much closer
identification of the College with the State and the enlargement of its
services until it should deal with all the "useful sciences." Without saying
so precisely, what he really anticipated at this early date was a state
university.The tie with the State was to be tightened by causing the reduced governing
board to be elected annually by the Assembly and by providing for more
stable support from public funds. A unique administrative provision was
for three chancellors, to be chosen from the judges of the High Court of
Chancery or of the General Court, who were to constitute a judiciary in all
disputes relating to faculty or students. In view of Jefferson's later role as
the founder of a university, however, none of his recommendations are
quite so interesting as those relating to the enlargement of the faculty and
the designation of fields of service. He wanted to increase the professors
from six to eight, to get rid of the two chairs of divinity and the Indian
school, and to introduce the study of law, medicine, history, and modern
languages. There being no longer real need for an Indian school, he thought
that a missionary to the
26 Difficulties summarized in Honeywell, p. 14, ch. 3.
27 Bill in Ford, II, 229-235.
Indians might be appointed instead, but this missionary was also to perform
a scholarly service: he was to investigate their laws, customs, and, most of
all, their languages.
On half a dozen counts Jefferson showed himself in this bill to be an
American prophet in the field of higher education. He himself believed that
it was defeated by the dissenting sects; they still looked with disfavor upon
an institution which had been historically Anglican, and their fears were
not allayed by his amendments. He was not permitted to transform the
College into a genuinely public institution or to enlarge its faculty. During
his governorship, however, when he served as a member of the board of
visitors, he was able to change the professorships to some degree and thus
to become a pioneer as well as a prophet. He did introduce professorships
of law, medicine, and modern languages, and if these were not the first of
the sort in the United States the people in Williamsburg have been many
years in error. Law and medicine were committed to his old friends George
Wythe and James McClurg, while modern languages were entrusted to an
Italian, Charles Bellini. The gratitude and affection of the latter for
Jefferson were excessive. He is perhaps the only man in history known to
have addressed the philosopher as "My dearest Thomas." 28
Jefferson took special pride in the work of Wythe, and before he went toFrance he was ambitious to add other professorships: on the ancient
languages and literature of the North, for example. Also, he still wanted to
find somebody to deal with the customs and languages of the Indians. 29
Not for long years did he return to a detailed consideration of the needs of
higher education, but in one fundamental respect he showed himself in his
late thirties to be qualified to found a university: his scholarly interest was
universal.
This learned and extraordinarily farseeing architect of laws and institutions
also sought to further a high educational purpose by establishing a public
library in Richmond. 80 His bill for this was not enacted, but by his
personal activities as a collector of books during these Revolutionary years
he amply demonstrated his own conviction that they were of supreme
importance. No American of his generation did more by precept and
example, if anybody did so much, to emphasize the sacred freedom of the
human spirit and the necessary nourishment of the mind.
28 W. & M., 2 ser., V, 1-29.
29 Comments in Notes on Virginia, in Ford, III, 252, 255-257. ,0 Ford, II,
236-237.
The Amenities of War 1777-1779
AS a member of the House of Delegates, Jefferson did not have a full-time
position. It is true that the sessions were longer than they had been in the
old House of Burgesses; once he was seventy-nine days in unbroken
attendance. 1 But even in these war years this was unusual, and despite his
being an important public character he could spend most of his time at
home.
His work as a revisor of the laws he did almost entirely at Monti-cello,
since that was much the best place to do it. His library there was growing
by leaps and bounds. After the deaths of Peyton Randolph and Richard
Bland he had purchased the books these distinguished kinsmen had left,
including some rare volumes of Virginia manuscripts. The books he got
from the Reverend Samuel Henley, after that philosophical professor left
the College of William and Mary, were of a somewhat different character,
but everything was grist for his mill. 2 He was also collecting old Virginia
newspapers and laws. Finding that many of the latter had disappeared, heset out to assemble all that remained — in manuscript, in fugitive printed
sheets, or in any other form. 3 While acquiring and preserving these
perishable materials of local history, he was thinking of posterity, but he
was also facilitating his own immediate task.
He had other public responsibilities besides those of a delegate and revisor,
but most of these were local in their setting. As county lieu-
1 Payment for 79 days, Oct. 20, 1777-Jan. 24, 1778, noted in his Fee Book.
2 To H. P. Taylor, Oct. 4, 1823 (L. & B.,'XV, 472); to Henley, June 9,
1778 (Ford, II, 160-161); Mar. 3, 1785 (MHS); from Henley, Nov. 16,
1785 {Papers, MHS, p. 15).
8 Details given in letters to George Wythe, Jan. 16, 1796 (L. & B., IX,
319-323); to W. W. Hening, Jan. 14, 1807 (Ibid., XI, 138-139); and
elsewhere.
tenant, Colonel Jefferson had to do much paper work in connection with the
militia, and in the spring of 1777 his name was added to the list of
Albemarle magistrates as a justice of the peace. He kept in intimate touch
with the affairs of the Commonwealth, whose future he was seeking to
chart, and through letters from members of Congress he was informed of
the affairs of the Continent. He showed no such diligence in
correspondence, however, as he did later. Much of his time was given to
the public councils and most of it to public matters, but he could continue
to be a diligent legal scholar, an enthusiastic observer of nature, a generous
country gentleman, and a solicitous pater familias. This was a combination
of roles he greatly liked.
He had his wife with him briefly in George Wythe's house on the Palace
Green during his first session in the Assembly, but she was not in
Williamsburg when the delegates next met in May, 1777. That was the
major reason why he himself was there for only sixteen days in a session of
eight weeks. He was given a leave of absence because of impending
domestic events. At ten in the evening on May 28, after he got back to
Monticello, their first and only son was born. This shortlived infant appears
in the record merely as "our son." For a time they probably thought of him
as another Thomas but presumably he was never christened, and in his third
week, soon after ten in the evening, he died. 4For more than a year longer little Patsy remained the only child. She was
nearing six when her precise father made another entry in his notebook.
"Our third daughter born," he recorded on August 1, 1778, giving the hour
as 1:30 a.m. 5 Undoubtedly he was disappointed not to get a boy — but he
loved children, even girls. This one was named Mary. It may not have been
wholly on her account that he remained in Albemarle until the fall session
of the Assembly had almost run its course, but by that time the persistence
of this young life seemed relatively sure. She did not live as long as he did
but she grew up, being afterwards known as Maria and, more familiarly, as
Polly. She became a pretty lady like her mother, as the servants said.
The year of Polly's birth, 1778, was one of much building and planting at
Monticello. In February the Master contracted for three stone columns and
recorded that 90,000 good bricks had been made. In one month in
midsummer he said that 14,120 were laid. In the spring, among other acts
of husbandry, he added numerous grafted trees to his orchard: cherries,
apples, pears, quinces, plums, apricots, and bitter almonds. In the fall he
got from Philip Mazzei's neighboring place,
4 Account Book, June 14, 1777.
6 Ibid., Aug. 1, 1778. It will be recalled that his second daughter had died-
Colle, the shoot of an olive tree sprung from Italian stock, reflecting as he
planted it that it would take ten years to bear. He measured with exactitude
the circumference of the roundabout walk encompassing his mountaintop,
and the distance to the place where his millhouse should stand. Now as
always his activities were unceasing — but they had the domestic flavor
and the constructive quality that he most liked. 6
He was not unaware that a war was going on, and not uninformed about its
dirty side. His friend Thomas Nelson, Junior, who was closer to the scene
of military action, wrote him luridly about the conduct of the "damned
invaders," who played the very devil with the girls to satisfy their lewd
appetites and left few virgins behind them. 7 This correspondent and others
repeated the sad story of the general apathy and selfishness of the people.
"Rely on it, our confederacy is not founded on brotherly love," wrote his
friend John Harvie, who was briefly a congressman. When Washington was
at "Forge Valley" and Congress was at York, Pennsylvania, Harvie said in
great discouragement: "The avarice of individuals will be more fatal to theliberties of America than the sword of the enemy." He was sure his fellow
Virginians would execrate the states of Pennsylvania and Delaware if he
were there. However, he reported Burgoyne's surrender; and news of the
French alliance came after that. 8
This turn of events reassured the naturally optimistic Jefferson. By the
summer of 1778 he was saying that all doubt of the favorable outcome of
the war was removed by the interposition of France. Accordingly, he
thought it not improper to employ what leisure he had from public duties in
the philosophical pursuits of which he was so fond. 9 He used the term
"philosophy" in no technical, academic sense, but gave it the generalized
meaning that was current in his age. Its closest modern analogy is science
but there was a sweeping universality about it, for by observing the diverse
manifestations of nature he and his contemporaries hoped also to discover
the divine plan for man. Philosophy included many things, among them the
study of climate and temperature he was then carrying on at Monticello and
continued all his
6 Garden Book, pp. 76-80, and notes.
7 Jan. 2, 1777, from Baltimore, in LC, 2:354.
8 Sept. 10, Sept. 20, Dec. 29, 1777, in LC, 3:390-391, 392, 404-405.
9 To Giovanni Fabbroni, June 8, 1778. This highly interesting letter, on
which this and the following paragraph are largely based, was published
without name in Ford, II, 156-160, from a draft now in LC, 3:419;
autograph letter at Clements Library, Ann Arbor, Mich., photostat UVA.
Jefferson was probably replying to Fabbroni's letter of Sept. 15, 1776, in
LC, 2:301, giving the date 1777 in error. If this surmise is correct, that
letter was 21 months in reaching Jefferson. Fabbroni may have made a brief
visit to America, but the implication is that he had not. He was a friend of
Mazzei's.
life. "I make my daily observations as early as possible in the morning and
again about 4 o'clock in the afternoon," he said. The theodolite he had
bought at the first of the year he regarded as a philosophical instrument; by
means of it he calculated the angle of intersection of distant mountains with
the horizon. 10His mind was also much on music, which was not philosophy precisely but
was one of the good things to be found in the vast harmony of nature. He
wrote to a young Italian friend of Mazzei's, then in Paris, that music was
the favorite passion of his soul, though unhappily it was in a barbaric state
in America. He was now longing for a band of domestic musicians but his
fortune was not equal to that. He had a gardener, a weaver, and a
stonecutter, however, and hoped to secure a vigneron. He believed that in
cultivated Italy or France his correspondent might find for him men of
these useful trades who could also perform on the French horn, the clarinet,
the hautboy, or the bassoon. This letter was actually captured by the
British, and he did not get musical workmen from Europe, but it is
noteworthy that he wanted an orchestra of this homely and useful sort.
Meanwhile, he was giving thought to celestial mechanics. In June, 1778,
there was an eclipse of the sun which John Page and the Reverend James
Madison observed at Williamsburg with indifferent success because of
atmospheric conditions. These were somewhat better at Monti-cello where
Jefferson stood watch, but he was at a disadvantage because he lacked a
thoroughly dependable timepiece. Accordingly, he wrote the ingenious
David Rittenhouse in Philadelphia, reminding him of the promise to make
him an accurate clock, solely for astronomical purposes. 11 He spoke
admiringly of that mathematician's noted representation of the solar system
known as an "orrery." Also, he expressed the personal opinion that the
governing of a commonwealth did not require the first order of ability and
that higher and better things were expected of a philosopher.
Rittenhouse had been principally employed of late in the civil government
of Pennsylvania, and Jefferson, with the zeal of "a true Whig in science,"
was mildly upbraiding him. As he put it, "nobody can conceive that nature
ever intended to throw away a Newton upon the occupations of a crown."
The geniuses of men, he believed, should be employed according to their
orders and degrees. "I doubt not," he said, "there are in your country many
persons equal to the task of conducting government: but you should
consider that the world has but one
10 Garden Book, p. 80.
11 July 19, 1778, Ford, II, 162-163. He probablv did not know how
successful Rittenhouse had been in observing the same eclipse.Ryttenhouse [sic], and that it never had one before. . . . Are those powers
then, which . . . are, like air and light, the world's common property, to be
taken from their proper pursuit to do the commonplace drudgery of
governing a single state, a work which may be executed by men of an
ordinary stature, such as are always and everywhere to be found?"
He had made no scientific contributions that would have warranted his
comparing himself with Rittenhouse and Franklin, and he made no such
comparison. Nor did he claim for himself the exemption from ordinary
civil obligations that he believed they were entitled to. He could hardly
have failed to see that his major public employment in the Commonwealth
of Virginia had closely accorded with his special talents and his training. In
the spring of 1779, nevertheless, he talked to his friend Edmund Pendleton
about retiring. This collaborator of his, who knew so well where his
demonstrated talent lay, answered him with neat finality: "You are too
young to ask that happy quietus from the public, and should at least
postpone it till you have taught the rising generation the forms as well as
the substantial principles of legislation." 12
If George Washington had been consulted at this juncture, he would have
been less sympathetic and would have laid the emphasis elsewhere than on
the rising generation and local legislation. He was forced to think of
immediate necessities and to view the whole Continental stage. In the
winter of 1778-1779 it seemed to him that the common interests of
America were moldering, and would sink into "irretrievable ruin" if better
men were not soon sent to Congress. Writing to Benjamin Harrison, then
speaker of the House of Delegates, he asked: "Where is Mason, Wythe,
Jefferson, Nicholas, Pendleton, Nelson, and another I could name? The
harassed Commander expressed the same idea a few months later to
George Mason, when he again inquired where the men of ability were. "Let
this voice . . . call upon you, Jefferson and others," he said. 13 In his
opinion these patriotic leaders were much too absorbed in their own affairs
and those of their Commonwealth. 14
12 To Jefferson, May 11, 1779 (LC, 3:484).
"Washington to Harrison, Dec. 18-30, 1778 (Fitzpatrick, XIII, 467); to
Mason, Mar. 27, 1779 (Ibid., XIV, 301).
14 Beveridge in Marshall, I, 125-130, misses the point of Washington's
complaint against the Virginia leaders. His surmise that the question,"Where is Jefferson?" was echoed among the "shivering soldiers and
officers" is fanciful. The prominence of Jefferson in their minds may not be
assumed, and if the beginnings of John Marshall's personal estimate of his
later political foe "may be found in their relative situation and conduct"
during this period, it is hard to explain why James Monroe, who went
through the same sort of hardships as Marshall, arrived at an entirely
different personal estimate of Jefferson.
The county lieutenant and first citizen of Albemarle was not resting under
his own vine and fig tree, but he was considerably engaged in long-range
tasks with little direct bearing on the winning of the war. Furthermore, to
some people he appeared to be indulging his personal tastes too
complacently in these perilous times. There was more than a joke in the
remark of Edward Rutledge of South Carolina about his condescending to
come down from above and interesting himself in human affairs. 15 But his
contemporaries did not blame him for not being in the Continental Army.
Entirely apart from his family obligations, his greater usefulness in the
public councils was obvious.
How good a soldier he would have been, if circumstances had caused him
to become one, is a matter of sheer speculation. Being a skillful horseman
and a ready writer, he could have been an effective military aide, especially
if he had been as young as Alexander Hamilton or James Monroe, but he
was somewhat too old and rather too prominent for that sort of post. He had
had no experience commanding troops in the field. He always preferred
persuasion to command, anyway, and he had no ambitions whatever for
military glory. There is significance in the fact that he was rarely called
"Colonel," though many of his fellows often were designated thus, without
having any better claim to the title than he had. Quite clearly, his
contemporaries thought of him as a civilian type.No one who did as much as he to bring about this war could be termed a
pacifist. Nor was he unique in being too sanguine at this stage about the
larger military situation; most people underestimated the difficulties, as
Washington often lamented. But unquestionably his temperament and
philosophy tended to make him err on the side of optimism. He not only
thought the war more nearly won than it actually was; he also kept on
regarding it as more civilized than it turned out to be. He overestimated
both the reasonableness and the politeness of men; and he believed that,
even in the midst of conflict, the amenities should and could be generally
observed.
While still in Congress he wrote these words:
When necessity compelled us to take up arms against Great Britain in
defense of our just rights, we thought it a circumstance of comfort that our
enemy was brave and civilized. It is the happiness of modern times that the
evils of necessary war are softened by the refinement of manners &
sentiments and that an enemy is an object of vengeance, in arms, & in the
field only. 16
15 To Jefferson, Feb. 12, 1779 (LC, 3:450).
16 Declaration concerning Ethan Allen (Ford, I, 494).
This was preliminary to his burning indictment of the British for violating
the "rights of nations" in the case of Ethan Allen, who had been captured in
Canada and, as he thought, badly treated. The measure of his indignation
was also the measure of his sense of propriety. At no time had his
resolution wavered but he assumed that men would generally wage war like
gentlemen. He even invested a letter of introduction of a young soldier with
a sort of idyllic charm. In these words he commended a recruit to the
patronage of a high officer "in the school of honor":
The bearer hereof, Mr. Strother Jones, son of a friend of mine [Gabriel
Jones], is now setting out for the American army to share in the defense of
his country. He is from nature well principled, for war bold, honorable &
modest: but he is young also & will need the fatherly hand of some one to
lead him thro' the mazes of military delicacy & duty on so large a scale. . . ,
17Even before he became governor, the aura of honor and humanitari-anism
with which Jefferson had surrounded war was occasionally dispelled. The
very fact that he was so humanitarian in spirit made him the more relentless
whenever he believed that the rights of humanity had been violated. This
was shown not only in his threats of reprisal against the British for their
reported treatment of Ethan Allen. It was also shown in a case of treason,
when one Josiah Phillips was spreading terror through the southeastern
counties of Virginia and, in Patrick Henry's words, was warring against the
human race. For a good many months this murderous insurrectionist was
Public Enemy Number One. Treason was subject to the penalty of death in
Jefferson's generally humane bill for proportioning crimes and
punishments; and in this instance treason was countered by a bill of
attainder which he introduced precipitately in the House of Delegates. 18
The later description of this action by Edmund Randolph as a "striking and
shocking" violation of the Declaration of Rights was not technically
correct. Randolph was attorney general at the time and should have
remembered that the bill of attainder was not actually employed; the
outlawed Phillips was tried and condemned by regular legal process,
probably on the suggestion of the judges, and there seems no doubt that he
richly deserved his fate. 19 Nor can there be any doubt that
17 Apr. 18, 1777, to an unnamed officer (LC, 2:203); punctuation slighdy
modified.
18 May 28, 1778 (Ford, II, 149-154, with detailed editorial note).
19 Va. Mag., XLIV, 223. W. P. Trent gave a history of the case in A.H.R.,
I, 444-454 (Apr. 1896). He definitely discredited Randolph's credibility as a
witness. He discredited Jefferson's to no considerable degree but described
his attitude as inconsistent with his professed ideals.
Jefferson was normally a stickler for legality and dreaded any sort of
arbitrary power. He expressed no regret about his attitude in this extreme
case, however. In the pursuit of such objects as winning the war and
preventing the suffering of the innocent he could be ruthless. Before he
became governor, however, he was relatively free to indulge his fondness
not only for philosophical inquiry but also for the amenities. His relation
with the Convention prisoners, which is interesting in itself, is a case in
point.In January, 1779, some four thousand of the troops, English and Hessian,
who were surrendered by Burgoyne at Saratoga marched nearly seven
hundred miles from Boston to Albemarle County. According to the
Convention they were to be sent to England, and when Congress demurred
Burgoyne said, "The public faith is broke." They were known as the
"Convention troops," notwithstanding. Conditions for which Jefferson was
in no way responsible were bad when they arrived in his neighborhood.
The barracks on a high hill a few miles northwest of Charlottesville were
unfinished, the weather was unspeakable, and the meat provided for them
was largely spoiled because of slovenly butchering and lack of salt. Within
a few weeks the rumor spread that the prisoners would be moved
elsewhere; and Jefferson, soon after he had brought his family back from a
visit to the Forest, took the matter up.
He discussed it at length with Governor Patrick Henry, addressing some
arguments to the self-interest of the County and the State but concerning
himself to a notable degree with the interests of the troops themselves. 20
They were now living in completed barracks with gardens and poultry of
their own; they were in excellent health; and in his opinion they had
rendered captivity comfortable.
... I would not endeavor to show that their lives are valuable to us [he said],
because it would suppose a possibility that humanity was kicked out of
doors in America, and interest only attended to. . . . But is an enemy so
execrable, that, though in captivity, his wishes and comforts are to be
disregarded and even crossed? I think not. It is for the benefit of mankind to
mitigate the horrors of war as much as possible. The practice, therefore, of
modern nations, of treating captive enemies with politeness and generosity,
is not only delightful in contemplation, but really interesting to all the
world, friends, foes, and neutrals. 21
20 To Patrick Henry, Mar. 27, 1779 (Ford, II, 167-180).
21 Ibid., II, 175-176.
For humane reasons, no less than for local pride, he wanted the Convention
prisoners to stay; and probably he would have argued thus in any case. The
fact was, however, that he also had a deep personal interest and liked to
have them near by — chiefly because of the officers, who added greatly to
the joy and charm of life. The highest ones had become near neighbors ofhis.
The ranking British officer, Major General William Phillips, formerly
second in command to Burgoyne, rented Colonel Carter's place, Blenheim.
The ranking Hessian, Major General Baron de Riedesel, took Philip
Mazzei's place, Colle; and about the middle of February his vivacious wife
and three young daughters joined him there. The Italian was going to
Europe on a financial mission for the State of Virginia which Jefferson and
others had contrived. Jefferson had hastened to rent Colle to four young
officers, one of them a German who played the violin, but the necessities of
the Riedesels seemed greater and they got the place. Mazzei with his wife
and stepdaughter remained about three weeks, under circumstances of vast
confusion. The General had his revenge, however. Within a week his
horses destroyed Mazzei's vineyard and brought the latter's experiment in
vine culture in Virginia to a decisive end. 22
Jefferson regretted this and probably would have preferred the voung
officers as neighbors, but the Riedesels were a good exchange for the
Mazzeis. The exuberant Florentine had worn Jefferson down, and his wife
was a person of unpleasing manners, though the stepdaughter was a
favorite of Mrs. Jefferson's. The Baron made numerous and expensive
improvements at Colle and his family settled down in relative comfort,
though the Baroness complained a good deal. She was fearful of
rattlesnakes and terrified by thunderstorms, and as the season wore on she
loathed the heat. The Baron himself suffered a sunstroke before they left.
They could hardly have been expected to like this country, but things were
made easier for them by their kind and cultivated neighbor and his amiable
wife. 23
Jefferson sedulously avoided discussion of public matters with the officers,
but he recognized no bar to the exchange of hospitalities. Preserved in his
papers are invitations to and from the chief Britisher, one of which we shall
cite.
22 Mazzei, Memoirs, pp. 224-226; Garlick, Mazzei, pp. 51-53; Letters and
Journals relating to . . . the American Revolution, by Mrs. General
Riedesel, trans, by W. L. Stone (1867), p. 154; Memoirs, and Letters and
Journals, of Major General Riedesel, trans, from the original German of
Max von Eelking by W. L. Stone (1868), II, 65.
23 The Baroness made colorful comments on Colle and Virginia in herLetters and Journals, esp. pp. 155-157, but oddly enough she did not
mention Jefferson.
w THE AMENITIES OF WAR 295
Major General Phillips sends his Compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Jefferson,
requests the favour of their company at dinner on Thursday next at Two
oclock to meet General and Madame de Riedesel. Major General Phillips
hopes Miss Jefferson will be permitted to be of the party to meet the young
Ladies from Colle. 24
The Baron afterwards said that Jefferson showed him marks of friendship
from the first moment of their acquaintance. 26 The Virginian's relations
with General Phillips were friendly upon the surface, and he impressed that
proud officer with the liberality of his sentiments; but he preferred the
Hessians to the British as a group and it was they, chiefly, who enriched his
life. The Baroness, who was stout and handsome, created consternation in
Albemarle by wearing riding boots, but according to her own account she
charmed the rustics with her singing. Jefferson could hardly have failed to
hear her. He showed generous hospitality to the Riedesels at Monticello,
the two ladies became real friends, and the little German girls became
particularly attached to Mrs. Jefferson. 28
The circle was wider than the two families. It included other German
officers, among them Captain Baron de Geismar who played the violin.
There were special reasons why he wanted to be exchanged and Jefferson
exercised his good offices for him almost immediately. 27 Geismar left all
his music for his former host when he finally went away; the two men
corresponded afterwards; and they met again in Europe. 28
Jefferson lightened the heavy hours of another young Hessian, who was
deeply interested in philosophy. John Lewis de Unger wrote Jefferson that
his greatest loss in leaving Virginia was "the satisfaction of conversing
with a person in whom I find all the qualities which can arouse esteem and
affection," and that he hoped he might find another such benefactor
elsewhere. 29 The lord of Monticello was not a recognized sage as yet, but
already he had begun to exert the lure upon the
24 Apr. 11, 1779 CLC, 3:462). See also 3:463, Apr. 12, 1779. There is a
note on Phillips in Official Letters of the Governors of Va., II, 210, note165; and one on him and Riedesel in Henry Belcher, The First American
Civil War, First Period, II (London, 1911), 298-299.
25 To Jefferson, Dec. 4, 1779 (LC, 6:652). They may have met before
Jefferson got the invitation from Phillips.
26 Riedesel to Jefferson, June 13, 1780; LC, 5:735.
27 To R. H. Lee, Apr. 21, 1779 (Ford, II, 180-181); from R. H. Lee, May
22, 1779 (Ballagh, Letters, II, 56-57).
28 Among the earlier letters of Geismar may be cited one of Feb. 26, 1780,
and a fragment, probably from the same year, in LC, 5:706; 6:1037.
29 Nov. 13, 1780 (LC, 6:975, in French). Jefferson's reply of Nov. 30,
1780, is in Ford, II, 373-374.
young which gained him so many disciples in later years. No small part of
this attraction was owing to his sincere interest in them and in their future
course. In reply to this young man he said:
. . . When the course of events shall have removed you to distant scenes of
action where laurels not tarnished with the blood of my country may be
gathered, I shall urge sincere prayers for your obtaining every honor &
preferment which may gladden the heart of a souldier. On the other hand
should your fondness for philosophy resume it's merited ascendancy, is it
impossible to hope that this unexplored country may tempt your residence
by holding out materials wherewith to build a fame founded on the
happiness & not the calamities of human nature?
Another German officer, writing to someone else after Jefferson became
governor, gave a bit of description that is worthy of special note because
comments of this early date on Monticello and its residents are so rare.
. . . My only Occupation at present [said the unnamed officer], is to learn
the English language. It is the easier for me, as I have free Access to a
copious & well chosen Library of Colo. Jefferson's, Governor of Virginia. .
. . The Governor possesses a Noble Spirit of Building. He is now finishing
an elegant building, projected according to his own fancy. In his parlour he
is creating on the Cieling [sic] a Compass of his own invention by wich
[sic] he can know the Strength as well as Direction of the Winds. I havepromised to paint the Compass for it. He was much pleased with a fancy
Painting of mine ... As all Virginians are fond of Music, he is particularly
so. You will find in his House an elegant Harpsichord, Pianoforte & some
Violins. The latter he performs well upon himself, the former his Lady
touches very skilfully & who, is in all respects a very agreeable, sensible &
accomplished Lady. 80
In the midst of war Jefferson conversed with former enemies in the
international language of art, music, and philosophy, as well as the
universal speech of human kindness. One of his regrets about becoming
governor was that his friendly intercourse with these cultivated prisoners
was interrupted. He was distinctly helpful to them, however, as an
executive. When Riedesel, still suffering from his sunstroke, wanted to take
advantage of certain medicinal springs in the summer, the Governor
provided the necessary passports and granted him all possible
30 Extract from a Hamburg paper enclosed in a letter from Jacob Rubsamer
to Jefferson, Jan. 1, 1780 (LC, 6:994), and presumably translated by the
former.
freedom of movement. 81 He lent his aid to the efforts of Riedesel and
others to secure exchange, and carried on with the Baron a correspondence
marked by mutual affection and touched with humor. Madame at length
had another child and Jefferson sent condolences on the birth of another
daughter. 3 - Also, when the Baron congratulated him on his election as
governor, he said that condolences were really in order. This time he was
speaking in grim seriousness.
His new office was no bar to continued friendliness toward the Hessians,
but the Convention troops eventually became one of his serious problems,
and the later course of events was not favorable to amicable relations with
General Phillips. Jefferson soon had a more notorious British prisoner to
deal with than any he had known in Albemarle. General Hamilton, recently
of Detroit, did not wage civilized warfare, and toward him Jefferson was
relentless. If he did not know it already, he learned in the next two years
that this war involved exceedingly bitter business.
31 LC, 2:200, draft of a letter presumably addressed to Riedesel; Jefferson
to Riedesel, July 4, 1779 (L. & B., IV, 300-301); to Phillips, June 25, 1779
(LC, 3:518).32 May 13, 1780 (Ford, II, 302).
The Ordeal of a War Governor
The Limitations of Executive Power
JEFFERSON was thirty-six years old and a member of the Assembly on
June 1, 1779, when the two houses on joint ballot elected him Governor of
Virginia. He was gratified that his public conduct was thus approved, but
he soon remarked that the appointment was unlikely to add to his personal
happiness. Replying to one letter of congratulation, he said: "In a virtuous
government, and more especially in times like these, public offices are,
what they should be, burdens to those appointed to them, which it would be
wrong to decline, though foreseen to bring with them intense labour, and
great private loss." * He had not been in office a month when he said: "The
hour of private retirement to which I am drawn by my nature with a
propensity almost irresistible, will be the most welcome of my life." 2 That
hour did not come until two painful years had passed.
At the time of his election his wife and two daughters were not with him.
They were at the Forest, making one of their frequent visits to the
hospitable Eppes family, and the lady did not intend to come to
Williamsburg soon. 3 He himself was compelled to spend most of his time
at the seat of government, however, and he found it necessary to put a
steward in full charge at Monticello. 4 Williamsburg was still the capital
and the governor was expected to reside at the Palace, where Patrick Henry
had followed truculent Dunmore, gracious Botetourt, and brilliant
Fauquier. Jefferson had well known this former seat of royal prerogative
since his student days, and at some time before he occupied it he drew
plans for alterations which appear to have been
J To Richard Henry Lee, June 17, 1779 (Ford, II, 192). 2 To Maj. Gen.
William Phillips, June 25, 1779 (LC, 3:518).
3 Jefferson to John Page, June, 1779 (Ford, II, 188).
4 Garden Book, pp. 88-89. This was Thomas Garth, the first of a well-
known family in Albemarle. Other references to him are on pp. 71, 74. He
had also served as steward in 1778.partially carried out. 5 Probably his family did not move in until fall, and
he managed to spend most of August and September in Albemarle, but
during nearly all the rest of his governorship he was chained to his post. He
established a home in a rented house in Richmond when the government
moved there in the spring of 1780, and took a considerable retinue of
domestics with him. The house belonged to his uncle by marriage, Thomas
Turpin, and it had a garden. 6 He was more fortunate than some of the
other war governors of the era in being able to keep his family near him,
and no doubt he was physically comfortable; but neither in the old capital
nor the new one could he reproduce the free and elevated life of
Monticello, and he soon came to regard himself not as a public servant but
as a public slave. His fellow executives in other states felt much the same,
for they were all engaged in an onerous and thankless task, but it is
doubtful if any of them regretted so much the loss of liberty, on personal as
well as on philosophical grounds.
The political implications of his election are not wholly clear. The bare
facts are that on the first ballot he had a plurality but not a majority, the
other votes being divided between two intimate friends of his youth and
young manhood, John Page and Thomas Nelson, Junior. On the second
ballot Page got most of Nelson's votes but Jefferson got enough of them to
be elected, the final tally being 67 to 61. 7
This unnatural competition of persons caused momentary embarrassment
on both sides. Page, who was already president of the Council of State and
lieutenant governor, could not see the new Governor at once and soon had
to leave town. Therefore, he wrote a little note which called for a reply and
thus left a pleasant record. 8 He wanted to leave no shadow of suspicion
that he had "low dirty feelings" and was avoiding his old friend in order to
hide embarrassment. Jefferson was not to be outdone in politeness or
expressions of affection. "It had given me much pain," he wrote, "that the
zeal of our respective friends should ever have placed you and me in the
situation of competitors. I was comforted, however, with the reflection that
it was their competition,
5 Waterman, Mansions of Virginia, p. 394; drawings themselves, MHS. An
inventory of the household furniture in the Palace, dated June 16, 1779,
also found lodgment in his papers (LC, 3:508-509).
6 He took possession on Apr. 17, 1780 (Account Book). The state paid the
rent; see Gov. Benjamin Harrison to Jefferson, Oct. 3, 1782 {OfficialLetters of the Governors of Virginia, hereafter cited as O. L., Ill, 336). For
other details see Dumbauld, pp. 45^6, and Appendix II in that work.
7 Delegates, Journal, June 1, 1779. On the first ballot the vote was Jefferson
55^ Page 38, Nelson 32.
* Page to Jefferson, June 2, 1779 (LC, 3:493); Jefferson to Page, June,
1779, (Ford, II, 187-188).
not ours, and that the difference of the numbers which decided between us,
was too insignificant to give you a pain, or me a pleasure, had our
dispositions toward each other been such as to admit those sensations." As
for the constructions of the world, the world might go to the devil!
The rivalry caused no rift in ancient friendship. Page remained in office for
almost a year, and when he did leave the government he regretted that he
had to do so in Jefferson's administration. The political differences between
them soon ceased to seem important, but in June, 1779, their respective
friends divided roughly into the progressive and conservative groups which
have been described already. The former were more expansionist in
Western policy, less associated with mercantile interests, and more liberal
on questions of human rights. 9
Having served three successive terms of a year, Patrick Henry was no
longer eligible. Jefferson was chairman of the committee of the House of
Delegates which had notified him of his unopposed reelection the year
before. He himself was generally regarded as being with Henry rather than
against him, and his own political support came chiefly from the back
counties, while Page and Nelson were favored by Tidewater. 10 But
Jefferson had not created anything deserving the name of an organization.
If anybody had a personal organization Patrick Henry did, and it was
probably a relief to his successor when Demosthenes retired to his place
Leatherwood in the forests of Henry County. There, as he wrote Jefferson,
he heard scarcely a word of public matters; and he believed that his health
would never again permit him to apply himself closely to sedentary
business. He took a seat in the Assembly, however, before a year had
passed, and he followed a legislative course which did not meet the
Governor's full approval. By the summer of 1780 at least, Jefferson became
aware that the influence of his predecessor was something of a hindrance;
and at the session of the Assembly in the following fall, so anotherobserver said, the majority party was headed by Henry, who carried
everything in the House of Delegates as he pleased. He, not Jefferson, was
the most popular political leader of the Commonwealth. 11
The new Governor's disinterested devotion to the State and the
revolutionary cause, not his political skill, had most impressed his
associates.
e Abemethy, Western Lands, pp. 217-218, 219, 222-223.
10 J. J. Pringle to Arthur Lee, Aug. 19, 1779; UVA photostat of original in
Harvard Coll. Lib.
11 Henry to Jefferson, Feb. 15, 1780; in Henrv, Patrick Henry, II, 48-49;
Thcodo-rick Bland, Sr., to Theodorick Bland, Jr., Jan. 8, 1781, in Bland
Papers, II, 51; Maude H. Woodfln, in Essays in Honor of William E. Dodd
ed. by A. O. Craven, pp. 35-36. The particular issue in the May session of
1780 was that of the currency, which will be referred to hereafter.
Richard Henry Lee, who was often involved in intrigue, wrote him: "Every
good Whig will wish success to a governor whose principles of action are
not the incentives of whim, or the suggestions of partiality; but who is
influenced by motives of sound whiggism, which I take to be those of
genuine philanthropy." 12 Another contemporary said privately: "I wish
[his] excellency's activity may be equal to the abilities he possesses in so
eminent a degree. In that case we may boast of having the greatest man on
the continent at the helm. But if he should tread in the footsteps of his
predecessor, there is not much to be expected from the brightest talents." "
The reference was not to a program of domestic reform, for Patrick Henry
had none. Jefferson's own long-range program, as embodied in the report of
the revisors, was presented soon after this; and the spirit and needs of the
hour were such that it was left lying on the legislative table. The immediate
question was the prosecution of the war on Virginia's part and, as this
observer saw it, "never was a country in a more shabby situation." It was
practically defenseless, he said. At such a time oratory and personal politics
promised little. Unfortunately, the same might have been said of high
intellectual attainments and prophetic insight into the distant prospects of a
republican society.
Jefferson's own statement, when accepting the election, that he was fearfullest his poor endeavors should fall short of the kind expectations of his
country, was something more than a polite expression. 14 Fundamentally
he was modest, and his major services up to this point had been rendered in
the legislative rather than the executive department. However, there was no
reason for anybody to suppose that he lacked administrative qualifications,
in the narrow sense in which they were then understood. This industrious
and systematic man who had shown such diligence in details might have
been expected to be more efficient than his predecessor in daily business.
But Jefferson could not have been a high-powered modern executive even
if he had wanted to be one. The constitution of the State and the spirit of
the times made that quite impossible.
His scrupulous observance of the constitutional limitations upon the
executive might have been anticipated by anyone familiar with the
workings of his mind. To him fundamental law was not so sacred that it
could not be changed. Quite the contrary. But until it was changed it stood
as an expression of the public will and could not be challenged by a
particular official. Fear of governmental authority and its tendency
12 July 8, 1779; Ballagh, Letters, II, 82.
13 St. George Tucker to Theodorick Bland, Jr., June 6, 1779; Bland Papers.
II, 11. "O.L., II, 3.
to aggrandizement was thoroughly characteristic of him. Most of the
Patriots believed in what he called a free and mild government, but no one
did so more firmly than he, and few were more reluctant to yield it to the
exigencies of immediate circumstances. It may have been his weakness but
unquestionably it was his genius to take a long-range view of things.
He did not fully share the jealousy of executive power, as compared with
legislative, which was so rampant in that period and which had left its
negative impress on the constitution of his State. He never approved of
legislative omnipotence, and became bitter about it before the Revolution
was over; but he was even more bitter about the alleged proposals to
establish a dictatorship in Virginia in 1776 and again, at the close of his
administration, in 1781. 15 He was passionately hostile to autocracy at the
end of his own executive experience, just as he was before it began. He was
determined that the outcome of this war should not be the loss of the
freedom men were fighting for. He was no advocate of anarchy orirresponsibility, but both as an executive and a legislator he was a
champion of liberty under law.
At the beginning of his governorship he had no choice, or at least he saw
no choice, but to be an executive in the restricted sense and carry out the
expressed will of the Assembly. That body had elected him for a term of
one year, and he could not lawfully serve more than three. He was directly
responsible to it, and he had no veto with which to check it. His
contemporary, Governor George Clinton of New York, occupied a much
stronger constitutional position, and it would have been surprising if
Clinton had not been considerably the more effective of the two. 16 The
major formulation of public policy was not
15 Notes on Virginia (Ford, III, 231). Only the proposals of 1776 need
concern us here, and these are far from clear. On Dec. 21, 1776, just before
adjournment, the House of Delegates passed a resolution which said in the
preamble that the present imminent danger made it necessary that "the
usual forms of government should be suspended during a limited time." By
a Senate amendment which the House accepted this passage was stricken
out, and for it was substituted the statement that "additional powers be
given the Governor and Council." This was really a more accurate
description of the action taken, for this strengthened the executive by
granting specific powers during the recess, journal of the House of
Delegates . . . 1776, pp. 107-108.) Something more drastic may have been
talked about privately, but, on the other hand, the comment Jefferson made
five or six years later may have been exaggerated because of the undoubted
resentment he felt toward Patrick Henry by that time. It has been
vigorously combatted by the partisans of Henry, who was governor in
1776; see Henry, Henry, I, 505-509. Jefferson's name does not appear on
the record on Dec. 21, and it is possible he was not in the House that day.
16 The theoretical powers of the executives in the various states are
described in the useful monograph by Margaret B. Macmillan, War
Governors in the American Revolution, ch. 4. The executive was strongest
in New York and weakest in Penn-
expected of the governor of Virginia in 1779. During the administration of
Patrick Henry some leaders had questioned the ability of a popular
assembly to carry on the business of war. 17 But such opinions were not
general, and Jefferson, like George Washington, had to make the best oflegislative dilatoriness and incompetence. The only real question is whether
he did all that he could have done to correct this weak situation. He
undoubtedly exerted influence through reports, recommendations, and
private representations, but he did not do so to the same degree as
Governor William Livingston of New Jersey, who remained in office
longer but whose constitutional position was only a little stronger than his
own. 18 In part the difference lay in the relative aggressiveness of the two
men. As danger drew nearer the Assembly made temporary grants of
considerable authority to the executive, but these were belated. 19 Whether
they would have been wielded more effectively by a Clinton or a
Livingston is a matter of sheer speculation.
Jefferson as governor was not only the creature of the Assembly;
supposedly he was guided by the Council of State, a body of eight men
elected periodically by the legislature. On the few occasions when he used
the pronoun "I" instead of "we" in official papers, he said he was acting by
and with the advice of the Council. He did not believe that the governor
should merely act "as the clerk and authenticator" of the votes of the
councilors; but he did believe that their advice should control whenever it
was unmistakable. Only in the case of a divided vote, or in an emergency
when there was no vote at all, was the governor to act on his own
responsibility. 20 Jefferson's first formal statement should not be taken
literally, but he expressed confidence only in his own impartiality,
assiduous attention to duty, and sincere devotion to the great American
cause. Beyond that, he said, he must rely on the wise counsels of the
Assembly and of those who had been appointed to aid him. 21 One gains
no impression of irresolution or personal weakness from his official
utterances, but quite clearly he was more concerned to be reasonable than
to dominate the Council or anybody else.
His group of special advisers during the first months of his governorship
included John Page, James Madison, and John Walker — his still
sylvania and New Hampshire. Virginia stood somewhat below the middle
in this respect, but the distinction was merely between "varying degrees of
weakness" (Ibid., pp. 68-69).
17 John Banister to Theodorick Bland, Jr., June 10, 1777, in Bland Papers,
I, 58.
18 Macmillan, ch. 11, esp. pp. 221 ft.19 See especially acts of sessions of October, 1780, and May, 1781, in
Hening, X, 383-386, 413-416.
20 To Governor James Barbour, Jan. 22, 1812 (Ford, IX, 335-337).
21 Answer to the Assembly (O. L., II, 3).
affectionate friend from Albemarle. He worked harmoniously with these
men and had their full confidence. This association marks the beginning of
his intimate friendship with Madison, whom he had previously served with
in the House of Delegates but had not known well. This serious little man
was another enlightened liberal and scholar in politics. In the time of
greatest emergency, unfortunately, these particular friends of Jefferson
were off the Council. During his second year, ironically enough, one of his
constitutional advisers was his former rival, Jacquelin Ambler, husband of
the Belinda of his romantic youth and afterwards the father-in-law of John
Marshall. It is also ironical that the records of the Council during three
fourths of his governorship were lost at the time of Benedict Arnold's raid
on Richmond, which some people thought he should have prevented. From
those which remain, it appears that he was diligence itself in official
business. He and his Board met practically every day at ten o'clock, and
even when the exigencies of war prevented a quorum he himself went
through the forms and left records that he had attempted to hold a meeting.
22
The rest of the executive machinery was cumbersome. The Assembly had
accepted the recommendation of the revisors by establishing a board of war
and a board of trade. These were subject to the direction and control of the
Governor and Council, but neither was effective and both were abolished
within a year. 28 Jefferson had played an important part in creating these
boards, but his relations with them were not wholly harmonious and he
shed no tears when they were dissolved.
Throughout his administration he gave the impression of unfailing zeal and
incessant labor. He had clerks to copy official papers, but from the outset
he was enmeshed in details and swamped by paper work, as the war
governors generally were. Even during his first year there were vexations
enough, and serious difficulties were to be expected unless the war should
end. Jefferson could not have avoided trouble if he had had far greater
power and wisdom, and it is hard to see how anyone could have beengenuinely effective in the larger sense with the instruments which were
available to his hand. Also, this was a
22 Journals of the Executive Council of the State of Virginia, U (1932), ed.
by H. R. Mcllwaine. This volume covers the period Oct. 6, 1777-Nov. 30,
1781. Madison and Walker retired on Dec. 25, 1779, and John Page on
May 24, 1780. Dudley Digges was lieutenant governor thereafter. Ambler,
who had previously been on the board of trade, was appointed on May 24,
1780. Beginning Dec. 25, 1779, William Fleming was a member, but
owing to the confusion between two persons of the name, I am not
absolutely sure that he was Jefferson's old college friend.
28 Hening, X, 15-18. 291-292.
period of growing public apathy and discouragement, and at times there
was actual disaffection. Opinion about the war was more uniform in
Virginia than in most of the states, but the work of the Revolution was done
by a relatively small group. Jefferson had come down from the rarefied
atmosphere of thought and legal scholarship in order to participate
continuously in the conflict. This action gratified George Washington, who
needed help from civilian officials, but before the war was over it caused
Thomas Jefferson to suffer far beyond his just deserts. Deep disappointment
did not come immediately — but this polite and thoughtful man found out,
all too soon, that war played havoc with philosophy and the amenities.
The reception of Henry Hamilton, former Lieutenant Governor of Detroit
and notorious on the frontier as the "scalp-buyer," was definitely an
executive matter, and, although not the greatest of Jefferson's problems, it
was almost the first. In the February before his accession Hamilton had
been captured at Vincennes in Virginia's northwestern county of Illinois.
The captor was another native of Albemarle, George Rogers Clark; and his
letter announcing the capitulation, though addressed to Patrick Henry, was
actually received by Jefferson. 2 * The news was specially pleasing to the
new governor because he had been associated in spirit with the exploits of
this hardy frontier soldier from the inception of his bold and brilliantly
successful plan to conquer the Northwest.
Jefferson was probably one of the gentlemen in Williamsburg to whom,
late in 1777, Clark set forth his plan to carry the war from Kentucky into
the Indians' own country, and who communicated this plan to GovernorPatrick Henry. He was a member of the Assembly which granted the
Governor the necessary power in general terms; and Patrick Henry
consulted him, Wythe, and Mason, about future rewards to the members of
the expedition. As a result, Clark not only received secret instructions from
Henry; he also got a private letter from these three gentlemen, assuring him
that if he and his associates were successful they might rely on the
Assembly for grants from the conquered lands. 25
24 Dated Apr. 29, 1779. Printed in Jefferson's Works, Washington ed., I,
222-224, and reprinted in various places, including "George Rogers Clark
Papers," Colls. III. State Hist. Lib., VIII (1912), 169-174 (referred to
hereafter as ///. Colls.).
25 Jan. 3, 1778, ///. Colls., VIII, 37-38. See also Clark to Mason, Nov. 19,
1779, Ibid., VIII, 115-116; Henry, Patrick Henry, I, 583; and Abernethy,
Western Lands, ch. 15, where the whole story of the enterprise is freshly
summarized. In "Jefferson and the Kentucky Pioneers," A. M. Lewis makes
the nice point that this promise of lands was in accord with Jefferson's
policy of making small grants to actual settlers.
Heartened by this extralegal act, Lieutenant Colonel Clark proceeded to
capture Kaskaskia and overrun the Illinois country, thereby writing a
dramatic and heroic chapter in the history of the American Revolution.
Also, he greatly strengthened the claim of Virginia to the region beyond the
Ohio, which was soon designated a county by legislative act. It was largely
because of him that Jefferson as governor was the civil chief of this vast
domain. The recapture of Vin-cennes by Hamilton, who sallied forth from
Detroit, was a serious annoyance, but Clark retaliated with another brilliant
exploit. Marching across the drowned lands, he surprised the fort and
captured the commandant himself. Not knowing what else to do with this
troublesome officer, he sent him to Kentucky, to be conducted thence to
Virginia. News of Clark's triumph reached Jefferson before the prisoner
did, and Hamilton constituted, as it were, the dregs in the cup of victory.
The Governor of Virginia was convinced that the conduct of the Lieutenant
Governor of Detroit had been barbarous; and he was no little embarrassed
when General Phillips, the high British officer with whom he had
exchanged hospitalities, interested himself in Hamilton's fate. The scalp-
buyer was not brought to Williamsburg until after the Assembly had voted
George Rogers Clark a sword. In the middle of June Hamilton and CaptainWilliam Lamothe arrived from Chesterfield County in handcuffs.
According to his own story, which must be accepted with considerable
reservation, they were conducted to the Palace and stood at the Governor's
door half an hour, weary, wet, and hungry; they were then carried off to
jail, accompanied by a mob. 26 There they found Philip Dejean, Justice of
Peace for Detroit. Two days later — on the very day that the report of the
revisors, including Jefferson's bill for the proportioning of crimes and
punishments, was presented to the Assembly —the Governor and Council
decided on the fate of these three, whom they linked in common barbarity
and regarded as war criminals.
These were men of another stripe from the British and Hessian officers with
whom Jefferson had consorted so pleasantly in recent months, and the
Council had no thought of honoring them with gracious treatment. On the
contrary, they advised that they be put in irons and confined in the dungeon
of the public jail, that they be debarred the use of pen, ink, and paper and
be excluded from all conversation except with the keeper. The latter was
Jefferson's organ-playing friend, Peter Pelham. The specific reasons
assigned were Hamilton's incitation of the Indians to perpetrate their
"accustomed cruelties" on United States
26 Hamilton's Report, July 6, 1781; ///. Colls., VIII, 197.
citizens, without distinction of age, sex, or condition, and his inhuman
treatment of American captives. Dejean and Lamothe were regarded as his
willing accomplices. A more general reason which was assigned for the
action of the executive was the savage and uncivilized conduct of British
officers in the war and their foul treatment of prisoners. Whether or not
these general charges were too sweeping, Jefferson had facts about the
sufferings of Virginians, and from personal observation he knew that
British prisoner, in American hands had been treated with humanity and
consideration. General Phillips himself could testify to that.
Jefferson could hardly have been a passive auditor during the session of the
Council, and there is no reason to suppose that he hesitated to issue the
official order putting these severe penalties into effect. That very day, in a
letter about Hamilton, he said: "It is impossible for any generous man to
disapprove his sentence." On the next day he reported that the justice of the
action was confirmed by "the general sense" of the people. 27 The latter
observation was contained in a letter to the President of Congress, which hedispatched with scrupulous correctness; and his confidence that the
approval of the members might be expected was borne out by the event.
Thus Richard Henry Lee wrote him: "The reasons assigned for Hamilton's
treatment are strongly and pointedly set forth. His fate is well merited."
Another correspondent said that the proceedings were received by
Congress "with the utmost applause," that the whole matter was
"beautifully stated," and that the sentence was "judicious and spirited." 28
Unquestionably the sentence was spirited, but the best person to judge
whether or not it was judicious was George Washington. Jefferson sent him
a copy of the executive order while reporting Clark's success. "It will add
much to our satisfaction to know it meets with your approbation," he said.
He was much pleased, therefore, to learn that Washington had no doubt of
the propriety of the proceedings against these cruel men. 29 On the
American side there was little or no protest against the severity of the
treatment; but General Phillips, speaking for the British, raised a
troublesome question, which Jefferson passed on to Washington and
Congress. Did not Hamilton's formal capitulation forbid confinement of
this sort? Jefferson did not think it did, being legalistic in his turn. Hamilton
had signed an
27 Minutes of Council, June 18, 1779, O. L., II, 9-11; Jefferson to
Theodorick Bland, June 18, 1779, Ibid., p. 13; to John Jay, June 19, 1779,
Ibid., p. 14.
28 R. H. Lee to Jefferson (Ballagh, II, 86); A. B. to Jefferson, July 13, 1779
(LC, 4:547; on the basis of handwriting, assigned by JP to Cyrus Griffin).
29 Jefferson to Washington, June 19, 1779 (Ford, II, 240-241); Washington
tc Jefferson, July 10, 1779 (Fitzpatrick, XV, 401).
p THE LIMITATIONS OF EXECUTIVE POWER 311
agreement but it contained no stipulation about the treatment of prisoners.
He had said that he relied on the generosity of his enemies, but Jefferson
had an answer for that. "Generosity, on a large and comprehensive scale,
seems to dictate the making a signal example of this gentleman," he wrote
to Washington. 30 He also replied to the British talk about the possibility of
reprisals: "When ... we are desired to advert to the possible consequences
of treating prisoners with rigour, I need only ask when did these rigoursbegin? Not with us assuredly." 31 In his opinion it was high time to teach
respect for the "dictates of humanity," and in such a case retaliation became
"an act of benevolence." The murdering of innocent women and children
and the unjustifiable severities on American captives must stop.
He was sensitive about the charge of violation of faith, however, and
sought Washington's advice. On sober second thought the General
concluded that, according to the usage of war, Hamilton was on a different
footing from a mere prisoner at discretion, though he certainly merited
discrimination and might be confined to a room. 82 Congress did not
intervene, holding this to be a question for the executive power of Virginia.
33 Jefferson and the Council, however, accepted Washington's counsel as
decisive. It was received in Williamsburg during the Governor's absence in
Albemarle, but his advisers assumed authority for taking off the irons. After
he returned it was agreed that the three prisoners should be at large within
certain limits, taking the parole in the usual form. Unfortunately, however,
the prisoners objected to that part of the parole which restricted them from
saying anything to the prejudice of the United States. As Jefferson
informed Washington, they were then remanded to confinement in jail,
which he considered as voluntary, until they could determine to be
"inoffensive in word as well as deed." 8 * Washington agreed that the
objection of the prisoners to the customary parole was unreasonable, but he
was pressed by the British, who had already begun to retaliate. Pressure
was also brought to bear on the Governor in behalf of prisoners from
Virginia. The threat of further reprisals, he said, was shocking beyond
expression, and he prayed that these might be averted. Nevertheless, though
perfectly willing to extend the privileges of the prisoners as soon as they
signed the parole, he refused to be bullied. "In every event I shall resign
myself to the hard neces-
80 July 17, 1779 (Ford, II, 247).
31 July 22, 1779 (O. L., II, 30). Letter now believed by JP to have been to
Gen. William Phillips.
32 Aug. 6, 1779 (Fitzpatrick, XVI, 68-^69).
33 Aug. 21, 1775 (Journals, XIV, 985). 84 Oct. 1, 1779 (Ford, II, 258-259).
sity under which I shall act," he said. There was no trace of sentimentalweakness here; in this matter he was hard as iron. 85
Not until after another year was the matter settled, following a discreet
suggestion from Washington that the prisoners be exchanged. Jefferson was
adamant about Hamilton at first, because of fear of his influence over the
Indians, but in late October, 1780, hoping that the action would have a
happy effect on the situation of the Virginia prisoners on Long Island, he
allowed Hamilton to go to New York. Under these circumstances the
recalcitrant Britisher was willing to sign the parole. Thus he passed out of
Jefferson's hands; and a few months later he was formally exchanged and
went back to England. 86 By that time the Governor was involved in far
greater difficulties, and the troublesome Hamilton affair had receded into
the background of his mind. It involved a normally humane man in
embarrassing contradictions while it lasted, and it sharply illustrated the
hard necessities of war.
As part of his executive duty Jefferson kept in touch with the military
situation in the region whence this notorious prisoner had come. He
continued to support George Rogers Clark as fully as he could. With
respect to Kentucky and Illinois, however, he was subject to the same
limitations as at home, namely, the shortage of men and money, especially
money. The depreciated currency of Virginia could not be circulated in the
Illinois country, and he had to advise Clark to withdraw to the Kentucky
side of the Ohio. He interested himself minutely in the building of a fort
below the junction of that river with the Mississippi; work on it was begun
during his first year as governor, and it was named for him. So was one of
the three new counties which were set up in Kentucky that year. 37 He
wanted the people of the Illinois country also to share, insofar as possible,
the benefits of the "free and mild" laws and government of Virginia, and
cordially approved Clark's "mild conduct towards the inhabitants of the
French villages." 38 During his first year as governor, however, he
concerned himself more with the American pioneers south of the Ohio, as
was natural from the political point of view and probably inevitable from
35 To Washington, Oct. 8, 1779 (Ford, II, 261).
86 To Washington, Oct. 25, 1780 (Ford, II, 354); Hamilton's Report, ///.
Colls., VIII, 204-207.
37 See, in particular, Jefferson to Clark, Jan. 29, Apr. 19, 1780, in ///.
Colls., VIII, 386-391, 414-416; Hening, X, 315-317 (Session of May1780); Abemethy, Western Lands, pp. 247-249.
38 To County Lieutenant John Todd, Jan. 28, 1780 (///. Colls., V t 143); to
Clark, Jan. 29, 1780 (O. L., II, 93).
the military. He was fully aware of the desirability of a successful attack on
the focal center of British power at Detroit, and was willing to support
Clark in such an expedition if this commander of the Virginia forces should
think it feasible; but at this stage he talked more about building the fort
below the Ohio and about attacking the Indians who were immediately
menacing. 39 Not until his second year (in the fall of 1780) did he
definitely plan a movement against Detroit in cooperation with the
Continental forces, and even then the plan proved abortive. He did not
render his greatest services to the Northwest as the chief executive of
Virginia, but as a member of Congress a few years later. He made a signal
contribution to the political development of the region after his State had
formally ceded it to the Union, and his governorship was then only an
unpleasant memory.
39 Besides the letters of Jefferson to Clark already cited, see Jan. 1, 1780
(UVA), and Jefferson to Washington, Feb. 10, 1780 (Ford, II, 29&-299). In
"Jefferson and the Kentucky Pioneers," A. M. Lewis strongly emphasizes
the Governor's reluctance to co-operate with the Continental forces until
after the attitude of Congress toward the land question was clarified.
CxxiiO
The Frustrations of a War Governor 1779-1780
DURING nearly a year and a half of Jefferson's governorship, his State was
spared the shock of actual invasion. Until late October, 1780, he was
physically safe in the executive chair in Williamsburg or Richmond,
generally engaged in unspectacular paper work. Virginians had met defeat
and death on the battlefields of South Carolina before then, but the enemy
had not yet ascended the tidal rivers and brought terror to the heart of his
own country. For him this was predominantly a time of frustration. His
humor was not robust enough to laugh away all the vexations, and the
period was deeply colored at last by sorrow. The major difficulties proved
to be beyond his control; and, feeling unequal to the burden that had beenimposed upon him, he tried to get rid of it, only to find that escape was
impossible. This was not an acutely perilous time, but it was an
increasingly disappointing one, and danger kept drawing nearer.
Before the military invasion, the chief problems of the Commonwealth
were the important but unexciting ones of procuring money, supplies, and
soldiers. In his first days as an executive Jefferson had some hope that the
crucial financial question could be answered. 1 While he was in the House
of Delegates he had introduced a bill for the forfeiture and sale of the
property of British subjects. With minor amendments this was passed, and
one of his early official acts was to issue a proclamation carrying it into
effect. 2 In a few months, however, he had to inform the Speaker of the
House of Delegates
*To William Fleming, June 8, 1779 (Ford, II, 189-190).
2 BUI reported May 27, 1779 (Ford, II, 182-186); act in Hening, X, 66-71;
proclamation of July 1, 1779 (Ford, II, 243-244).
that the proceeds from sales could not be immediately relied upon. 8 The
chief trouble was delay in the courts. He said drily that the matter had been
thrown into "a course of legal contestation . . . which may not be
terminated in the present age." Following his suggestion that something be
done to expedite procedure, the Assembly amended the law; and in
anticipation of returns they made a large appropriation to meet the
requisitions of Congress. The delegates and senators were more hopeful
than Jefferson, but they were doomed to disappointment. The returns from
this source were not only delayed and insufficient upon their face; worse
still, they were rendered practically valueless by the depreciation of the
currency. 4
At the very beginning Jefferson foresaw the same difficulty in connection
with taxes, for he correctly predicted that they would not catch up with
depreciation. According to his own reckoning, the ratio of Virginia
currency to specie about the time of his inauguration was 12 Vi to 1. The
Assembly struggled with the tax question in the fall, but by the first of the
year the ratio was 40 to 1. At the end of his administration it was 250 to 1.
Then he paid ,£27 for nine chickens and ,£2400 for 160 pounds of brown
sugar. 5 The inflationary process was reflected in his own salary. He was
first paid at the rate of ,£4500 per year, which was certainly much less thanit sounded; in the following fall the figure was raised to ,£7500; and in
May, 1780, in order to put matters on "a more permanent footing," the
Assembly changed his salary to 60,000 pounds of tobacco. 6
He was opposed to the financing of the war by the reckless use of the
printing press, though he never could do much to stop it. In his first month
as governor he wrote Richard Henry Lee: "It is a cruel thought, that, when
we feel ourselves standing on the firmest ground, in every respect, the
cursed arts of our secret enemies, combining with other causes, should
effect by depreciating our money, what the open arms of a powerful enemy
could not do." Some of the "secret enemies" must have been in the current
Assembly, for that body provided for an emission of ,£l,000,000. 7
Jefferson hoped that Virginia could co-operate with other states in reducing
the vast amount of paper money in circulation, and he thought every other
8 Oct. 22, 1779 (Ford, II, 264-265).
4 Hening, X, 153-156, 168; I. S. Harrell, Loyalist in Virginia, pp. 92-98,
111. The criticism of Jefferson in Eckenrode, Revolution in Va., p. 202, for
passing this question on to the Assembly, seems unwarranted in the light of
the full circumstances.
5 Summary given in Account Book, 1781; particular items on May 17,
June 11. His figures coincide closely with those given in L. G. Tyler,
Letters and Tunes of the Tylers, 1, 72-75, where the history of the
depreciation is sketched.
6 Hening, X, 118, 219, 278-279.
7 To Lee, June 17, 1779 (Ford, II, 193); Hening, X, 31.
remedy "nonsensical quackery." Soon, however, he saw no sure hope
except in an early peace or a large loan of hard money.
The best prospect of co-operation appeared within a year. Congress
proposed that the old currency, both state and continental, be withdrawn,
that new notes be substituted at the rate of 1 to 40, and that these be
pledged by the faith of the United States as a whole. This eleventh-hour
proposal was conspicuously championed in the House of Delegates by
George Mason and Richard Henry Lee, with Jefferson's full sympathy.Patrick Henry, emerging from retirement at Leatherwood, opposed the
measure with temporary success; it was agreed to after the orator had
departed. 8 But execution was suspended until the majority of the states
should approve, and in the meantime a further emission of paper money
was authorized. This was followed during the next year by others in a
dizzily ascending scale. 9
The initiative in fiscal matters was not with the executive, and if Jefferson
had had it he could have done little to check the roaring torrent of inflation
that engulfed the continent. It is easy enough to say that the taxing power
should have been employed more rigorously and that the executive should
have done more to expedite collections; but many people thought the war
was being fought against taxation, and there had long been a serious
scarcity of specie in Virginia. As Jefferson's committee had told Lord
Dunmore before the Declaration of Independence, money was not a plant
of the native growth of this agricultural country.
The normal way in which the State would have procured hard money, or its
equivalent in credits, was by shipping tobacco abroad. But, soon after his
accession, Jefferson said that the trade of Virginia had not been so
distressed since Lord Dunmore ravaged the coasts. A "parcel of trifling
privateers," supported by two or three larger British vessels, had
completely nullified the small naval force of the Commonwealth. He was
annoyed that the Continental Navy had done nothing in the Chesapeake
Bay region, but he had not lost his dry humor. He observed that the same
bad luck had attended the disposition of prizes; even though they were
taken by the Virginia Navy
8 Act of May session, 1780, in Hening, X, 241-254; Jefferson to Madison,
July 26, 1780, in Ford, II, 319-320; Rowland, Mason, I, 350-356; Henry,
Patrick Henry, II, 51-53, giving favorable view of substitute proposed.
9 Session of May, 1780, authorizing £2,000,000, Hening, X, 279-286; Oct.,
1780, £6,000,000, lbid. y X, 347-350; March, 1781, £10,000,000, Ibid., X,
399; May, 1781, £20,000,000, Ibid., X, 430-431. Not even these figures tell
the whole story, for authority was often granted the executive to make
further emissions if necesssary. Between the sessions of Oct. 1780 and
March 1781, emissions totaled more than £ 11,000,000; see O. L., II, 377.
off their own capes it always seemed expedient to carry them elsewhere. "ABritish prize would be a more rare phenomenon here than a comet," he
said, "because the one has been seen, but the other never was." 10
Occasionally, supplies did slip through. In the autumn of his first year he
reported that three vessels had arrived, loaded with ordnance and other
necessities; and the Frenchman who had procured these invaluable articles
was rewarded with a generous grant of land and the commission of
lieutenant colonel. 11 In his second summer as governor, however, he
wrote to the French minister: "Our own efforts to establish a force on the
water have been very unsuccessful; and our trade has been almost
annihilated by the most contemptible part of the enemy's force on that
element." By that time, for reasons of economy, the Assembly had reduced
the navy to even more trivial proportions, and a French fleet was in
American waters. Jefferson asked no special favors from it. "The interest of
this State," he said, "is intimately blended, so perfectly the same with that
of the others of the confederacy that the most effectual aid it can at any
time receive, is where the general cause most needs it." Nevertheless, he
hoped something might be done to free Chesapeake Bay, the channel of
Virginia's commerce. 12
From the beginning he realized that the State could not depend on arms
carried across the ocean, for the enemy still reigned there. After five years
of war the supply remained inadequate. Because of the lack of arms the
Council, during his temporary absence in Albemarle in August, 1779, acted
in a way which caused him considerable embarrassment. At a time when
the magazines of the State had been reduced to about three thousand stands
of arms, Lieutenant Governor John Page and his associates detained five
thousand that were intended for the use of the United States and had
providentially come into a Virginia harbor. The action gave offense to
Congress, and Jefferson, who was not responsible, was called upon to
explain it. This he did on the ground that the arms were justly due the State
because of previous gifts to "the Continent." 13
There was a confusion of accounts, to be sure, and he described this with
genial irony:
10 To John Jay, June 19, 1779; Ford, II, 243.
11 Jefferson to the Speaker of the House of Delegates, Oct. 29 r 1779, O.
L., II, 50 and note.12 To Chevalier de la Luzerne, Aug. 31, 1780; O. L., II, 176.
18 Page to the President of the Board of War in Philadelphia, Aug. 28,
1779; O. L., II, 37. Jefferson to the President of Congress, Dec. 16, 1779;
Ford, II, 282-288, quotation on p. 283.
... It is a fact, which we are to lament, that, in the earlier part of our
struggles, we were so wholly occupied by the great object of establishing
our rights, that we attended not at all to those little circumstances of taking
receipts, and vouchers, keeping regular accounts, and preparing subjects for
future disputes with our friends. If we could have supported the whole
Continent, I believe we should have done it, and never dishonored our
exertions by producing accounts; . . .
The case he made was all the more appealing because generosity of spirit
toward the common cause breathed through his entire letter.
The Governor urged the development of local manufacturing, saying that
the making of war implements in Virginia was as necessary as that of
bread. The State had established a foundry near Westham and had made a
special contract with one John Ballendine for the erection of a furnace in
Buckingham, but he proved less a help than a hindrance. The most
promising prospect during Jefferson's administration was that of a factory
and foundry on the James, to be built by a French company, Messrs. Penet,
Windel & Co. Following a legislative resolution, Jefferson drew a contract
with them. 14 This company was also to have the right to construct a canal
from Westham to Richmond, thus avoiding the falls, and the whole matter
became entangled with the claims of the same John Ballendine, who had
begun a canal four years before and completed about one twentieth of it.
Jefferson became a lawyer again when he discussed the latter's rights in
detail, and he showed that he had not lost his youthful interest in the
navigation of the James. His summary of the situation was amusing and far
from legalistic.
A very simple calculation then will inform us, that, in his hands the
completion of this Work will require near a century, and then a question
arises whether Mr. Ballendine will live so long. ... It is right that in cases of
such general importance, the interests of a few individuals should give way
to the general good, full compensation being made them . . , 15In this matter, as in that of the estates of British subjects, he tried to cut the
cords of legal procedure and urged prompt legislative action. It was the
chairman of the legislative committee who declared that the Assembly
could not assume judicial powers; and it was General Nelson, afterwards
regarded as a mdre forthright man than his learned
14 Articles of agreement, signed July 22, 1779; O. L., II, 23-28. "To the
Speaker of House of Delegates, Oct. 30, 1779; O. L., II, 51-54; quotation
on p. 54.
friend Jefferson, who recommended in December, 1779, that the contract
with the French company be referred to the next Assembly. The
postponement defeated the purpose of the contract, and in the end nothing
came of the plan on which Jefferson had spent so much labor. 16 This was
another case of frustration.
Even though too little was done about the manufacture of arms, even
though foreign trade was almost annihilated and the value of the currency
was approaching that of oak leaves, he could have reasonably expected that
an agricultural province like Virginia would be blessed with an abundance
of foodstuffs. Ordinarily the State sold flour to Maryland and Pennsylvania;
but crops failed disastrously in 1779, and by fall Virginia had to purchase
from her neighbors. 17 Salt, which was so necessary in preserving beef and
pork, had long been wanting, and there was little more wheat than was
needed for the next year's sowing. The result was an embarrassing situation
with respect to the Convention prisoners. Jefferson had assured Patrick
Henry that they could be more easily fed in Albemarle County than
anywhere else; but he now had to write the President of Congress that these
troops could not be supplied with flour, according to the agreement, and
that it must be sent from some other place. The Congressional Board of
War, chuckling over the difficulty, said that the prisoners might be given
Indian corn, though the British were at liberty to send them flour if they
wanted to. 18 Unfortunately, not even corn was plentiful. Jefferson
included it in the embargo of six months that he declared on the last day of
November, 1779, by advice of the Council and under authority of an act of
Assembly. This extended to all the chief provisions, both meat and grain,
none of which might be exported from the State to any other. 19
In his days as a legislator, Jefferson may have devoted more time to the
affairs of his Commonwealth than Washington thought advisable; but healways viewed the conflict between the States and Great Britain with the
eye of a unionist, not a localist, and he was anxious that Virginia should
contribute her proper share to the common cause. Under the existing
organization the major responsibility lay with the Assembly. He believed
that the legislature made the task of meeting the requisitions of Congress its
chief business until there was actual
16 O. L., II, 23 n, citing letter of Penet to Governor and Council, May 20,
1780, Calendar State Papers, I, 352.
17 Jefferson to the Governor of Louisiana, Nov. 8, 1779; O. L., II, 59-61.
18 Jefferson to President of Congress, Sept. 25, 1779, O. L., II, 38-39;
report of board of war, Oct. 18, 1779, Ibid., 39 n.
19 Nov. 30, 1779; O.L., II, 72.
invasion, and that it strained the resources of the State in trying to supply
the men, money, and provisions that were asked for. 20 The legislators did
attack the problem in a commendable spirit of devotion to the "glorious
cause," though they were open to criticism for the tardiness of their
successive actions. 21 The trouble was not so much that they did too little
as that they did it too late. They were not in continuous session and, as
Jefferson said, the physical problem of getting them together was greater
than in more compact communities. If he himself was blamable, it was for
his failure to call them more frequently. Not until his governorship neared
its end did he exercise his authority to advance the time of meeting. Even
for this, however, he had to get the consent of the Council.
He cannot be justly charged with complacency during this period, but he
was convinced that Virginia had done well, everything considered. He
summarized the whole matter in a letter to the President of Congress in the
summer of 1780. "It would have given me great pleasure," he said, "to have
been able to show Congress that their requisitions had been complied with
in this state accurately in time, quantity and every other circumstance." He
did not have that pleasure, but he did claim that up to this date Virginia had
paid practically the whole of the requisition of money. 22 He made no
comparisons with other states at that time, but he afterwards asserted that
his Commonwealth was always above par in what was actually furnished.His emphasis on the general cause was even more notable in the matter of
troops than in that of money. He was never so shortsighted as to believe
that the defense of the State should be made within or on its borders. A
year and a half before he became governor he drafted a bill authorizing the
executive to order the militia to the defense of sister states when they were
invaded. 28 However, the militia were supposed to serve local needs
primarily, and he, like all other competent observers, had a low opinion of
their prowess. More effective and more lasting aid to the larger cause could
be given by troops incorporated in the Continental Army. He was
concerned to fill Vir-
20 To Skelton Jones, July 28, 1809; L. & B., XII, 302.
21 See particularly the act for raising a supply of money for the services of
the United States, session of Oct. 1779; Hening, X, 165-171.
"July 27, 1780; see Ford, II, 322-328, quotation on p. 328. He said that
about $13,381,000 had been paid, and that only a little more than $500,000
was still due. On the general subject, see C. J. Bullock, Finances of the
United States, 1115-1189, esp. pp. 153-158.
28 Jan. 13, 1778; Ford, II, 143. As was customary, this act was limited in
its duration. He himself as governor acted under larger grants of authority
which were made later.
ginia's quota and was sympathetic with Washington's desire to lengthen
terms of enlistment. In temper he was no soldier, but he viewed military
requirements with high intelligence, and he gained Washington's full
approval by his loyal co-operation.
He had to admit that the quota of Virginia in the Continental Army was not
filled during his first year as governor. 24 He did not quite say so, but it
was in this connection that the infrequent meetings of the legislators and
their lack of long-range planning were most unfortunate. The Assembly did
the customary things. Just before Jefferson became governor it offered
bounties to soldiers and premiums to recruiting officers, but, as he stated
afterwards, these encouragements did not have the expected results. To
what extent the failure may be attributed to him as an administrator is now
almost impossible to decide, but there can be no question of his spirit or of
his diligence.Supplementary measures in the fall again failed to fill the quota. At that
time, however, when British activity had shifted to the South, and South
Carolina was in grave danger, greater discretionary power was given the
Governor. He was empowered to order to her aid such state troops as could
be sent under the terms of their enlistment, and as many as fifteen hundred
of the militia. 25 Jefferson ordered certain new levies to go southward.
There were rumors of the invasion of Virginia toward the end of the year,
but he never took these as seriously as his own Board of War did. 26 To
meet this particular menace he depended on the militia. His confidence may
have been unwarranted, but, in terms of the larger strategy of the war, he
did well in sticking to his original purpose to add strength where it was
most needed on the continent as a whole.
Late in November he wrote to Washington: "No inclination is wanting in
either the Legislature or Executive, to aid them [in the South] or strengthen
you; but we find it very difficult to procure
24 According to the resolution of Congress, March 9, 1779, Journals, XIII,
298, this quota was 11 out of a total of 80 battalions, the same as that of
Pennsylvania but smaller than that of Massachusetts. By the resolution of
Feb. 9, 1780, Ibid., XVI, 150, it was set at 6070 men, the same as that of
Massachusetts and above that of Pennsylvania. The question, just how
many troops were in the Continental service, was partially one of
definition. Returns were faulty. From Washington's correspondence with
Jefferson, 1779-1780 (Fitzpatrick, XVII, 75-76, 321-324, etc.), it appears
that even he was uncertain about the exact number. From these sources and
from the returns now preserved in Jefferson's papers (especially Oct. 1,
1779, in LC, 5:727), it appears that there were between 3000 and 4000 on
that date.
"Hening, X, 214.
26 Formal actions of the Board of War, Nov. 8, 1779-Mar. 25, 1780, are in
a manuscript volume at the William L. Clements Library, Ann Arbor.
Mich., entitled Board of War, List of Warrants. A communication of Nov.
16, 1779, and the reply ©f the Council on Nov. 18 bear on this point.
men." 2T It was even more difficult to procure supplies for the new levies.
The Governor had trouble with his Board of War and Board of Trade on
that account in the late winter and spring. The price of shirts was too high,and the cost of rum, without which it was supposed the troops could not
move southward, was exorbitant. Jefferson and the Council took the
position that the necessary commodities would have to be bought,
regardless. The two Boards acquiesced reluctantly, and one of them said
that the paying of such prices "must go near to ruin the state." 28 The
decisions of the executive were in line with the urgent request of
Washington, who said "there never was greater occasion for the states to
exert themselves in procuring clothing for their respective troops." 29 In
this sort of situation Jefferson was one of the governors he most relied on.
Before these levies were in full motion southward, disaster befell
Charleston and the flower of the Virginia troops in the Continental service.
At the request of Congress, Washington had detached the Virginia line
from his own forces and sent it to General Lincoln in South Carolina. On
the last day of May the Governor had to make a sad report about these men.
80 They had been shut up in the beleaguered city and had been surrendered
there. The wisdom of sending Virginians into other states was questioned
more after that, but Jefferson did not change his mind about the supreme
importance of supporting the general cause, and he retained the confidence
of the Assembly. A few months earlier a wise Virginian in Congress had
said: "The governor need not fear the favor of the community as to his
future appointment, while he continues to make the common good his
study. I have no intimate acquaintance with Mr. Jefferson, but from the
knowledge I have of him, he is in my opinion as proper a man as can be put
into office, having the requisites of ability, firmness, and diligence." The
legislators must have believed that, for they re-elected him, leaving no
record of such votes as may have been cast against him. 31
The summer of 1780 fell between the surrender of Charleston to General
Clinton (May 12) and the distressing battle of Camden, where Gates was
overwhelmed by Cornwallis (August 16). After the former event and before
he knew of Clinton's return to New York by sea, Jefferson wrote to
Washington: "There is really nothing to oppose
27 Nov. 28, 1779 (O. L., II, 70-71).
28 Mar. 17, 1780 (O. L., II, 107); see also Feb. 4, 16, 1780 (Ibid., 96,
101-102).
29 Apr. 15, 1780 (Fitzpatrick, XVIII, 263). 80 May 30, 1780 (O. L., II,
124).31 Joseph Jones to James Monroe, Mar. 7, 1780, in D. C. Gilman, James
Monroe, pp. 13-14; Boyd, Papers of Thomas Jefferson, III, 410, on the
election of June 2, 1780.
the progress of the enemy northward but the cautious principles of the
military art." He politely intimated that Continental assistance would be
welcome. "Your Excellency will readily conceive," he said, "that after the
loss of one army our eyes are turned towards the other, and that we comfort
ourselves if any aids can be furnished by you without defeating operations
more beneficial to the general union, they will be furnished. At the same
time I am happy to find that the wishes of the people go no further, as far as
I have had an opportunity of learning their sentiments." The lack of money
cramped every effort and he was painfully aware of the shortage of arms.
"As far as they will go," he wrote the President of Congress, "they have
been, and will be, cheerfully submitted to the common use." w
Washington was sympathetic but helpless. He said that he himself was
compelled "to see the honor and dignity of the States daily insulted without
the power either to prevent it or retaliate." He could give only one answer:
"To oppose our Southern misfortunes and surmount our difficulties our
principal dependence must be the means we have left us in your quarter."
The Commander could not consider his native Commonwealth alone or the
Southern department merely; he must reserve his strength to oppose
Clinton in the Northern theater. By aiding General Gates the Governor of
Virginia must do the best he could to meet the reduced but continuing
menace from below. 83
His vigorous actions during the summer were directed almost wholly
against this Southern danger. Jefferson reported that twenty-five hundred of
the militia would soon set out, and that some state troops would also be put
in motion. Meanwhile, in a region which had always depended primarily on
transportation by water, they were furnishing all the wagons they could
collect. Furthermore, the Assembly ordered the raising, not of more militia
as requested by Congress, but of three thousand regulars enlisted for
eighteen months. Jefferson asked Washington to arrange for the officering
of these men, cheerfully transferring to him every power the executive
might exercise in this connection. 84 There was some division of opinion
as to the proper destination of these newly recruited regulars. Jefferson
favored sending them to Gates, when raised, as Congress finally requested.
He now regarded South Carolina as prostrate and did not82 To President of Congress, June 9, 1780 (Ford, II, 306); to Washington,
June 11, 1780 (Ibid., II, 309).
33 Washington to Jefferson, June 29, 1780 (Fitzpatrick, XIX, 98).
84 To Washington, June 11, July 2, 1780 (Ford, II, 309-310, 315); Hening,
X, 257-262.
think it right for the whole burden of the southern war to fall on North
Carolina. 35
As the fall of Charleston and the loss of the Virginia line spurred him and
his State to reinforce the army of General Gates, it convinced him of the
need to improve the service of information. Nearly a month after the
surrender he wrote Washington that the intelligence from the southward
was lamentably defective. 36 To remedy this defect he established a line of
riders, forty miles apart, from Richmond to the neighborhood of the hostile
army, hoping that news would be conveyed at the rate of 120 miles in 24
hours. To the other end of the line he sent a gentleman whom he described
as sensible and judicious. This commissioner, who was to watch and listen
for him and whose character he thus assessed, was James Monroe, then
aged twenty-two, a tall and athletic young man who rode well but did not
laugh easily. The arrangement was desirable in itself, but in history it has
far more than military significance. This sign of official confidence was
highly gratifying to Monroe, and it played an important part in establishing
him as Jefferson's disciple. The Governor would have denied the term
"master," but there was a difference of fifteen years in age between the two
men and at this stage their deepening friendship was unequal. 37
Monroe's solemn face had lighted up more frequently since he had formed
a connection with Jefferson and begun to chart his future course under his
elder's guidance. For some months he had been at loose ends. He had been
a brave and effective officer in the Continental Army, but had left it in
confused circumstances. He had come to Williamsburg armed with a
commendatory letter from Washington, but he was unable to find a suitable
opportunity to serve in the forces of his own State. Jefferson's kind offer to
guide him in legal studies rescued a bewildered young man from deep
discouragement and fixed his ultimate course. The removal of the capital to
Richmond confronted him with an immediate problem, however. Should he
remain in Williamsburg and attend the lectures of George Wythe, or shouldhe accompany the busy Governor to Richmond? He got
85 To Madison, July 26, 1780 (Ford, II, 320); to John Mathews of Com. of
Congress at Headquarters, Sept. 2, 1780 (O. L., II, 181).
86 June 11, 1780 (Ford, II, 308).
87 Jefferson gave instructions to Monroe in a letter of June 16, 1780, now
in the ms. book belonging to the W. L. Clements Library, Ann x\rbor,
Mich., and previously cited. On the same date he wrote Gov. Nash of North
Carolina about the plan; O. L., II, 130-131. See also the document of June
10, quoted in W. P. Cresson, James Monroe, p. 55. Monroe's lengthy report
of June 26, 1780, is available; see Writings, Hamilton ed. (1898), I, 3-8.
THE FRUSTRATIONS OF A WAR GOVERNOR 325
good advice from his sagacious uncle, Joseph Jones, then a member of
Congress:
. . . You do well to cultivate his [Jefferson's] friendship, . . . and while you
continue to deserve his esteem he will not withdraw his countenance. If,
therefore, ... he wishes or shows a desire that you go with him, I would
gratify him. Should you remain to attend Mr. Wythe, I would do it with his
approbation, and under the expectation that when you come to Richmond
you shall hope for the continuance of his friendship and assistance. 88
Jefferson did not assume personal command of the militia and take Monroe
into the field as his aide, as Jones had hoped he would, but he soon solved
his young friend's military difficulties by sending him to the South as
commissioner, to collect and forward information. This delighted Colonel
Monroe's heart, and in the fall, when Jefferson himself needed
encouragement, his protege thanked him effusively in his awkward and
almost illegible writing. 39 Though his private fortune was small, he
declined to accept any compensation for his work in the Carolinas; he
announced that he was now determined to stick to his legal studies unless
his mentor thought he should play a further public part; and he said that he
owed everything to Jefferson's friendship. Actually, he did further military
service before the war was over, but the most important fact is that he had
formed a personal tie which was never severed.His new disciple gave the Governor useful information, but nobody
prepared his mind for the defeat of Gates at Camden. On the day before it
occurred he wrote the General, saying that he would send him five hundred
regulars in a few days and congratulating him on his "successful advances
on the enemy." Also, he set out on a little recess from public business, after
a "long and laborious confinement." When he got back he received from
Governor Rutledge of South Carolina a copy of an intercepted letter from
no less a person than Cornwallis. Viewing events from the other side, the
letter said, "There never was a more complete victory." *°
Jefferson did not have to get the news itself from British sources, and the
worst of it was that the raw Virginia militia had behaved
88 Mar. 7, 1780; D. C. Gilman, Ja?nes Monroe (191U, p. 15. Monroe's
immediate action is uncertain.
"Monroe to Jefferson, Sept. 9, 1780; Writings, I, 8-11.
"To Gates, Aug. 15, 1780, in L. & B., IV, 96-97; O. L., II. 167-168;
Cornwallis to Lt. Col. Balfour, Aug. 16, 1780; letter sent by Jefferson to
Washington on Sept. 26, in L. & B., IV, 108-109 n.
badly. State pride did not dispose him to excuse them; he sent condolences
to General Stevens, their commander. 41 There were some compensations
in misfortune. He wrote to General Stevens a little later: "The subsequent
desertions of your militia have taken away the necessity of answering the
question how they shall be armed." More philosophical reflections were
contained in a letter to the President of Congress. "The scene of military
operations," he said, "has been hitherto so distant from these states, that
their militia are strangers to the actual presence of danger. Habit alone will
enable them to view this with familiarity, to face it without dismay; a habit
which must be purchased by calamity, but cannot be purchased too dear. In
the acquisition of this, other misfortunes may be incurred, for which we
should be prepared." 42
It did not fall to his own lot to go to the battlefield, to learn how to fight by
fighting, but he realized after Camden that he must make immediate and
even greater efforts to stop the progress of the enemy. 43 As later reports
trickled in the losses loomed larger, not smaller. These included not only
the slain, the captured, and the deserters from the militia, but all the cannonon the field, four hundred wagons (including one of his own that had been
impressed, and two horses with it), all the tents which had been so hard to
come by, and vast numbers of small arms which would be sorely missed. A
large part of these supplies had been contributed by his Commonwealth. 44
The disaster practically nullified the incessant labors of the summer, and
forced him to start again.
To Washington he reported promptly that a new army was forming to serve
in North Carolina. For the times this sounded impressive on paper. Virginia
was providing the three thousand newly-levied regulars and a thousand or
more militiamen, including some from the Piedmont and western counties
whom he regarded as really good. 45 It is difficult to determine how many
actually got to the southern theater before late October, when attention was
distracted by a threat from the seacoast; but some militiamen did reach
Gates, for he com-
41 Sept. 3, 1780 (Ford, II, 333). See also letter of same date to Gov. Nash
of North Carolina, in O. L., II, 186, and partial defense of the militia by the
editor (/Wrf.,n,184»).
42 To Stevens, Sept. 12, 1780 (Ford, II, 338); to President of Congress,
Sept. 3, 1780 (Ibid., II, 335).
43 To the Council, Aug. 28, 1780, in O. L., II, 170.
44 Details from various letters, chiefly that of Cornwaliis and one from
Jefferson himself to an unknown person, Sept. 13, 1780 (VHS); see note 49
below.
"Sept. 3, 23, 1780 (Ford, II, 331-333, 343-344).
THE FRUSTRATIONS OF A WAR GOVERNOR 327
plained of their lack of equipment. Jefferson countered with the flat
assertion that to wait until they were fully equipped would be to put an
entire end to the sending of reinforcements. He sent them on, hoping they
would be supplied by Congress. 48
Quite clearly, the major problem was that of equipment, not men. He
reported to Washington that the troops who were being collected were
unarmed. Virginia had no tents; now there were provisions in abundanceand he was busily ordering the impressment of them, but wagons were
practically unavailable. The treasury was drained dry and there was no
prospect of getting any more paper money until the Assembly should meet
in October. Also, a dangerous spirit of disaffection was discovered in
several of the southern counties. Hundreds had gone so far as to take oaths
of allegiance to the British King and a time had been set for insurrection.
This was in September. Next month the fire broke out in another county; a
dangerous revolt in Pittsylvania was prevented by the seizure of the
ringleaders in their beds. Disaffection was not general, but Jefferson
correctly concluded that something brilliant in the military line was needed
to restore the spirits of the people. 47
He could not contribute that sort of brilliance, and nobody else did in this
deeply depressing period of the war. His time was chiefly spent in issuing
orders for mobilization and impressment and in begging arms and tents of
Congress. The details of his manifold activities are too wearisome to go
into. 48 He was still convinced that the supremely important thing for
Virginia to do was to support the Southern Army; he assumed a resolute
tone in official communications; and he indulged in relatively few
recriminations. He made no spectacular efforts to inspirit his people, but he
set a high example of personal devotion to a cause which he had not ceased
to regard as sacred. At the same time he revealed in private that he was
unutterably weary, that he did not regard himself as effective, and that he
definitely wanted to get out of office before the end of his term.
Early in September he wrote: "The application requisite to the duties of the
office I hold is so excessive, and the execution of them after all so
imperfect, that I have determined to retire from it at the
46 To President of Congress, Oct. 14, 1780 (Ford, II, 348).
47 To President of Congress, Sept. 4, 14, 1780 (Ford, II, 334, 340-342); to
Va. delegates in Congress, Oct. 27, 1780 (Ibid., II, 356-357); to John
Mathews, Sept. 2, 1780 (O. L., II, 181).
48 Details of his routine activity during late August and early September
are in O. L., II, 170-174, 187-195.
close of the present campaign. I wish a successor to be thought of in time
who to sound whiggism can join perseverance in business and an extensiveknowledge of the various subjects he must superintend. Such a one may
keep us above water even in our present moneyless situation." 49
Presumably he intended to get out before spring, when there would be
another general election, for George Mason, who had heard the report,
urged him to stay at least until after that. The enlightened master of
Gunston Hall dreaded the choice of a successor by the existing Assembly.
60 It was dominated by Patrick Henry. A more violent protestor than
Mason was John Page. Jefferson tried to persuade this old friend to become
his successor, though he left no information as to the methods whereby this
succession was to be brought about. Page strongly rejected the suggestion,
saying that Jefferson's resignation would give him great uneasiness and the
country much distress. 61 When the Governor repeated the proposal Page
again rejected it, saying that he had quitted the ship (that is, had resigned as
lieutenant governor), worn down and fatigued, in calm weather; while
Jefferson was proposing to leave the helm when the utmost skill was
needed to steer through the storm. 62 By the time this letter came another
squall was threatening, and Jefferson had let the Assembly meet without
offering to resign. Page then encouraged him to make the best of the
situation and urged him not only to serve out this term but to accept
another, as the law allowed.
... I know your Love of Study & Retirement must strongly solicit you to
leave the Hurry, Bustle, & Nonsense your Station daily exposes you to [he
said]. I know too the many Mortifications you must meet with, but 18
Months will soon pass away. Deny yourself your darling Pleasures for that
Space of Time, & despise not only now, but forever, the Impertinence of
the silly World All who know you know how eminently qualified you are
to hold the [station] you hold, & that Circumstances may happen within the
Compass of the Time above alluded to, which may require the Exertion of
greater Abilities than can be found in any other Person within this State. 68
Except for Richard Henry Lee, who was too unpopular to be thought of,
Page knew of no one else who could possibly manage the
49 Sept. 13, 1780, to an unnamed person [probably R. H. Lee]; VHS,
courtesy of JP. This letter is in O. L., II, 205, with the erroneous date Sept.
3. 80 To Jefferson, Oct. 6, 1780 (LC, 6:932-933). 61 To Jefferson, Sept. 22,
1780 (LC, 6:905-906). 82 To Jefferson, Oct. 20, 1780 (LC, 6:942-943). 68
To Jefferson, Dec. 9, 1780 (LC, 6:996).important affairs which might come up, and he assured his weary and
homesick friend that others held this opinion as well as he. Whether
encouragement like this, or consciousness of the difficulties of the hour,
swayed Jefferson the more, there was really nothing for him to do but
endure the hurry, the bustle, the nonsense, and the mortifications, while
hoping that nothing worse impended.
The Menace of Invasion 1780-1781
THE CHARACTER of Jefferson's last eight months as governor, and
particularly the last six, was determined by military events over which he
had little or no control. He adjusted himself to these with the best of spirit
but with increasing difficulty, and at last he was overpowered by them. The
defeat at Camden had dangerously weakened the defenses to the south and
he properly directed his efforts toward repairing them. The penultimate
period opened, however, with a threat from the east, where a British
detachment under General Leslie landed. This proved to be only a landing
party, but at the very beginning of the new year a slashing raid by Benedict
Arnold from the coast spread consternation in the interior and deeply
embarrassed the Governor. The traitor's forces were soon contained at
Portsmouth, and for a time high hopes were entertained of Lafayette's
projected expedition against him. These were dashed, however, when
hostile reinforcements came under General Phillips. Even then, Jefferson's
own interest continued to be chiefly in the Southern theater, but through
force of circumstances, if not because of bad judgment, the dwindling
resources of the State were considerably dissipated. Richmond was again
imperiled from the east but the speedy return of Lafayette saved it
temporarily from the invader. The final phase began only when Lord
Cornwallis unexpectedly drove into the State from North Carolina and
linked the British forces. Then the fates pursued Jefferson into the depths of
the forest, and the feeble government collapsed under the blows of the
enemy. But it was brought low by attrition and inanition before that time,
and Jefferson himself, though still struggling valiantly, had already
appeared as the sport of circumstance.
The fact that Virginia had hitherto escaped invasion from the east can be
best explained on grounds of the ignorance, caution, or indifference of the
enemy. It was not owing to the military strength of the State, which was so
largely spent elsewhere, and certainly not to the inaccessibility of theregion. Few other commonwealths were equally vulnerable on the side of
the water. This sparsely settled country was penetrated by broad arms of
the sea on which any fleet could ride, and by long, navigable rivers which
were so many avenues into the interior. There was no real obstacle below
the fall-line — that is, roughly, the longitude of Richmond. This was well
understood by the generally unmilitary James Madison, who was in
Congress, and it was by no means unknown to Jefferson, whose father had
mapped this country, and who himself had a liking for geography. 1 On the
other hand, Jefferson knew there was little to attract the invader, for there
were still no important centers.
In the early fall of 1780 he admitted that if the enemy should attack
Virginia from the coast in force, the State would be incapable of effective
resistance. But, although he had heard that the British were thinking of
taking Portsmouth near the mouth of the James, he regarded this event as
unlikely for two reasons: Clinton would hardly dare send the necessary
force from New York; and if he did dispatch it the French could send a
superior fleet and bottle up the enemy. 2 Events proved that he
underestimated the military audacity of the British and overestimated the
likelihood of naval aid in Chesapeake Bay throughout this period. On
grounds of the balance of sea power alone he was probably not justified in
turning his eyes away from the coast and fixing them on the army of
Cornwallis. But he was correct in judging the Southern danger to be much
the greater; and if, in terms of local defense, there was risk in largely
disregarding the seaboard, major strategy and the general interest of the
Continent seemed to require it.
In late October the unexpected happened. Then, as Jefferson reported in
some alarm to Washington, a hostile fleet was sighted in the bay.
"We are endeavoring to collect as large a body to oppose them as we can
arm," he said; "this will be lamentably inadequate, if the enemy be in any
force. It is mortifying to suppose that a people, able
1 Madison to Pendleton, Jan. 16, 1781, in Hunt, I, 122-123. The raid on
Chesapeake Bay in May, 1779, shortly before Jefferson became governor,
was hardly an "invasion," though he used that term in describing it to John
Jay (June 19, 1779; O.L., II, 14).
2 To President of Congress, Sept. 14, 1780 (Ford, II, 340).and zealous to contend with the enemy, should be reduced to fold their
arms for want of the means of defence. Yet no resources, that we know of,
insure us against this event. It has become necessary to divert to this new
object, a considerable part of the aids we had intended for General Gates."
He added a depressing afterthought: "Of the troops we shall raise, there is
not a single man who ever saw the face of an enemy." 3
Soon it became known that Commodore Rodney, son of the Admiral, was
the ranking naval officer and that General Alexander Leslie was in
command of the military force. Early reports were that the soldiers
numbered from four to five thousand, but these were afterwards found to
have been exaggerated. Enemy landings were made on both sides of the
James, but the cavalry at Newport News were soon removed and the whole
force was concentrated at and near Portsmouth. The militia, which had
been assembled on both sides of the river, were in a chaotic state, but
except for fortifying their position and seizing cattle the enemy were
quiescent. Jefferson commented on the slightness of their naval support and
was quite correct in his early opinion that this was not a real invasion. 4
He soon reported to Gates and Washington an interesting bit of intelligence
confirming this supposition. Early in November a British emissary was
taken who was trying to get to Carolina. When about to be searched he was
observed to put something into his mouth that looked like a quid of
tobacco. As described by Jefferson, this was a letter, "written on silk paper,
rolled up in gold beater's skin, and nicely tied at each end, the whole not
larger than a goose quill." It showed that Leslie was now awaiting orders.
These came on a ship which got through to the Carolinas and returned.
Then, almost exactly a month after their sail had first been sighted, the
enemy vessels put out to sea. There had been little wanton destruction.
Luck was with Jefferson and with Virginia. 5
Now, said he to Gates, we can again give attention to the reinforcement of
the Southern Army. Gates had been relieved, however, and in mid-
November General Nathanael Greene, the new commander of the Southern
department, visited Richmond, where he was greatly disturbed to find
strong sentiment against the sending of further mili-
8 To Washington, Oct. 22, 1780 (L. & B., IV, 120-121).
4 To President of Congress, Oct. 25, Nov. 3, 1780 (Ford, II, 353, 358); to
Gates, Oct. 28, 1780 (L. & B., IV, 125-126); to Gen. Stevens, Nov. 10,1780 (O. L., II, 230).
5 Jefferson to Gates, Nov. 10, 1780 (Ford, II, 361-362); to Washington,
Nov. 10, 1780 (L. & B., IV, 129) giving Leslie's letter to Cornwallis; to
Speaker of House of Delegates, Nov. 24, 1780 (Ford, II, 369).
tary resources to the Carolinas. 6 The Governor did not fail him, but spoke
strongly to the Assembly, now in lengthy session. Rejoiced though he was
at Leslie's departure, Jefferson called for an increase rather than an
abatement of preparations. Leslie's troops might have gone to reinforce
Cornwallis (actually they had) and there might be a new embarkation from
New York for the same purpose. South Carolina and Georgia now weighed
nothing in the scale, he said, and North Carolina had been lately ravaged.
Therefore, the weight of responsibility rested on his own State. He thought
it infinitely important to keep the war outside of Virginia's borders and to
lose no time about it. 7 This was good advice, based on sound strategy. He
underestimated the likelihood of future enemy landings on the Virginia
coast; but, on the other hand, he may have been taking what we should now
call a calculated risk — one that seemed minor in view of the situation to
the southward.
General Greene was no little encouraged by the response of the Assembly
to the strong appeal of the Governor; and Jefferson himself, after Leslie
withdrew, believed that he could meet Greene's requisitions. The latter had
brought General von Steuben with him to Virginia, and when Greene
proceeded to North Carolina he left the noted drillmaster behind, as
temporary commander of the Continental forces in the State and his
personal representative. Steuben was popular at first, and he provided
much-needed leadership in matters of organization and military training.
For one thing, he appointed Colonel William Davies to command the base
at Chesterfield Courthouse and charged him with the organization and
equipment of the Continentals. By the middle of December he sent
reinforcements to Greene which enabled the latter to open his campaign to
reconquer South Carolina. 8 Outwardly, things were going well, and if
Jefferson had resigned at this time he could have retired with honor. But,
most unfortunately, on the last day of the year a new menace appeared in
the east. He had not counted on having to cope with Benedict Arnold, and
that hated foe upset several of his calculations.
While the British were still at Portsmouth he had concluded that he mustget rid of the Convention prisoners who had been so long in Albemarle and
who now invited trouble. Late in November the British, of whom he was
more fearful than of the Germans, were
•To Gates, Nov. 19, 1780 (Ford, II, 368); J. M. Palmer, General von
Steuben, pp. 239-240.
7 To Speaker of House of Delegates, Nov. 24, 1780 (Ford, II, 369-370).
8 Palmer, Steuben, pp. 240-242.
marched across the Blue Ridge and down the Shenandoah Valley toward
Frederick, Maryland. The Hessians remained in the State some months
longer, but he finally got them as far as Winchester. 9
These were actions of prudence, looking toward a reduction of military
responsibilities. More surprising was his revival of the project of an
expedition against Detroit, for an offensive in that distant quarter seemed to
involve an unwise dispersal of limited forces and resources. He thought it
necessary at this time, however, and he was not one to let immediate local
considerations blind him to the requirements of a larger strategy. He had
long contemplated a movement against the British post where the attacks of
the Indians on the western settlements were instigated, but he had been
deterred from it because of the excessive burden it would have laid on the
state treasury. Whether he could have secured co-operation from the
Continental forces at an earlier time is doubtful, and he had preferred
independent action, being reluctant to weaken the claims of Virginia to
western lands until reassured about the probable attitude of Congress.
Between the battle of Camden and Leslie's raid, however, he broached to
Washington the question of Continental aid for an expedition which
promised such great general advantages, and before Arnold swooped down
he definitely planned one under the command of George Rogers Clark. 10
He was now convinced that satisfactory terms could be worked out
between Virginia and Congress for the cession of the Northwest territory.
He had wanted to guard this against speculators for the benefit of small
settlers but had not wanted to keep it for any other reason.
He was sure that Clark's popularity would rally a sufficient body of militia,
and under other circumstances it probably would have. He asked for
powder and money, and Washington was not encouraging, though hethought there might be enough of the former. The Governor would not be
rebuffed. By the middle of December he informed
9 To the President of Congress, Oct. 26, 1780 (Ford, II, 355); to
Washington, Nov. 26, 1780 (Ibid., II, 370-371).
10 The most important specific references for the episode as a whole are
the .following: To Washington, Sept. 26, 1780 (Ford, II, 346-347), which
should be compared with the letter of Feb. 10, 1780, to Washington (Ford,
II, 298-299); to Clark, Sept. 29, 1780 (O. L., II, 213); from Washington,
Oct. 10, 1780 (Fitzpatrick, XX, 148-149); to Washington, Dec. 15, 1780,
saying that Clark was in Richmond (Ford, II, 375-378); to Clark, Dec. 25,
1780, giving instructions (O. L., II, 250-253); from Washington, Dec. 28,
1780 (Fitzpatrick, XXI, 23-24); to Clark, Jan. 13, 1781 (O. L., H, 273); to
Clark, Feb. 19, 1781 (O. L., II, 362-363); to Clark, Apr. 20, 1781 (O. L., II,
488). Abernethy, Western Lands, pp. 251-255, is particularly good for
Clark's troubles in Pittsburg, and gives many references. A. M. Lewis,
"Jefferson and the Kentucky Pioneers," supports the thesis that Jefferson's
delay in seeking co-operation with the Continental forces was chiefly due
to his earlier uncertainties about the attitude of Congress toward western
lands. For the ultimate outcome, see ///. Colls., VIII, cxlii-clxvii.
the Commander in Chief that immediate action on Virginia's part was
imperative, regardless of all other calls and dangers. He had learned of the
situation from Clark himself, who had come to Richmond, and he issued
detailed instructions to the latter on Christmas Day before he got another
reply from Washington.
The reasons for his bold decision were chiefly two. A serious secession
movement had arisen in Kentucky, and he feared that if successful this
would mean not only the separation of these counties from Virginia but
also that of the entire West from the Union. Furthermore, he had learned
from Clark that a confederacy of British and Indians was then being formed
to devastate the Virginia frontier in the spring, and he believed that, besides
imperiling the western country, this would draw off the most valuable part
of the militia. He wanted to anticipate this by sending Clark against Detroit
with his regular force, along with militia from beyond the Alleghanies and
a few of the most northern counties. Thus the dispersal of forces would be
more apparent than real. All he now asked from Washington was the loan
of certain military necessities from the store at Fort Pitt. The question whoshould bear the expense would have to be left to the justice of Congress.
There would be immense long-range benefits from this enterprise, he
believed. Future quiet on the frontier would be assured, and an extensive
and fertile country would be added to the "empire of liberty." The case was
convincingly presented and the provisions seemed adequate. If his plan
could have been carried out it would undoubtedly have brought great
benefits to the general cause and have prevented a vast amount of future
trouble — whatever the effect might have been on the immediate military
situation of Virginia. But, as things turned out, the timing was bad and the
obstacles were insuperable.
Not until after Benedict Arnold had raided Virginia did he learn from
Washington that Colonel Daniel Brodhead at Pittsburg had been instructed
to co-operate, though he did not let the intervening events upset his larger
strategy. He detached Clark from the local military service he had been
doing in this emergency, and, late in January, started him off to Pittsburg
with a brigadier general's commission. But to all practical purposes the
western expedition then passed wholly from Jefferson's hands. His urgent
request that Brodhead allow Colonel Gibson's regiment to go with Clark
was denied by the unco-operative officer at Pittsburg; and when he learned
from Clark of the unwillingness of the militia of Berkeley and Frederick
counties to go west he had to admit that any attempt to force them would
result in open disobedience. Like him, they were now more deeply
concerned about dangers much closer home, and they did not share his
vision. He was encouraged by Clark's persistence in the face of the
unexpected diffi-
culties the General ran into in Pittsburg, and he continued to believe that
victory in the West was supremely important to the East, but at this stage
there was little he could do but hope. When Clark finally dropped down the
Ohio in the summer — much later and with a much smaller body of men
than had been intended — his friend the Governor was no longer in office,
and when he arrived in Kentucky he found that Fort Jefferson had been
abandoned. The abandonment of the expedition against Detroit became
inevitable. It had been well conceived and perhaps it could not have been
planned earlier, but unquestionably it had been planned too late. Events
revealed more petty selfishness in the hearts of men than was allowed for in
Jefferson's humane philosophy, and the affairs of the West remained in a
parlous state. His immediate successors in the governorship were much lessinterested in those affairs than he was, and this was one of many reasons
why George Rogers Clark continued to be his friend. His vision of
possibilities in the West is also one of the many important reasons why
later generations have remembered him; but after the last day of the year
1780 he was swamped with local military problems.
Almost before Jefferson knew what had happened Arnold made a brilliant
foray into Virginia. This was damaging enough in itself, but it assumed an
importance in his history far in excess of its military significance — for
political reasons. This brief period in his career need not be subjected to
such microscopic examination as it received afterwards from his foes and
partisans, but his activities should be described and his movements charted
in some detail. Besides being intrinsically interesting, the episode throws
light on his character as a man of action in a serious emergency.
Soon after Leslie's departure, Washington informed the Governor that there
was talk of another embarkation in New York. He neither scouted nor
encouraged the hope of naval aid from the French off the southern coast,
but he emphasized the advantages the enemy would enjoy if they should
again come to the lower parts of Virginia and remain there. They could
move up and down the rivers in small parties, he said, while the defenders
on the land would not have the means to transport themselves across these
same waterways quickly enough to get at them. A month later he reported
that a British force had actually sailed and that it was supposed to be
destined southward. 11
11 To Jefferson, Nov. 8, Dec. 9, 1780; Fitzpatrick, XX, 326-327, 447^48.
His letters of Dec. 27, 1780, and Jan. 2, 1781 (Ibid., XXI, 21, 51-52), in the
latter of which he said that Arnold was in command, were too late to be of
any help to Jefferson.
Jefferson should not have been surprised when he heard on the last day of
the year that another fleet had been sighted in the bay. However, the report
sent him by his friend General Thomas Nelson, Junior, of the militia was
not full; and he understood that it was to be followed shortly by a more
precise one. He promptly submitted such news as he had to General
Steuben, the ranking Continental officer, saying that, until further
information was received, he could only dispatch General Nelson into the
lower country to take such steps as the exigencies of the moment might
require. 12The day happened to be Sunday, and he did not think it necessary to call
the Council. Before it met in regular session on Monday morning, however,
he had written several other letters to officers and officials, "requiring
several necessary measures to be taken," and had given orders for
stationing couriers. Unfortunately, the line of post riders which he had
previously established had been discontinued for reasons of economy. In
the minutes of the Council the fleet was described as British, but when
transmitting the news to the House of Delegates, then on the point of
adjournment, Jefferson only said that he suspected it of being hostile —
because of its size and also because of the information from Washington.
13
He may have still cherished vain illusions about immediate French support,
and he appears to have maintained his unruffled manner. About this time a
Virginia officer, who had foot in stirrup to go elsewhere, heard the news,
hastened to the Governor's house, and met him walking on the hill by the
side of his garden. Jefferson then said that unless he had other information
to justify the measure he would not disturb the country by calling out the
militia. 14 Presumably the Council shared his scruples; they approved his
prompt but limited actions, at any rate. Precise information of the sort that
Jefferson required did not come until fifty hours after the first intelligence,
and in the meantime this
12 The events of these days can be sufficiently recovered from
contemporary records, especially the Journals of the Council of the State of
Virginia, II ( Va. Council Journals, State), 268-272, and O. L., II, 254-270,
giving the letters. The extracts from Jefferson's own diary, which are
reproduced in O. L., II, 270-271 n., are not contemporary in that exact
form, but they were undoubtedly based on contemporary records and they
check well with these, including his Account Book. Valuable information
of a descriptive nature is also contained in numerous affidavits collected by
his partisans at a later time and now preserved in his papers. Some of these
appeared in print in Richmond Enquirer, as on Aug. 23, 1805. Specific
reference will be made hereafter to certain of these later documents.
ia O.L., II, 254, 256.
"Col. William Tatham to W. A. Burwell, June 13, 1805 (LC,
150:26215-26216); an extract from this or a similar letter in Jefferson's own
hand is in LC, A: 1017. Late testimony like this need not be accepted in
detail, but Tatham's rather vivid statement accords with impressions gainedfrom more sober contemporary sources.
first report became "totally disbelieved," he said. If this disbelief was
somewhat less than total, he and his advisers probably thought that if a
hostile force was approaching it was only a raiding party. 15 The period
was one of rumors; but in this instance optimism did him disservice. On
Tuesday the report of an enemy invasion was definitely confirmed, and
Jefferson and his Board took action they should have taken two days
earlier.
He called part of the militia: one half, from counties near Richmond and
Petersburg, to assemble at those places; one fourth, from another group,
including his own Albemarle; and a specified number of men from the
more distant Shenandoah Valley. He had already given General Nelson
blanket authority, but he now definitely empowered him to draw out the
militia of the lower counties in any way that he thought proper. He wrote
Nelson direct, telling him that he intended to put 4600 militia in the field.
He sent the orders to the various county lieutenants by members of the
Assembly, who were returning home after adjournment. If not the best of
messengers they were probably as good as were available; they might have
moved faster had they known they had Benedict Arnold to contend with.
Jefferson also wrote to other persons, apparently missing nobody who was
important. Plans were also made for the removal of stores, if this should
prove necessary. All this was on Tuesday; it was a busy day.
On Wednesday night he learned that the enemy were at anchor opposite
Jamestown, but they did not land and proceed against Williamsburg as
expected. (It was afterwards reported that Chancellor Wythe and one or
two other old gentlemen were shooting partridges near the riverbank and
"took a shot" at the enemy.) 16 Favored by wind and tide, Arnold decided
to go farther by water. Jefferson did not know how far as yet, but on
Thursday, after he had received a report at 5 a.m., and had been advised by
the Council, he called all militia from the counties centering in Richmond
and Petersburg, both of which were threatened. The need was so pressing
that he asked them to come in small detachments without waiting to form
companies.
It was already obvious, however, that they were not going to arrive in
sufficient number to form an effective defense for the capital. Accordingly,
he gave orders to withdraw arms, military stores, and important records tothe foundry, five or six miles up the river near Westham. He did not yet
know that this was Arnold's chief physical objective. About sunset he
learned that the British had landed at Westover, north of the James, and he
then properly concluded that they were making
15 This was Tatham's memory of Jefferson's statement.
16 William Tatham, in the letter cited.
for Richmond. He promptly ordered the stores which were still there and
those that were being carried up the river to be taken across it. At 7:30,
having remained in the capital quite as long as was prudent, he set out for
Westham to supervise the operations there in person. Until eleven or twelve
the erstwhile philosopher of Monticello gave his attention and direction to
the safeguarding of the public property. Then, saying that he would cross
the river in the morning and make the necessary arrangements for
transportation on the other side, he went on to Tuckahoe for the night. His
family had gone ahead, and on Friday he sent them on to Fine Creek, where
he had inherited a place from his father.
On that day at 1 p.m. the enemy entered Richmond in triumph. A
detachment went on to the foundry, destroyed it and did other damage, and
then returned to the capital. Jefferson was at Westham for a time that day
but the British did not see him. He saw them in Richmond, however, from
Manchester across the river. His horse failing him after all this riding, he
borrowed another and tried vainly to see General Steuben, under whose
command he placed all the militia. This can hardly be dismissed as a case
of "passing the buck," for it was a wise action, if belated. 17 He missed the
Baron at several places, though he rode over much the same ground for two
days. He spent Saturday night with his family at Fine Creek, but otherwise
was wholly occupied with public matters — at Westham, Manchester, and
elsewhere — riding incessantly through snow and rain.
On Sunday, when he was again in Manchester, the enemy retired from the
capital. This was one week after he had heard of an approaching fleet. Early
Monday morning he was back in his official seat. On Wednesday the
enemy fell down the river toward Portsmouth, where for some weeks they
stayed. Catching his breath after this startlingly rapid affair, he reported
events to Washington and the President of Congress with customary
conscientiousness. The troops commanded by the "parricide" Arnoldamounted to some 1,500 infantrymen and from 50 to 120 horsemen, he
said. Opposed to them in the neighborhood of Richmond had been only
about 200 militiamen, though these were now much more numerous,
especiallv on the south side of the James. General Steuben, a zealous
friend, "descended from the dignitv of his proper command to direct our
smallest movements," he said; his vigilance prevented the enemy from
crossing the river, which might have been fatal. 18
17 Palmer, Steuben, p. 246.
18 To President of Congress and Washington, Jan. 10, 1781 (O. L., II,
266-268, quotation, p. 268).
As he summed up the losses afterwards, he comforted himself that they had
been less than might have been expected. In Richmond there were no
permanent public buildings to be destroyed, since none had yet been built.
The invaders overlooked the frame structure at the corner of Fourteenth and
Cary Streets where the Assembly met. The legislators were not there and
the streets were not filled with the saddled horses which made the place
look like an Arabian village in times of session. 19 Apparently the invaders
harmed neither the Governor's rented house nor the single-story brick
building on the hill behind it where the Council sat. Nearly everything else
in the straggling town was built of wood. Most of the public stores that
were movable had been transported, in considerable confusion undoubtedly
but with celerity. The chief damage was up the river, where the boring mill
and magazine were destroyed and the roof of the foundry was burned,
though the chimney stacks and furnaces of the latter were uninjured. Some
stores were lost, chiefly leather, but most of the firearms were afterwards
recovered from the water and Jefferson believed that much of the
gunpowder which had been thrown into the canal could be saved by re-
manufacturing. 20
The loss which Jefferson's friends felt most called upon to explain in later
years was that of important public records, including those of the Council.
A sad mistake was made by some wagoners, who lodged these papers in
the magazine instead of placing them at the landing on the river; they could
not be moved again before the enemy swooped down. 21 The British did
not know how effectively they were destroying the Governor's record. He
went to great pains afterwards to procure copies of letters from the
recipients, and there can be no question of his unremitting personal effortsto preserve the public property.
Years later a supporter explained why he went into day-by-day details of
the Governor's movements during Arnold's raid: "For we wish any man,
who can discover the slightest remissness in these movements, to lay his
finger upon the point and say when and where it was." ** It would be
difficult indeed to find any remissness in Jefferson's movements or actions
from the moment that the report of the invasion was confirmed. The only
real question is that of his delay in recognizing
™J. D. Schoepf, Travels in the Confederation (1911), II, 65; various
valuable details from Mrs. Louise T. Catterall, Valentine Museum,
Richmond.
20 The best summaries are in the letter to Washington, Jan. 10, 1781,
already cited, and a letter to the Speaker of the House of Delegates, Mar. 1,
1781, in O. L., II, 378-379.
21 Deposition of Daniel L. Hylton, Oct. 12, 1796, in LC, 100:17,225.
22 Thomas Ritchie in Richmond Enquirer, Aug. 23, 1805.
the seriousness of the situation. He himself was of the opinion, soon after
the event, that if the militia had been called two days earlier Arnold might
never have got to Richmond; and he blamed the loss of those two days on
faulty intelligence. 23 This defect he immediately tried to correct, but he
never explained satisfactorily his failure to interpret more realistically the
intelligence he did receive.
His later references to his original doubts about the status of the fleet in the
bay were not emphatic, nor were they to any considerable degree
recriminatory. But at this distance they seem disingenuous; they do not
quite ring true; they are a little less, though not much less, than candid. It
would have been better if he had admitted the unvarnished truth: Arnold
had caught him off his guard. It would have been better if he had erred on
the side of self-reproach and had assumed more than his proportionate
share of blame, just as he had shouldered more than his share of labor.
Neither civil nor military officials often do that, but such an attitude would
have been in character with the high-minded and personally disinterested
public official that he was. He could have stood on his record as a whole,without attempting to excuse himself even by implication. Or, as so many
lesser men would have done, he might have burst forth in fierce indignation
against others who were more at fault than he and then have stopped
thinking about the matter. Actually he did neither. There is no doubt that he
had vengeful feelings toward Benedict Arnold, whom he regarded as "the
greatest of all traitors," and would have liked to see captured and exhibited
as "a public spectacle of infamy." 23 ° But when dealing with colleagues
whose good will he had no reason to suspect he was rarely denunciatory.
He was characteristically polite, regardful of others, and slow to anger. On
the other hand, he was too proud and sensitive to endure criticism and
reproach in self-forgetful silence.
He received censure in unmerited degree later on. Meanwhile, he had
words of comfort from the person who was best able to view the situation
as a whole. Washington agreed that the experience had been mortifying,
but, considering the geography of Virginia, wondered that
23 To Jacob Wray, Jan. 15, 1781, in O. L., II, 276-277.
230 Phrases quoted from this letter of Jan. 31, 1781, to an unknown person,
authorizing an attempt to capture Arnold and offering a reward. This
included a passage (seen by me through courtesy JP), stricken out by him,
in which he approved taking Arnold dead if he could not be taken alive.
Without this passage the letter is in Ford, II, 441-443, with a note saying it
was probably to CJ. R. Clark; and in O. L., II, 312-313, where it is given as
addressed to Gen. Mohlcn b c f g . There is no address on the original, and
it may never have been sent. It is better regarded as a revelation of
Jefferson's state of mind than as an illustration of punitive action.
the State had been molested so little. He feared similar experiences in the
future, but regarded the evils to be apprehended from these predatory
expeditions as relatively small. They were not to be compared with the
injury to the common cause and to Virginia itself that would result from the
conquest of the region to the south. There was no doubt whatever in his
mind that the policy of this highly vulnerable State should be to keep the
weight of the war at a distance. The principal object of Arnold's operatiors
had been to make a diversion in favor of Cornwallis, and the surest way to
get rid of him was to show him, by the continued reinforcement of General
Greene, that he had failed of his intention. In other words, Jefferson's own
major policies were right, and should be continued. If he had committed amilitary sin — and the wise and magnanimous General did not even imply
that he had — this was a venial sin, not mortal. 2 *
A much more severe military critic whom Jefferson had to cope with at this
stage was General von Steuben, who had been greatly annoyed by the delay
and confusion of the mobilization, who regarded the war commissioner,
Colonel George Muter, as incompetent, and who believed that things were
done better in New Jersey under Governor William Livingston than in
Virginia under Governor Thomas Jefferson. 25 The former Prussian staff
officer was determined that the shame and disgrace of Arnold's virtually
unopposed raid should not be repeated, and in trying to carry out one of his
cherished plans he soon became engaged in altercation with the champion
of self-government. In important respects the episode was revealing.
Before Arnold came Steuben had recommended the fortification of a bend
of the river below Richmond at a place called Hood's, and he believed that
this would have been a considerable obstacle to the invader. Jefferson had
punctiliously referred the matter to the Assembly but that body had found
no time to consider it before adjournment. After both the legislators and
raiders had gone Steuben brought up the matter again, whereupon the
Governor and Council assumed the authority to approve the proposal.
Steuben quite naturally thought they might have done this in the first place.
Even now they were much too dilatory from the point of view of Frederick
the Great's disciple, and a sharp exchange of letters ensued. There had been
a serious misunderstanding between the General and the civilian officials
about the methods of procuring the necessary labor. Steuben wanted to
summon in neighboring militiamen, regarding them
24 To Jefferson, Feb. 6, 1781; Fitzpatrick, XXI, 191-192. 26 Palmer,
Steuben, pp. 248-249.
as soldiers under orders, or he wanted Negroes as substitutes. To his
brusque demand the Governor raised firm legal objections. "The executives
have not by the laws of this state any power to call a freeman to labor even
for the public without his consent, nor a slave without that of his master,"
he said. Therefore, voluntary labor must be hired, quickly if possible but
slowly if necessary. In supreme disgust Steuben wrote to Washington: "The
executive power is so confined that the Governor has it not in his power to
procure me 40 negroes to work at Hood's." In military terms this was areductio ad absurdum. Indeed, in military terms this unprofessional war,
waged in fits and starts by temporary soldiers, was little less than that.
Jefferson himself never succeeded in resolving the contradiction. His
ingenious mind finally figured out a way to get around the legal limitations
upon the employment of the militia in fatigue duty, but he did not get the
fortifications erected soon enough to delay the next invasion, and in his last
message to the Assembly he posed the vexing question of employing
freemen and slaves in necessary military works at a time when the currency
was worthless. 26
It was the militia, he said, who "environed" Arnold at Portsmouth and
prevented that bold soldier from making any other raids for upwards of two
months. Not until late March did British reinforcements come and create
new dangers. Meanwhile, the situation was disturbing enough to cause the
Governor to advance the date of the Assembly to March 1, despite the
inconvenience to the members. His explanation was entirely adequate:
"One army of our enemies lodged within our country, another pointing
towards it, . . . without a shilling in the public coffers, was a situation in
which it was impossible to rest the safety of the State." 27 The emissions of
paper money, ordered or permitted by the last Assembly, and amounting to
more than £ 11,000,000, had been dispensed as fast as they came off the
printing press, and many urgent calls had not yet been answered. These
facts may be cited against later allegations that Jefferson as governor was
foolishly economical.
Despite dangers and difficulties, reinforcements had gone to General
Greene. These consisted chiefly of militia from the western counties, whom
Jefferson always considered as Virginia's best. Those counties had been
drawn on as little as possible for the operations
26 Jefferson to Steuben, Feb. 12, 1781, in O. L, II, 333-334; to Col.
William Call, Apr. 18, 1781 (Ibid., II, 484); to Speaker of House of
Delegates, May 10, 1781 (Ibid., II, 512). The excellent account of this
episode in Palmer, Steuben, pp. 251-253, is marred by an inadequate
appreciation of the real legal difficulties that Jefferson faced.
27 To Speaker of House of Delegates, Mar. 1, 1781 (O. L., II, 377).
around Portsmouth. 28 The Governor was still wondering about the best
way to raise troops to meet all the calls on him. He would have preferred torely on regulars, and he deeply regretted the interference with drafting
operations which had resulted from calling the militia in such numbers
from so many counties. In any case where the manpower had been drained
from a county and the filling of a levy seemed impracticable, he was forced
to exercise his authority to suspend drafting. This was one reason why he
waited as long as he could before calling out the militia.
He did not like the existing system — or lack of system. He told the
Assembly: "Whether it be practicable to raise and maintain a sufficient
number of regulars to carry on the war is a question: that it would be
burdensome is undoubted. Yet it is perhaps as certain that no possible mode
of carrying it on can be so expensive to the public and so distressing and
disgusting to individuals as by militia." 29 His concern for individuals did
not go to the point of condoning avoidance of militia duty, or resistance to
drafting or impressment. Whenever the spirit of disobedience appeared he
favored subduing it immediately. "Laws made by common consent must
not be trampled on by individuals," he said. 30 But he regarded militiamen
as civilians who had been drawn from their farms and homes to do
temporary service in local emergencies. They should not be sent to a
distance; they should not — they could not — be kept in armies very long.
Perhaps he was too solicitous, but he had to be realistic. The men who were
serving around Portsmouth were being kept beyond their time for a
purpose. Although he did not speak of it publicly there was a definite plan
to catch the traitor. If it could have been carried out his governorship would
have been regarded, then and thereafter, as definitely successful.
At last French naval support in the Chesapeake Bay region promised to be
something more than a figment of Jefferson's imagination. Heeding the
request of the Virginia delegation in Congress, the French minister, La
Luzerne, urged Admiral Destouches to send a few ships from Newport to
check Arnold. By late February a man-of-war and some smaller vessels
actually arrived, though they did not stay long. 31 Meanwhile, Washington
had formed a plan for Lafayette to operate
28 Jefferson to Steuben, Feb. 15, 18, 1781 (O. L., II, 346, 357); to President
of Congress, Feb. 17, 1781 (Ibid., II, 350-352); Palmer, Steuben, p. 253.
29 O. L., II, 378.
30 To Col. Vanmeter, Apr. 27, 1781 (O. L., II, 499).31 Jeferson to Steuben, Feb. 19, 1781 (Ford, II, 459); Louis Gottschalk,
Lafayette and the Close of the American Revolution, p. 191. I have not
given space to the special mission of Benjamin Harrison to Congress; see
Madison to Pendleton, Jan. 16, 1781 (Writings, I, 124).
in conjunction with a larger naval force. Before the middle of March the
Marquis got his detachment as far south as Annapolis, and he himself went
on to Yorktown and Williamsburg to consult the military authorities in
Virginia. He and the Governor did not see each other this time, but the
letters they exchanged marked the beginning of a lifelong correspondence
and heralded an historic friendship. 32
Certain sentences in Jefferson's welcoming letter are particularly revealing.
Modestly and realistically he wrote:
I trust that your future Acquaintance with the Executive of the State will
evince to you that among their faults is not to be counted a want of
disposition to second the Views of the Commander against our common
Enemy. We are too much interested in the present scene and have too much
at Stake to leave a doubt on that Head. Mild Laws, a People not used to war
and prompt obedience, a want of the provisions of War & means of
procuring them render our efforts often ineffectual, oblige us to temporise
and when we cannot accomplish an object in one way to attempt it in
another. . . .**
These limiting circumstances he wanted Lafayette to know. A couple of
days later he understated the case by saying that he had to reduce his own
expectations at times. "I know," he added, "that you will be satisfied to
make the most of an unprepared [people] who have the war now for the
first time seriously fixed in their country, and have therefore all those habits
to acquire which their northern brethren had in the year 1776 and which
they have purchased at so great an expence." 34 Fortunately, Lafayette was
already used to the inconveniences arising from popular government, and
believed that these were compensated by numberless blessings. He was
reluctant to sign impressing warrants for horses, much as he needed them,
and he wanted to be informed of the exact state of the militia laws.
Delighted to find a foreign officer who appreciated conditions in civilian
America, Jefferson hastened to say that under existing conditions
impressment of property was indispensable, and that he had no fear of
Lafayette's exercise of these powers. Washington's letter of introduction,forwarded at this late date, was not really needed. Quite obviously, these
two men were going to like each other. 35
82 Well discussed by Gilbert Chinard in his ed. of Letters of Lafayette and
Jefferson, pp. 5-13.
33 Mar. 10, 1781 (O. L, II, 401). He had written on Mar. 2, 8 (Ibid., II,
382-383, 393).
84 Mar. 12, 1781 (O. L., 11,405).
35 Lafayette to Jefferson, Mar. 17, 20, 1781 (Chinard, Letters, pp. 26-27,
30-31); Jefferson to Lafayette, Mar. 19, 1781 (O. L., II, 416-417).
To Steuben the Governor spoke much to the same effect but in a quite
different tone. The Baron, angered because of the failure to obtain the
expected men, supplies, and horses for Lafayette's expedition, complained
bitterly to Jefferson, asking that his letter be laid before the Assembly. In
reply, after summarizing his orders to the county authorities about the
militia, the Governor said: "We can only be answerable for the orders we
give, and not for the execution. If they are disobeyed [in the counties] from
obstinacy of spirit or want of coercion in the laws it is not our fault; we
have done what alone remained for us to do in such case, we have ordered
other militia from other counties." 36 In the matter of horses, the
quartermaster applied for militia to aid him in executing his powers of
impressment. This request Jefferson denied. "We did not think proper to
resign ourselves and our country implicitly to the demands of a
quartermaster," he said, "but thought we had some right of judgment left to
us. We know that an armed force to impress horses was as unnecessary as it
was new." Nothing caused quite so much irritation as the seizure of horses,
and Jefferson soon was directed by the Assembly to authorize county
lieutenants to restrain this form of impressment. He wrote to General
Greene: "As tedious as is the operation of reasoning with every individual
on whom we are obliged to exercise disagreeable powers, yet free people
think they have a right to an explanation of the circumstances which give
rise to the necessity under which thev suffer." 37
So far as Lafayette's expedition was concerned, all this turned out to be
much ado about nothing, for the expected naval aid did not come. The fleet
that sailed into the bay in late March was not French but British. The event,which was so fateful to Governor Jefferson, hung by a hair. Not knowing
that there had been a naval battle, he tried hard to inform his allies of the
presence of the foe, only to learn afterwards that Destouches, though
claiming a victory, had gone back to Newport. 38 Reinforcements soon
came to Arnold under General William Phillips, Jefferson's former
neighbor, who as an exchanged prisoner had returned to the fight.
Lafayette, forced to abandon the expedition, went back to Annapolis and
then to Head of Elk. Jefferson would have shared the glory if the Marquis
had caught Arnold, but he could claim none when Cornwallis surrendered
at Yorktown after he himself had retired.
* • *
36 Mar. 10, 1781 (O. L., II, 399).
37 Apr. 5, 1781 (O. L., II, 456).
38 Several letters of Mar. 21, 1781 (O. L., II, 421-423); excellent account
of whole affair in Gottschalk, ch. 9.
He might have shared the credit of another enterprise, which Steuben
conceived and Lafayette approved before he left. The Baron boldly
proposed that he march immediately with two thousand picked militia to
join Greene, the supposition being that with this reinforcement the latter
would be able to defeat Cornwallis decisively. Richard Henry Lee regarded
this as a master stroke; General Wcedon of the militia thought it would
practically terminate the war; and no less an authority than George
Washington believed that, if carried out, it would probably have ruined
Cornwallis. 39
From what Jefferson himself said about the strategy of the war he might
have been expected to approve the proposal. Almost a month later, when
the local situation was still precarious, he wrote Lafayette that so long as
Greene was kept superior to Cornwallis Virginia really had little to fear.
What he was most afraid of was what the British themselves hoped,
namely, that they would be able to rally Loyalists and other disaffected
elements in the South. "The British force may harass and distress us
greatly," he said, "but the Carolinas alone can subdue us. . . . We therefore
think it our first interest to keep them under in that quarter, considering the
war in our own country but as a secondary object." *° He regarded themilitia left in the State as only a defensive force, frankly recognizing the
probability that they could do little more than impede the enemy.
It is possible that the Governor was overborne by his Council when they
considered Steuben's proposal, but, just as he would have been condemned
if it had been accepted and then followed by local disaster, so he must bear
the blame for its unfortunate rejection. He and his advisers recognized that
the plan was founded on "very probable principles," but, now that the
enemy had been reinforced at Portsmouth, they were unwilling to weaken
local defenses further. The detachment which Steuben wanted would take
so large a proportion of the available arms that the remaining militia in the
east would be practically powerless. The best they could offer, therefore,
was the speediest possible reinforcement of Greene from the Piedmont and
southwestern counties, where there was reason to suppose the militia could
supply arms. 41
Jefferson also wanted to expedite the raising of the Continental levies of
regulars, and the sending of these to Greene. I [c \^ as in-
39 Lee to Jefferson, Mar. 27, 1781, in Ballagh, II, 217; other letters quoted
in Palmer, Steuben, p. 260.
40 To Lafayette, Apr. 23, 1781 (O. L., II, 494). At this time the British had
actually advanced up the river and were again threatening the capital.
41 Mar. 21, 1781 (Va. Council Journals, State, II, 322).
volved in several contradictions. Not only had this work of enlistment been
interfered with by the embodiment of the militia; he was also acutely aware
that both the militia in the east and those now with Greene in the Carolinas
had already served a longer tour of duty than was customary and must be
shortly relieved. "Thus pushed for men," he wrote one of his high officers,
"the Baron's proposition was not acceded to as exposing the country too
much." 42 The issue was not merely between local and general strategy,
nor even between the military and civilian points of view in this amateurish
war. Considerations of war weariness, of disaffection, and of local
psychology also entered in.
The calls of the militia specified no precise term of service, and Jefferson's
attempt hereafter to limit this to two months was not legally necessary. Onpractical grounds it probably was, if he did not want to be faced with
wholesale desertions. It is curiously ironical, however, that at this critical
time he ordered an extensive shifting of the militia. This was not a case of
fiddling while Rome burned, for the Governor's violin was quite neglected,
but it was a case of applying principles of human justice in a period of
grave emergency. Such a time called for a less scrupulous and more
ruthless man.
Steuben, now more contemptuous than ever of the feeble and, to his mind,
indecisive government of Virginia, wanted more support against Phillips
and Arnold in Portsmouth if he could not go to the aid of Greene. At this
juncture, however, Jefferson w?s very unwilling to "harass" the militia any
more than was absolutely necessary. Accordingly, while urging Steuben
and others to explain things to them and to express appreciation of their
long and arduous services, he called upon the county lieutenants to round
up their delinquents. The penalty of six months' service on these men he
thought entirely proper. Burdens must be equitably distributed between
counties and within them. 43 Unquestionably he had a keener sense of
justice than of military efficiency. It was not because of pressure from him
and the Council that Colonel George Muter, the commissioner of war,
finally resigned. They had declined his offer to submit himself to a formal
investigation and denied having had complaints against him. In place of
this official, Jefferson named Colonel William Davies, a Continental officer
whom Steuben regarded as thoroughly competent,
42 To Gen. Weedon, Mar. 31, 1781 (O. L., II, 446). See also letter to
Greene, Mar. 30, 1781 (Ibid., II, 443-444).
43 To County Lieutenants, Apr. 11, 1781 (O. L., II, 465); to Steuben,
Weedon, and .Muhlenberg, Apr. 3, 1781 (Ibid., II, 451-453).but Davies, viewing the administrative confusion with the eye of a
professional, thought it now little short of irremediable. Also, when
Lafayette came back, this friendly officer said that more militia seemed to
be going off than coming in. To a military man this was another reductio ad
abmrdum^
By the spring of 1781, when the Governor was thirty-eight years old, his
official troubles had become so great that even reading about them is
painful. To these personal sorrow was now added. On April 15, he made
another mournful entry in his Account Book: "Our daughter Lucy Elizabeth
died about 10 o'clock a.m. this day," he wrote. The infant was in only her
second year. On the next day, which was so inclement that he doubted the
presence of a quorum at the Council meetings, he begged to be excused
from attending. His wife was in a situation in which he did not wish to
leave her, he said. 45
Three days after that he received intelligence that the enemy were in
motion up the James in eleven square-rigged vessels. It looked as though
the interior would be penetrated again, but he was not caught napping this
time. He did all he was supposed to do, did it promptly, and remained in his
appointed place throughout the ten-day period that the immediate danger
lasted. Certain members of the Council were out of town at the most
perilous time, doubtless for quite sufficient reasons, but he was always
there and he gave no sign that he was particularly perturbed. He did not
think there was much in Richmond now that the enemy could damage, and
he soon learned that Lafayette was coming back.
Lafayette came in time to save the capital. Phillips and Arnold got no
closer than Manchester, across the James to the south, and thev caused
chief damage by burning tobacco warehouses there and at Petersburg.
Lafayette, advancing by forced marches, reached Richmond on the evening
of Sunday, April 29, and very shortly after his arrival he and Jefferson first
met. The militia joined the Continental regulars of the Marquis, and the
"cowardly plunderers" (as Jefferson described them) were soon sailing
down the river. There was no reason to suppose that the enemy would soon
come back. It seemed to the Governor that the new Continental levies
within the State could be sent to Greene as they were raised, and that
Richmond was a safe44 Jefferson to Muter, Mar. 2, 1781 (O. L., II, 383); to Davies, Mar. 22,
1781 (Ibid., II, 424); Palmer, Steuben, p. 261; Gottschalk, Lafayette, p.
228.
45 To David Jamieson, Apr. 16, 1781; Ford, III, 13. Four members
appeared but they transacted only the single item of business which
Jefferson had written them about; Journals, II, 335.
enough place for the Assembly to meet at the scheduled time in early-May.
46
The legislators themselves did not think so, for no quorum came; and on
May 10 those who had braved the dangers determined to meet two weeks
later in Charlottesville. 47 Jefferson had no choice but to follow them, and
the position of the government in the capital soon became quite untenable,
anyway. The tide of war turned swiftly and unexpectedly. Phillips and
Arnold reversed their course and came back up the river for a more
important purpose than a predatory raid. They were going to join
Cornwallis, who had adopted a new plan. 48 His Lordship, leaving behind
him a smaller force to cope with Greene, made straight for Petersburg; and
there, on May 20, the armies of the enemy were linked. Jefferson had
certainly not anticipated this. General Greene, though continuing to serve
the Continental cause bravely and effectively, was no longer Virginia's
shield; and, so far as local defense was concerned, the troops and supplies
sent to him were wasted. The military hopes of the Commonwealth now
centered necessarily in Lafayette.
The Governor was still going through the customary motions, but he had to
admit to the Marquis that the machinery of enforcement in the counties had
largely broken down. If his calls did not produce the necessary
reinforcements, he wrote, "I shall candidly acknowledge that it is not in my
power to do anything more than to represent to the General Assembly that
unless they can provide more effectually for the execution of the laws it
will be vain to call on militia." 49 After a last conference with Lafayette,
and what proved to be his last official meeting with the Council on May 15,
he left Richmond. Apparently his family were already at Tuckahoe; he
himself remained in that familiar seat several days before riding homeward.
This was not a precipitate flight but a dignified, if discouraged, retirement
before a new alignment of superior forces.46 Jefferson to various county lieutenants, Apr. 19, 1781 (O. L., II,
485-486); to Col. William Preston, Apr. 21, 1781 {Ibid., II, 489); to
Lafayette, Apr. 23, 1781 {Ibid., II, 494); to President of Congress and
Washington, Apr. 23, 1781 {Ibid., II, 495); to Members of the General
Assembly from certain counties, May 1, 1781 {Ibid., II, 500); to President
of Congress and Washington, May 9, 1781 {Ibid., II, 509-510); Gottschalk,
Lafayette, pp. 221-223. No quorum of the Council was present Apr. 26-
May 5, but Jefferson was there every day at the appointed time; see
Journals, II, 341-342.
47 Delegates, Journal, May 7-10. Jefferson addressed his customary letter
to the Speaker on May 10 (O. L., II, 510-512).
48 The whole matter is illuminated by the correspondence in Cornwallis's
Answer to Clinton's Narrative (London, 1783), pp. 55-73.
49 To Lafayette, May 14, 1781 (O. L., II, 515). See also letter to the
Speaker, May 28, 1781 (O. L., II, 523).
One question of formalities was now wholly pointless. From the former
commander at Portsmouth he had received a letter addressed to "Thomas
Jefferson, Esq., American Governor of Virginia"; and, not to be outdone, he
had addressed his reply to "William Phillips, Esq., commanding the British
forces in the Commonwealth of Virginia." M But on May 13, Phillips,
whom his recent neighbor described as "the proudest man of the proudest
nation on earth," lay dead in Petersburg; and Jefferson, retiring to supposed
safety with what remained of Virginia's officialdom, was now only the
shadow of a governor. In his native County he soon ceased being even that.
50 Jefferson, to Va. Delegates in Congress, May 10, 1781 (O. L., II, 513).
Exit His Excellency
RETIRING before the enemy under the inexorable pressure of events, the
government of the proud Commonwealth of Virginia not only lost all
semblance of impressiveness. In the process of transferring its seat from
Richmond to Charlottesville it practically dissolved. The constituent parts
were incompletely reassembled during Jefferson's few remaining days as
chief magistrate. He had called the Council to meet on the day appointedfor the convening of the adjourned legislature, May 24, but only one of his
advisers joined him by then. Another showed up six days later, but there
never was a quorum, and, though he himself was always on hand, there
were no further official transactions of the Board. So far as he was
concerned it had ceased to exist. 1
In his last days as the head of a moribund executive department he held a
council of another and more colorful sort. A delegation of Illinois Indians,
from the George Rogers Clark country in which he was so deeply
interested, visited him and thus served as a reminder of that imperial
domain. He smoked the pipe of peace with Brother John Baptist de Coigne,
though otherwise he never used tobacco. Also, as the Great Father, he
addressed the Chief in words of simple eloquence which he charged not
only with sympathy but also with confidence and hope. 2
To him in June, 1781, as in July, 1776, this was a struggle against tyranny
in the name of freedom; and he spoke of its prospects
1 Va. Council Journals, State, II, 345-346.
2 To Brother John Baptist de Coigne, June, 1781 (L. & B., XVI, 371-377).
A passage from this speech has already been quoted in connection with the
Declaration of Independence and Jefferson's interpretation of the meaning
of the war. One of the <few references to this council by a contemporary is
in a letter from John Taylor, a member of the Assembly, to D. C. Brent,
Oct. 7, 1796 (LC, 100:17217-17218).
EXIT HIS EXCELLENCY 353
with an optimism which seems absurd in view of British successes and the
immediacy of his own peril. After six years of attempted conquest, he said,
the enemy had won no more land than would serve for the burial of their
slain warriors. Upon the face of it this was merely an idle boast, designed
for psychological effect. The Governor, it seems, was whistling loudly to
keep up courage. Other words of his, however, show that his optimism was
not wholly feigned. This was the same sort of struggle that it had been at
the beginning, and, in the larger view, he saw victory as inevitable. "But
peace is not far off," he said. "The English cannot hold out long, because all
the world is against them." 3 The logic seemed unescapable if one argued
deductively after viewing the international scene, and before many monthsit was borne out by events. Despite the deep darkness of the hour Jefferson
had retained both his philosophy and his faith.
His view of the local situation was another matter. He saw clearly and
stated frankly that Virginia was nearing the end of her resources and that he
himself could do practically nothing more. Before he addressed the Indian
Chief with such show of confidence he appealed as a last resort to
Washington to come to the rescue of a sinking State. His last letter to the
Commander in Chief in this period of suspended animation was not a
pretentious communication nor was it querulous, but it was touching and he
himself regarded it as final. 4
If Washington was not already aware of the rapid deterioration of the
military situation, the Governor left him in no possible doubt of it. The
forces of Cornwallis and Arnold, united at Petersburg, had moved
northward, and they had been joined by fresh reinforcements, brought by
water from New York. Jefferson did not know that Virginia was to be freed
of Benedict Arnold, who was granted leave to return to the North; but it
was an occasion of grave concern to him that there were now some seven
thousand enemy troops within the Commonwealth. Lafayette, not yet
reinforced by Wayne from Pennsylvania, stood between the British and
Fredericksburg, but, with his regulars and such militia as could be armed,
he had less than half that number. Cornwallis might not be able to
annihilate the Marquis; actually, the Earl soon found the "boy" dangerously
elusive. But Jefferson foresaw that the enemy, restraining him with part of
their much larger force, could use the rest to waste an unarmed country.
What he most feared was the acquiescence of a weary people, un-
3 L. &B., XVI, 375.
4 To Washington, May 28, 1781 (O. L., II, 524-525). He wrote the
President of Congress more briefly on the same date, and also issued
certain orders to county lieutenants {Ibid., II,'522-524).
der events which they could see no human power prepared to ward off. He
issued more orders to the militia to join Lafayette but he had no assurance
that these would be heeded. What his exhausted and discouraged country
needed was the aid and presence of the greatest of its sons. Washington's
judgment must be formed on a view of the whole Continental scene, not asingle part; but Jefferson believed that his appearance among his
countrymen would restore full confidence. "Should the dangers of this State
and its consequences to the union be such as to render it best for the whole
that you should repair to its assistance," he said, "the difficulty would be to
keep men out of the field." To Washington this painfully consistent unionist
turned, because there was now no use appealing to anybody else.
It was only as a private citizen, however, that he himself could hope to feel
the comforting effects of the Commander in Chief's presence. He was
speaking his valedictory as a war governor. "A few days will bring to me
that period of relief which the constitution has prepared for those oppressed
with the labours of my office," he said, "and a long declared resolution of
relinquishing it to abler hands has prepared my way for retirement to a
private station." Washington could not yet promise to come to the rescue of
Virginia, but he could say this:
Give me leave before I take leave of your Excellency in your public
capacity to Express the obligations I am under for the readiness and zeal
with which you have always forwarded and supported every measure
which I have had occasion to recommend thro' you, and to assure you that I
shall esteem myself honored by a continuance of your friendship and
correspondence shou'd vour Country permit you to remain in the private
walk of life. 5
On the very day that Jefferson wrote Washington the Assembly held its first
formal session in Charlottesville. 6 The month of May had almost run its
flowery course before the legislators managed to organize. The two
speakers, Benjamin Harrison of the House of Delegates and Archibald Cary
of the Senate, with some other members, were guests at Monticello. They
could not have been left in much doubt about the state of their host's mind,
but Jefferson would have guarded himself better against later controversy if
he had made to the Assembly at this time a formal statement of his
unwillingness to serve longer. Perhaps he thought this unnecessary because
his sentiments were well known; perhaps he believed that anything he said
publicly
5 To Jefferson, June 8, 1781 (Fitzpatrick, XXII, 190). 6 There was no
quorum until May 28.
at this critical juncture would be liable to misinterpretation; perhaps, withcharacteristic deference to the legislators, he wanted to leave the ultimate
responsibility with them. Unfortunately, however, they did not immediately
provide the relief he undoubtedly longed for and almost certainly expected.
They resolved to ballot for governor on June 2, the precise date on which
his second term of one year ended. This happened to fall on Saturday and
when the day came they postponed action till Monday, not anticipating that
action would then be impossible.
On Sunday, June 3, Jefferson stretched legalities sufficiently to write
several official letters which are of some interest in themselves and of more
in that they were his last. He accepted the proposal of the President of
Pennsylvania that the final settlement of the boundary between that State
and Virginia be postponed. He agreed that it was impracticable to
determine this by astronomical observations during the present season, and
that in the meantime the line of Mason and Dixon should be extended for
twenty-three miles by surveyor's compass. This was a good note for Peter
Jefferson's son to end on. 7
But the fates were not content that his administration should expire so
calmly. Before sunrise on Monday a gigantic horseman rode up the
mountain to tell him the British dragoons were coming. He and his guests
ate a normal breakfast, traditionally a large one, and the legislators
afterwards gathered momentarily in Charlottesville. They did not take time
to elect a governor, however; they merely adjourned to Staunton, beyond
the Blue Ridge, after the House of Delegates had agreed that forty members
should constitute a quorum. 8 The villain of the piece (though not a really
vile one) was Lieutenant Colonel Tarleton; the hero was towering Jack
Jouett; the victims were the scampering legislators and a stranded
gentleman who presumed himself to be a private citizen and had a family to
look after.
In Hanover County, several days earlier, Cornwallis had planned to distress
the Virginians by breaking up the Assembly. Also, the Earl had learned that
Steuben, with recent levies intended for General Greene, was at Point of
Fork on the upper James to the southwest of Charlottesville, covering
Continental stores there. Detaching Tarleton with one hundred and eightv
dragoons and seventy mounted infantry, Cornwallis sent him to disrupt the
government; he despatched a slower-moving force under Lieutenant
Colonel Simcoe against Point
7 To the Virginia commissioners, to the President of Pennsylvania, and tothe Surveyor of Monongalia County, June 3, 1781 (O. L., II, 531-552). B
Delegates, Journal, June 4, 1781.
of Fork and Steuben. After completing his mission Tarleton was to join
Simcoe. Meanwhile, the main body was to proceed westward through
Goochland County to unite later with the two detachments. 9 Simcoe put
Steuben to flight, bringing that already unpopular officer into considerable
discredit, and the main body of the enemy, making headquarters shortly at
Elkhill, destroyed much of Jefferson's property. But it was Tarleton who
did most damage to his reputation.
The dragoons and mounted infantry, starting from Hanover on that Sunday
when Jefferson wrote his last official letters, covered seventy miles in
twenty-four hours. Riding chiefly in the night, they counted on surprise and
but for accident would have achieved it. At a tavern bearing the incredible
name of Cuckoo, some forty miles from Charlottesville, Captain John
Jouett, Junior, known in local story as "J ac V observed them. The son and
namesake of the keeper of the Swan Tavern in Charlottesville, who was
himself something of legendary figure, he was even taller than Jefferson
and weighed more than two hundred pounds. Also an expert horseman, he
knew the back trails and bypaths, and through the night he followed them.
It is said that the scars made on his face by the lashing branches of the
undergrowth remained with him all his life. Legend also has it that when he
arrived at Monticello before sunrise, he was regaled by Jefferson with old
Madeira; he then rode on to arouse the sleeping legislators in
Charlottesville. 10
Jouett was well ahead of Tarleton. The latter rested his men for three hours
during the night, paused to capture and burn a baggage train, stopped to
pluck several of the "principal gentlemen of Virginia" from their beds, and
gathered in a visiting congressman from North Carolina. The legend is,
also, that he partook of a generous breakfast at Dr. Thomas Walker's. 11
Tarleton's delay, however, was relatively slight and should detract nothing
from the glory of Jack Jouett's ride, which, as an isolated feat, was
obviously more difficult than the far more famous one of Paul Revere. It
came toward the end of the Revolution, rather than at the beginning, and
the ensuing events were less heroic, but the chief difference between the
two rides lies in the fact that no poet immortalized Jouett. In passing him
9 Banastre Tarleton, History of the Campaigns of 1181 and 1182 (Dublin,1787), pp. 302-303.
10 The best account is Virginius Dabney, "Jouett Outrides Tarleton,"
Scribner's Mag., vol. 83, pp. 690-698 (June, 1928).
11 The safest account is Tarleton's History, pp. 303-305. Randall, I,
335-336, makes Only slight reference to Jouett but tells a good story. He
designates the prisoners as the two Walkers, William and Robert Nelson,
Colonel Simms - a senator — and Francis Kinlock of North Carolina.
by writers have missed an opportunity, for he might have been depicted in
scarlet coat, with military plume and hat, and was in other respects a highly
dramatic figure. He rendered great service to Thomas Jefferson, for if the
British had captured him they would probably not have released him so
quickly on parole as they did the other Patriots. They would hardly have
caught such an early riser in bed, however, and made him suffer the
indignity of being dragged forth in his nightshirt.
By the time Tarleton's men got to the ford of the Rivanna below
Charlottesville, this was guarded. They stormed through, nevertheless,
destroyed stores of firelocks and gunpowder, and despite Jack Jouett
captured seven dilatory members of the Assembly. "The attempt to secure
Mr. Jefferson was ineffectual," reported the Colonel; "he discovered the
British dragoons from his house, . . . before they could approach him, and
he provided for his personal safety with a precipitate retreat." In this case
discretion was undoubtedly the better part of valor, but Tarleton did not
have firsthand knowledge of Jefferson's movements. He sent somebody else
(Captain McLeod) up the mountain and he himself hastened on toward
Simcoe, though that officer really did not need him. It is difficult to sift
truth from legend, but the former Governor was by no means the first to
flee, and there was no sign of terror in his almost too deliberate movements.
If no Don Quixote, neither was he a Falstaff.
The indisputable facts are that he first sent off his guests, that he dispatched
his family in a carriage a couple of hours later, and that he himself did not
leave Monticello until practically every other man was gone and the enemy
were actually approaching. Family tradition has embroidered the story. It is
said that his delay was partly occasioned by the necessity of having his
horse shod; that he started off once, dismounted to look through a
telescope, saw no soldiers, and turned back; then noting that he haddropped his small sword at the observation point, he returned to that place,
took another look through the telescope, and saw redcoats filling the streets
of Charlottesville. 12
A late but credible account is that he was warned of immediate danger by a
young officer who found him "perfectly tranquil and undisturbed." 13 The
subsequent emphasis of his partisans on his composure seemed necessary
to them because of the charges of personal cowardice which were hurled at
him by political enemies long after the events. He himself termed these too
ridiculous to be taken seri-
12 These traditions enter into the account given by Randall, I, 337-339. For
Jefferson's own story, see Ford, VIII, 368-369 n.
13 Deposition of Capt. Christopher Hudson, dated July 26, 1805 (LC,
151:26426).
ously, as they were, but one of them rankled in his mind. Thinking it unsafe
to go by road, he went past the gap and through the woods to the next
eminence. This was afterwards referred to hilariously as the affair of
Carter's Mountain. The impression is unescapable that he remained at home
too long for comfort, not that he left precipitately; and charges based on the
circumstances of his flight would have been ridiculous when so many
others were fleeing, and generally more hastily.
He sent his family to Colonel Carter's Blenheim, where he joined them for
dinner, and somewhat later to the Coles place, Enniscorthy, also in
Albemarle. By the middle of the month he took them to his own Poplar
Forest in Bedford County. The British came nowhere near them, but in this
safe place he was so unlucky as to fall from his horse (said to have been
Caractacus) while riding over his farm. Though not seriously injured, he
was largely confined to the house for six weeks or more thereafter. At a
much later time certain domestic enemies asserted that his accident
occurred while he was fleeing in terror. 14 He took it quite casually during
the summer that it happened, but any spiteful commentator might have
pointed to it as a symbol of his precipitate descent into a state of
helplessness.
His whole procedure was as dignified as that of any wartime fugitive but
the circumstances did not lend themselves to heroic legend. Tarleton didhim greatest disservice in the timing of his raid. He would have been kinder
if he had waited until the Assembly had chosen another governor. No
responsible person at the time seems to have questioned Jefferson's own
judgment that his term had expired, or to have blamed him for the
interregnum that followed. He could hardly have been expected to follow
the fleeing legislators to Staunton without a formal request from the
Assembly, or at least an informal one from the speakers, that he continue to
serve in the unexpected interim. Lacking that, he saw no alternative but to
interpret the law strictly, according to his custom. Assuming that his term
had expired, resignation was technically impossible, but the report reached
Richard Henry Lee as far away as Westmoreland County that he had
"resigned." 15 It would be nearer the truth to say that the government
abandoned him than that he abandoned the government, but there must
have been some people then, as there were more thereafter, who believed
that he had abdicated in utter impotence.
During late May and early June consternation had spread among a proud
people. "Such terror and confusion you have no idea of," wrote
14 Letter of Thomas Turner, quoted in Richmond Enquirer, Aug. 23, 1805.
"Lee to Washington, June 12, 1781; Ballagh, II, 234.
Miss Betsy Ambler. "Governor, Council, everybody scampering." 16 It was
the daughter of Jefferson's old flame, Rebecca Burwell, now an invalid, and
of Jacquelin Ambler, an honored member of his Council, who was
speaking. An amusing story of somebody's flight before the enemy had
been told. "But this is not more laughable," said Betsy, "than the accounts
we have of our illustrious Governor, who, they say, took neither rest nor
food for man or horse till he reached C—r's Mountain." There was much
merriment in the Ambler family over the troubles of Mr. Jefferson, and
John Marshall heard of this in later years. 17
They were having serious troubles of their own, also, and the Councilor,
whom Betsy referred to as her "best beloved father," though less
conspicuous than his former rival, was certainly no more heroic. He was
one of those who never did succeed in getting from Richmond to
Charlottesville for meetings of the Council, being forced to remain in a
well-hidden place in Louisa County. Said his daughter: "The public office
which he holds makes it absolutely necessary for him to run no risk of
falling into the hands of the enemy. We therefore see him safely lodged inthe old coach every night, with faithful old Sam as his guard, while we
endeavor to make ourselves as comfortable as we can in the overseer's tiny
dwelling, which will scarcely hold us all." Soon after this Ambler tried to
go on to Charlottesville, but the enemy got there before him and he had to
turn back. Nor was he able to follow the itinerant legislators to Staunton;
not until the Council was back in Richmond, more than a month after
Tarleton's raid, did John Marshall's future father-in-law return to his official
seat. 18
An anecdote survives about Patrick Henry, Speaker Benjamin Harrison,
and John Tyler, who went together from Charlottesville to Staunton.
Stopping at a rude hut in the hills and introducing themselves as fugitive
legislators, they were greeted as cowardly knaves by an old woman and
told to ride on. Explanations were met with derision and unbelief, until it
was finally revealed that Patrick Henry was among them. Then the old
woman concluded that everything must be all right. The story has been told
as a tribute to the orator's popularity; it also serves as a reminder that the
tribune of the people, no less than the philosopher of Monticello, was
forced to take flight and that his situation was by no means without
embarrassment. 19
18 Betsy Ambler to Mildred Smith, 1781, presumably in June; Atlantic
Monthly, vol. 84, p. 538.
17 A. J. Beveridge, Life of John Marshall, I, 144, quotes this passage.
18 July 10, 1781; Va. Council Journals, State, II, 354. Quotation is from his
daughter's letter.
19 Tyler, Tylers, I, 81-83.
Patrick Henry was exceedingly active in the Assembly which met beyond
the Blue Ridge in safety but amid continuing rumors. Since only forty were
necessary for a quorum the House of Delegates was able to convene on
June 7, the appointed day; but they got along without a governor for nearly
a week. Not until June 12 was an election held and the choice then fell on
Thomas Nelson, Junior, who besides being a prominent citizen, a devoted
Patriot, and an old friend of his predecessor, was then the ranking officer of
the militia. There is no record of the ballot but the probability is that some
votes were cast for Jefferson. 20Owing to the scarcity of records it is almost impossible to determine the
precise circumstances and the order of events. About a half-century later
Jefferson said that he approved of this combination of the civil and military
authority in one person, and that he himself "resigned" in order that it
might be effected. He was using his terms loosely, and after all those years
his remembrance of his own state of mind had doubtless become hazy.
Some of his partisans have asserted that his name was not formally
withdrawn until after a "plot" to establish a dictatorship had been foiled,
and that Nelson was then proposed by Jefferson's supporters in the
Assembly. 21 Not long after this session he himself wrote, and within a few
years said in cold print, that a move was made to set up a dictator,
"invested with every power legislative, executive, and judiciary, civil and
military, of life and death" over persons and property, and that this was
defeated by only a few votes. 22
Since there is nothing in the brief official Journal to indicate the formal
presentation of such a proposal, he may be charged with relying on hearsay
evidence and letting his fear of despotism run away with his imagination.
On the other hand, there must have been
20 The outcome of the election is given in Delegates, Journal, June 12,
1781. Eckenrode, Revolution in Va., p. 227, says some votes were given
Jefferson in the Senate, but gives no reference. The Senate journals have
not been preserved, but Henry, Patrick Henry, II, 143, citing a manuscript
note, says that he was nominated there. John Taylor of Caroline in a rather
confusing letter to D. C. Brent, Oct. 7, 1796, based on his own recollections
as a delegate, speaks of Jefferson as failing in the election (LC,
100:17217-17218).
21 Jefferson's statement is in his "Autobiography," in Ford, I, 70. The
classic partisan interpretation is that of Randall, I, 346-352, based in part on
Girardin's account in Burk, Hist, of Va., vol. IV, which Jefferson approved
— in his extreme old age, however. As the term "resignation" was
technically incorrect, the same can be said of the term "impeachment."
22 Notes on Va., in Ford, III, 231-232, and note quoting letter from
Archibald Stuart, Sept. 8, 1818. Stuart, who lived in Staunton but was not a
member of the Assembly, said that he communicated the facts to Jefferson
at the time. The evidence of formal action, however, is insufficient; see
Edmund Randolph, in Va. Mag., XLIV, 315.a good deal of informal talk at Staunton about a dictatorship, and the two
persons whose names were reported to him probably participated
prominently in this. One of them was George Nicholas, a young man of
considerable military experience who was making his political debut as a
representative from Hanover County, and the other was the veteran Patrick
Henry. The man most talked about as a possible dictator, however, was not
the latter, as Jefferson's partisans claimed, but George Washington, and
after him General Greene. 23 At this very time Richard Henry Lee, who
was not there and did not believe that the Assembly could organize, was
proposing that Washington go immediately to Virginia, that he be entrusted
by Congress with dictatorial powers, and that when the legislature did
convene it be strongly urged to continue these powers in him from six to
ten months. 24 To many people the situation seemed to require
unprecedented action, and the Assembly actually went a considerable
distance toward military dictatorship by vesting Nelson with powers which
Jefferson never had and would not have wanted. Furthermore, the new
Governor, under the pressure of circumstances, so far overstepped the
bounds in the next few months that another legislature legalized certain of
his actions after the event. 25 Jefferson showed no bitterness about either
the election or the conduct of his successor, and he was careful not to
criticize Patrick Henry in public, but from this time on he was deeply
distrustful of him. The chief reason^ though not the only one, lay in an
action of the House of Delegates, which he attributed primarily to the
influence and animus of that wordy statesmen, even though George
Nicholas initiated it. After the election of Nelson as governor and before
the House authorized the presentation of a pair of pistols and a sword to
gallant Jack Jouett, the following resolution was adopted:
Resolved, That at the next session of Assembly an inquiry be made into the
conduct of the Executive of this State for the last twelve months. 26
This event marked the nadir of the entire public career of Thomas
Jefferson.
News, whether good or bad, traveled slowly in those days and the former
Governor, disabled at Poplar Forest, was off the beaten track.
23 Henry, Patrick Henry, II, 145-148.
24 Lee to James Lovell, June 12, 1781 (Ballagh, II, 237). "In November,
1781 (Hening, X, 478).26 Delegates, Journal, June 12, 1781. On Henry's connection with this, see
Edmund Randolph, Va. Mag., XLIV, 321.
To that place a letter was brought him by private hands from his recent
guest and old friend, Speaker Archibald Cary of the Senate, a more
conservative man than he but reputedly as firm a foe of dictatorship. Cary
told him that General Nelson had just arrived in Staunton to succeed him,
that the legislature at length would give ample powers to the executive, and
that a bill had passed the two houses for establishing martial law twenty
miles around both armies. He hoped that Jefferson's personal losses from
the British had not been as great as reported. Continuing, he said:
... I must give you one more piece of News respecting yourself. An address
was ready to be offered the Senate to you [that is, in commendation of
him]. What can you think stopt it. George Nicholas [Cary's nephew] made
a Motion in the Delegates House for an inquiry in your Conduct, a
Catalogue of omissions and other misconduct. I have not seen the
Particulars. Your friends Confident an inquire would do you Honor second
the Motion. I presume you will be serv'd with the order, as this step Taken I
persuaded Winston not to make Motion; I heard something of this kind was
to be brought on the Carpit, and if I know you it will give you no pain. 27
He knew Jefferson well but was very much mistaken about his attitude.
Few things that ever happened to him as a public man gave him greater
pain. He reflected afterwards that only forty had been necessary to make a
quorum and that this particular House was not a genuinely representative
body, but there was more bitterness than comfort in the thought. 28
Not until late July did he do anything about the matter. Though not riding
Caractacus by then, he was sufficiently recovered to be back at Monticello,
looking things over. The damages there were slight. Tarleton turned out to
be a genteel raider; he gave strict orders that nothing was to be harmed, and
during the eighteen hours that Captain McLeod was on the mountain he
guarded everything with sacred care. 29 It is likely that Jefferson got the
actual resolution from the House of Delegates about this time. Three
members of the Council who had served with him, including Jacquelin
Ambler, did not know about it until the middle of the month, and were then
very much surprised. They naturally assumed that it implied censure of
them as well as the Governor, and in all fairness it should have. Under
these embarrassing27 To Jefferson from Staunton, June 19, 1781 (LC, 7:1138). Edmund
Winston was senator from the district including Bedford, Henry, and
Pittsylvania counties.
28 Notes on Va., in Ford, III, 229-231.
29 Jefferson to Dr. William Gordon, July 16, 1788, in Ford, V, 38.
circumstances they wondered if they ought to continue to attend meetings,
but, since their absence would deprive the Council of a quorum, they
decided to stay. 30 It was after this that Jefferson wrote to Nicholas in
pained dignity, asking him to specify the "unfortunate passages" in his
conduct which would be adduced against him when the Assembly met. 31
George Nicholas, a short and ungainly man of about twenty-seven, was not
only the nephew of Speaker Archibald Cary; he was the eldest son of
Robert Carter Nicholas, the late treasurer, whom Jefferson had known and
honored. 32 Before long he moved from Hanover County to Albemarle,
and the later history of his family was closely entwined with that of the
man whose conduct he now wanted to investigate. He himself, besides
becoming so grotesquely fat that he was caricatured as a plum pudding
with legs, attained considerable weight as a public man; and in the next
decade, after he had removed to Kentucky, he was aligned with Jefferson
while Patrick Henry was flirting with the Federalists. There were both
personal and political reasons why Jefferson's resentment against the mover
of the resolution did not last. At first, however, his pain was not greatly
alleviated by the discovery that the intrepid delegate from Hanover was
suffering some embarrassment of his own.
Replying to Jefferson's letter in sprawling and rather childish writing, the
young man said that no particular instances of misconduct had been
specified. However, as a freeman and a representative of freemen he stood
on his right to ask the executive to account for the many miscarriages and
losses the State had suffered, so far as they were concerned in them or
might have prevented them. He was distinctly on the defensive, however,
and he spoke of the executive in the plural, obviously meaning to include
the Council. He had acted in no spirit of personal pique, he said, and was
quite willing to change any opinion he might have formed if it should prove
groundless. Since Jefferson had requested it, he mentioned certain things
which seemed to require explanation. These began with the lack ofopposition to Arnold's raid and included alleged failures to issue timely
orders to the militia, along with a few other minor matters of the sort. There
was no mention whatever of Tarleton's raid, which ought to have been
fresh in a legislator's mind, nor was there reference to the absence of the
Governor from the scene of danger at any other time. 88
80 Va. Council Journals, State, June 16, 1781; II, 356. 31 To Nicholas, July
28, 1781 (LC, 7:1145).
"See H. B. Grigsby, Hist, of Va. Federal Convention of 1788, I (1890),
78-79, and II (1891), 281-298, for comments on Nicholas.
"Nicholas to Jefferson, July 31, 1781 (LC, 7:1146-1147).
Apparently Nicholas soon withdrew some of these specifications and
substituted others. The accusations to which Jefferson drew up detailed
answers for the benefit of the Assembly dealt wholly with Arnold's raid. He
afterwards said that Nicholas, unlike many other legislators, was not in
Richmond in that troubled time and did not realize just what the conditions
were and just what was done to meet them. At all events, the accuser
appears never to have reflected on the Governor's personal courage, nor to
have charged him with general incompetence. Before the Assembly met he
must have undergone a complete change of heart, for he then presented no
charges of any sort. 34
The accused said nothing in public and little in private during the interval,
but what he did say showed that he was deeply wounded. Early in August
he received through Lafayette a belated letter from the President of
Congress asking him to go abroad as a peace commissioner. He may have
overstated his disappointment that he was unable to accept the post. He
wrote Lafayette that he was losing the only opportunity he ever had, and
perhaps ever would have, to combine public service with private
gratification. But he must remain in Virginia until the legislature met. His
immediate task was to show that public poverty and private disobedience,
not the misconduct of public officials, had produced misfortunes, and he
hoped to find in private life a happiness which was as impossible to the
minister of a commonwealth as to any slave. 35 The Marquis was more
optimistic. He correctly predicted to the French Minister that Jefferson
would accept a foreign appointment some day. Also, while recognizing that
the machinery of Virginia government was too rusty for any governor tomake it function effectively, he made another wise forecast. To Washington
he said: "Time will prove that Jefferson has been too severely charged." M
The argument about re-entering public life went on intermittently between
Jefferson and his friends for many months. Edmund Randolph pressed him
about the appointment as peace commissioner. He still found this attractive,
but he had taken final leave of everything of the sort, he said. "I have
retired to my farm, my family and books from which I think nothing will
evermore separate me. A desire to leave public office with a reputation not
more blotted than it deserves will
84 Undated paper published in Ford, VIII, 363-369 n. y esp. pp. 366-368 n.
The form of this memorandum and of others of the sort (LC, 6:1011-1014)
is such that one cannot be sure of completeness. There can be no doubt,
however, that the contemporary charges dealt primarily with Arnold's raid.
Jefferson himself said that several years later Nicholas made an honorable
retraction.
85 Jefferson to Lafayette, Aug. 4, 1781 (Ford, III, 48-49); Pres. of Cong, to
Jefferson, June 15, 1781, and other related documents, MHS.
88 To Luzerne, Aug. 14, "1781 (A.HX., XX, 605); to Washington, Sept. 8,
1781, in Gottschalk, Letters of Lafayette to Washington, p. 135.
oblige me to emerge at the next session of our assembly and perhaps to
accept of a seat in it, but as I go with but a single object, I shall withdraw
when that shall be accomplished." These words distressed Randolph. "If
you can justify this resolution to yourself, I am confident that you cannot to
the world," he said. George Mason, entirely oblivious of the scheduled
investigation, noted only the report that Jefferson was going back into
legislative harness and hastened to discuss with him things which must be
done and which he alone could do. 37
He was not present when the Assembly met in the autumn. The Albemarle
delegation was then complete, and not until late in November was there a
vacancy which permitted his election. The House of Delegates paid no
attention to the resolution for an inquiry until about that time, which was
after the surrender of Cornwallis at Yorktown and the freeing of Virginia
from the dread invaders. Jefferson congratulated Washington on the return
to his native State, which he himself had urged so plaintively, and upon theglorious victory which resulted from the co-operation with French naval
power that he had long anticipated. 38 These events did not occur soon
enough to save his administration from disaster, but they created a state of
mind which made an investigation of it seem superfluous.
The House of Delegates had to go through the forms. On November 26
they named a committee to receive and state charges against the former
executive. This consisted of John Banister, John Tyler, Turner Southall,
Haynes Morgan, and George Nicholas, the original mover — whose fire
had quite subsided. 39 The news was transmitted to Jefferson by his friend
John Harvie, who gave this encouraging report from Richmond: "I have the
satisfaction to find that in the opinions of all men I have converse with, that
the administration before the last, is now viewed as having been honorable
to the chief magistrate, and preservative of the rights of the people, and the
constitution of the land. In short I think, Sir, in no period of your life has
your character shone with a superior lustre, to what it will do on your
appearance in the Assembly, to which place may your own inclination and
the voice of the people speedily send you." w
The gubernatorial career of his successor had not been marked by an
equally scrupulous legality; but, the crisis now being over, there was no
more need to cavil at the conduct of that gallant Patriot and soldier
"Jefferson to Randolph, Sept. 16, 1781 (Ford, III, 49-50); Randolph to
Jefferson, Oct. 9, 1781 (LC, 7:1162); Mason to Jefferson, Sept. 27, 1781
(LC, 7:1157-1158).
88 Oct. 28, 1781 (Ford, III, 51).
*» Delegates, Journal, Nov. 26, 1781.
40 To Jefferson, Nov. 27, 1781 (LC, 7:1181).
than there was at Jefferson's. Thomas Nelson, who had wasted his health
and spent his fortune in the "sacred cause," found it necessary to retire, and
Benjamin Harrison succeeded him. The committee of investigation had not
yet reported and Jefferson had not made his appearance, but on the day that
Harrison was chosen he was unwittingly elected a delegate to Congress. 41
He was on the floor of the House of Delegates on December 10, and withinthe next two days he voluntarily read aloud the charges he had got from
Nicholas during the previous summer and his answers to them. 42 That
young man absented himself on this occasion, and nobody else had
presented any charges. On December 12, John Banister reported for the
committee that no information had been offered on the subject matter of the
inquiry, and that in their opinion it had been ordered in the first place
because of groundless rumors. Accordingly, they moved a resolution which
was unanimously adopted. This was a complete vindication, but it
contained an extended reference to popular rumors which the Senate
preferred to leave out, along with a few minor bits. The House agreed, and
the Senate in turn voted unanimously. As amended, the resolution reads as
follows:
Resolved, That the sincere thanks of the General Assembly be given to our
former Governor, Thomas Jefferson, Esq. for his impartial, upright, and
attentive administration whilst in office. The Assembly wish, in the
strongest manner, to declare the high opinion which they entertain of Mr.
Jefferson's ability, rectitude and integrity, as Chief Magistrate of this
Commonwealth; and mean by thus publicly avowing their opinion, to
obviate and remove all unmerited censure. 43
This was not so profuse an apology as the original resolution of the House
of Delegates, and it did not so definitely stamp the censure of the former
Governor as undeserved, but it reduced to a minimum the references to
rumors and hostile criticism. If the legislators hoped to banish these to
oblivion, as presumably they did, they were unsuccessful; they could not
control the partisan tongues and pens of the future. But they did attain their
immediate purpose. At that place and time they gave Jefferson sufficient
vindication.
* • #
41 Delegates, Journal, Nov. 30, 1781. The vacancy in the Albemarle
delegation to the Assembly occurred on Nov. 21, when Isaac Davis
accepted a position as deputy commissioner of provisions and thus became
disqualified as delegate. Jefferson's election to replace him followed
shortly.
42 Ford, VIII, 366-368 n.
^Hening, X, 568-569, showing resolution adopted by the House ofDelegates and the parts stricken out by the Senate. See also Delegates ,
Journal, Dec. 12, 17, 19, 1781.
The discredit which he suffered among his own countrymen as the result of
his governorship has often been exaggerated by later writers. His prestige
was certainly not injured to such a degree that he was denied early
opportunity to perform important public service. On the very day that he
was formally exonerated he declined the appointment as delegate to
Congress, and from that time forward it was office that was seeking him,
not he who was seeking office. He was persistently reproached by his
friends for his successive refusals, and forced to do a great deal of
explaining. There is no reason to suppose that he had lost to any
considerable degree the good will and the deep respect of the responsible
leaders of the Commonwealth.
The effects of his misfortunes on his popular leadership are more difficult
to determine. It has often been said that after his term the government of
the State passed into the hands of the conservatives, such as Nelson and
Harrison, and, since Patrick Henry and Richard Henry Lee had now swung
to the conservative side, that liberalism went into eclipse after the "fall" of
Jefferson, and, presumptively, because of it. 44 The applicability of these
vague though convenient terms to the situation is questionable, and if
liberalism was eclipsed in Virginia in this period the primary cause was the
war itself. The Report of the revisors had been shelved in the first months
of Jefferson's governorship, when his prestige was high; and during the
next two years his own attention was concentrated on the conduct of the
war, not on any program of reform. This is certainly not to say that he
forgot the principles of freedom which had caused him to embark upon the
struggle in the first place. But, so far as persons were concerned, the
distinction between progressives and conservatives became blurred in his
mind as in those of most other people.
It has already been pointed out that his influence was not that of the head of
a political faction. Contemporary comments emphasized his impartiality.
Toward the end of his governorship his intimate friend George Gilmer,
commenting on the election of inferior men as delegates from Albemarle
County, bemoaned the rise of party spirit, by which he meant petty
factionalism. Speaking of Jefferson himself he said: "The envious only hate
the excellence they cannot reach. Heaven inspire every one with that
laudable ambition of serving their country as you have done without oneself interested motive." 45 Jefferson's influence at this time was owing
primarily to his example of patriotic devotion and his many personal
friendships, which continued to cut
**Eckenrode, Revolution in Va., pp. 228-229. Like many others, I myself
long accepted this interpretation without serious question. *• Gilmer to
Jefferson, Apr. 13, 1781 (LC, 7:1120).
across factional lines. Previously, as a long-range reformer, he had been
influential for these reasons and because of the intrinsic forcefulness of his
ideas. Such opposition as those ideas (religious freedom, for example) met
later, when thrown into the arena by James Madison, was probably not a
whit stronger than it would have been if Jefferson had never been governor
of the State.
The chief political significance of his troubles as an executive and the
investigation of his conduct was not contemporary. Others besides Madison
took his vindication for granted, once the danger of invasion was past, and
regarded the investigation as inconsequential, except in what it did to his
own spirits. 46 But when he became a national political figure, and aroused
opposition on other grounds in other places, the old charges were
unearthed, wildly exaggerated, and used for partisan purposes. From the
political point of view, they were far more important in 1796 than they
were in 1782, and they were displayed periodically thereafter. As late as
1805, when he had been four years President, a friendly Virginia editor
said: "Among the various charges which have been urged against Mr.
Jefferson, the most important are those which relate to his conduct during
our revolution. From these insinuations it has been inferred that Mr. J. has
neither the spirit nor the talents to conduct the administration of our
government. The man, who was unable to discharge the duties of a
governor of Virginia, is declared unfit to be the president of the Union." 47
The degree of Jefferson's success or failure as governor must be adjudged
from the facts themselves, as already presented in these pages in what may
have seemed wearisome detail. They speak more convincingly than any
summary any biographer may make. At the conclusion of the account of
this highly controversial period, however, it may be said without much
doubt that the most conspicuous failure was that of the government rather
than the Governor. The agencies which had been created in 1776 were ill-
suited to the conduct of a war, or to the meeting of serious crises of anysort. This was a major lesson of the entire American Revolution.
Jefferson's position on the important question of the organization of the
state government will appear hereafter in the discussion of the specific
proposals he made during the next two years. He undoubtedly believed that
the executive department should be considerably stronger than it was in his
own administration, but he was notable in his genera-
46 Madison to Jefferson, Jan. 15, 1782 (Hunt, Writings, I, 170).
47 Thorhas Ritchie in Richmond Enquirer, Aug. 23, 1805. In this number,
he reviews the whole history of these charges; and in this and succeeding
numbers he considers them seriatim, under the title, "Vindication of Mr.
Jefferson."
tion for his devotion to the sovereign law. His scruples were something of
an embarrassment in such an abnormal period, and his legalistic temper
would have been a handicap at any time if he had not coupled with it a
genuinely progressive concept of the necessary mutability of man-made
instruments. Though characteristically an efficient man, he had little chance
here and possibly little inclination to be an effective organizer of
administration; and he was made for much higher things than the details he
attended to so faithfullv in his own person. To say that he was a misfit as an
executive would be to say too much. But there were other tasks which he
liked to do, and did, a great deal better. For a variety of reasons he was not
the most effective of the war governors, but of all the war governors he was
incomparably the greatest mind and the greatest man.
^ Starting Again
s
CxxvO
A Philosopher Surveys His Country
JEFFERSON'S unequaled knowledge of his native region was no accident.
It was due to the incessant curiosity and the habits of methodical study and
observation which he combined with his ardent patriotism. Being the sortof man he was, he might have been expected to learn more about his State
than anybody else. There was much that was fortuitous, however, in the
circumstances that occasioned him to make his accumulated information
widely available to others. Because of the inquiries of a Frenchman he cast
this in systematic form and added to it, and he afterwards made it into a
book. Never again did this incidental author publish anything which can be
properly termed a book. Long before he died, his Notes on the State of
Virginia, commonly referred to as Notes on Virginia, became famous —
partly because he wrote them, no doubt, but also because the work was
distinctive in itself.
It did not appear in print until after he went to France and entered upon
another phase of his career. By that time he had supplemented his materials
in order to combat more effectively the erroneous opinions of French
naturalists about America — particularly their theories about the
degeneracy of animal life in the New World. Our concern here is not with
the whole of the long history of a noted book, and least of all with the parts
of it which were chiefly designed to correct European scientific ideas. Our
interest is in the main circumstances of its preparation, and, what is more
important, the major ideas about the Commonwealth and the Republic
which were in Jefferson's mind toward the close of the Revolution. He did
more than describe his country; he revealed his own thought. 1
1 The first printing was finished on May 10, 1785, in Paris, when he was
minister there. An account of the publication and foreign reception of the
book will be given in the following volume of this work, where it can be
fitted more read-
He began to assemble the Notes some months before he ceased being
governor. He was still exulting over the departure of General Leslie and did
not yet know that Benedict Arnold was coming when he said that the
Secretary of the French Legation had unknowingly done him a good turn
by causing him to become much better acquainted with Virginia. The
Marquis de Barbe-Marbois (generally referred to by his American
contemporaries as Marbois) was seeking information about the various
states of the American Union for the benefit of his own government, and
had drawn up a set of queries. These got into the hands of James Monroe's
wise uncle, Joseph Jones, then in Congress, and he turned them over to the
person in the State who could best reply to them and who also happened to
be governor. At the first chance, late in 1780, Jefferson occupied himselfbusily with the questions, but he was in Richmond and needed his materials
at Monticello. He had long been making memoranda about Virginia on
loose sheets of paper, which he had bundled together without bothering to
put them in order, but he was not able to get at these for some time. When
Marbois wrote him direct, and he replied in March, the British had again
deprived him of most of his leisure but he hoped to have more before long.
This was another way of saying that he expected to retire at the end of his
second year as governor. 2
He got even greater leisure than he anticipated. Besides ceasing to be
governor in June, 1781, he was confined to the house after his fall from his
horse. He must have taken with him to Poplar Forest his old memoranda
and all that he had afterwards been able to collect, and have brought all
these papers back to Monticello in the late summer. 3 He did
ily into the chronology and can be directly related to Jefferson's numerous
other efforts to give correct information about America. The chief study of
publishing details is Alice H. Lerch, "Who was the Printer of Jefferson's
Notes," in Bookmen's Holiday (1943), pp. 44-56. Two studies of the Notes
appeared after the present volume had gone to the printers. Marie Kimball,
Jefferson, War and Peace, 1116 to 1184 (New York, Coward-McCann,
1947), ch. XI, drawing extensively on manuscript sources, gives the whole
history of the work. Ruth Henline, "A Study of Notes on the State of
Virginia as an Evidence of Jefferson's Reaction against the Theories of the
French Naturalists," Va. Mag., LV, 233-246 (July, 1947), is based
primarily on the book itself and deals suggestively with matters I speak of
only briefly here.
2 To Chevalier D'Anmours, French vice-consul in Virginia, Nov. 30, 1780,
LC, 6:993; "Autobiography," Ford, I, 85; to Marbois, Mar. 4, 1781, Ford,
III, 68, replying to a letter of Feb. 5, 1781. Presumably, Jones handed the
questions to Jefferson in late October, 1780, when he arrived in Richmond
from Philadelphia; Letters of Joseph Jones, p. 33.
8 One reason for his lingering at Monticello when the British were
approaching may hgve been his desire to get these papers, or he may have
sent somebody back for them before he left for Po'plar Forest. They could
hardly have been among the books and papers of his which were removed
at some time to Augusta Countythe actual writing quickly and could have dispatched his replies to Marbois
before fall. However, he hoped to pick up some odds and ends of
information at the meeting of the Assembly, much as he dreaded that
meeting on other grounds. Soon after his vindication by the legislature he
was ready to send his answers, conscious as he was of their imperfection,
but, no safe conveyance being available, he committed them to Councillor
Jacquelin Ambler. Rebecca Bunnell's husband did not find a suitable
messenger for an embarrassingly long time, but in late March or early
April, 1782, the manuscript was in the Frenchman's hands. 4
Presumably he received from Jefferson a more elaborate reply to his
queries than from anybody else, and certainly he got far more than he had
any reason to expect. 5 He had sent out what in modern parlance would be
called a questionnaire. Jefferson did not stick to the precise order, but the
form of his response and of the resulting book was largely determined by
the questions, twenty-three all told. He had no secretarial assistance but he
sent copies to various people for comments. Others who learned about the
work wanted to see copies, and it was for this reason that he finally decided
to print. During the next two years he somewhat enlarged and revised his
manuscript, and he thought the lengthy comments from his friend Charles
Thomson, secretary of Congress, so important that he added them as an
appendix in the first printing. 6 He was eager to get corrections and
supplementary information, especially in scientific matters.
In the book as finally published the longest section is the one reply-
for safety; the latter had not come back by Mar. 24, 1782, when the replies
had already been sent to Marbois; see letter to Madison, Ford, III, 53.
4 Charles Thomson to Jefferson, Mar. 9, 1782, LC, 8:1220, replying to a
letter of Dec. 20, 1781, and saying that the answers to Marbois had not yet
been received; Jacquelin Ambler to Jefferson, Mar. 16, 1782, LC, 8:1225,
explaining his delay; Jefferson to Marbois, Mar. 24, 1782, LC, 8:1227,
describing the lull circumstances.
6 Two sets of queries have been located (courtesy JP). One was sent
Thomas McKean of Delaware (Pa. Hist. Soc). The other, from the papers
of Joseph Jones, is now in LC, 235:42226. However, the latter omits the
final query, no. 23. Jefferson gave 23 answers, though not in the same order
as in these documents. The only other reply to Marbois that I know of is in
Letters and Papers of Maj.-Gen. John Sullivan, III (New Hampshire Hist.Soc, 1939), 229-239; original HEH. See Marie Kimball, Jefferson, War and
Peace, p. 383, note 34. Sullivan's relatively brief reply was dated Dec. 10,
1780.
e He said that he made the revision in the winter of 1782, but he
undoubtedly made corrections and insertions as late as 1784. For
convenience of reference my citations are to the text as given by Ford, III,
85-295. This follows the original edn. (which bears 1782 on the tide page
and is wrongly dated by Ford as 1784), and gives in footnotes the important
variations in other edns. The appendix of Charles Thomson is scattered in
the form of notes. Jefferson's manuscript draft of the work is well discussed
by Marie Kimball, p. 382, note 30.
ing to the question about mineral, vegetable, and animal productions,
comprising about one fourth of the whole. This is the natural history-
section par excellence, and it speaks specifically of the theories of the
French naturalists, especially Buffon. The strong presumption that Jefferson
did most of his enlarging and correcting in this section is borne out by the
letters of inquiry he wrote during the next two years and the answers he
received. He had considerable doubt whether some of his political
comments in other parts of the work would be received charitably by his
countrymen, but he was quite willing to make these on his own authority.
In matters of natural history, on the other hand, he sought support from
observers whom he regarded as better qualified than himself. He wanted to
verify his descriptions of "curiosities" and, most of all, to buttress his
contention that there had been no degeneracy of animal life in America.
His objects are nowhere better expressed than in a letter to his friend and
neighbor Thomas Walker, to whom he sent in the fall of 1783 the portion
of his manuscript which he was most anxious to make accurate. "That part
particularly which relates to the position of Monsr. de Buffon I would wish
to have very correct in matters of fact," he said. Calling attention to the
table of animals he had made, he asked this explorer to send him the
heaviest weights of American animals that he knew, "from the mouse to the
mammoth." Being specially anxious to set his mind straight about the large
beasts, he sent to half a dozen qualified observers what amounted to a
questionnaire about the moose. At this stage, the bigger the animals the
better he liked them, but he wanted precise information or reasonable
conjectures. Also, he sought comments on the Indians, and his method of
procedure is shown by the free use he made of an answer to Buffon whichArchibald Cary sent him. 7
In spite of his doubts about the adequacy of his information he probably
enjoyed writing the natural history section most, and as an index of his
position in the history of advancing science many people will find it the
most interesting portion of his book. But this was not a book as yet; and
that portion was the slowest in completion. Most of what turned out to be
his magnum opus was tossed off in a few
7 To Thomas Walker, Sept. 25, 1783, W. C. Rives Coll., LC, kind
permission of Mrs. Philip M. Rhinelander, Washington; loose memoranda
for the Notes preserved at MHS, microfilm UVA (quotations from a
number of these given by-Marie Kimball, pp. 270-273); from George
Rogers Clark, Feb. 20, 1782, MHS, and to Clark, Nov. 9, 1782, LC,
9:1376, chiefly about big bones and "curious shells." Still later inquiries are
shown by such letters as the following: from Charles Carter, Feb. 9, 1784,
LC, 10:1638, about a "white negro"; from Gen. John Sullivan, Mar. 12,
1784, LC, 10:1646; from Gen. William Whipple, Mar. 14, 1784, MHS;
from John Sullivan, June 22,1784, LC, 11:1751-1752 - the three last about
the moose.
summer weeks and based on materials he had already collected and already
understood. It was an ad hoc work, like practically everything else he ever
wrote; it was unpretentious and unlabored, and at no time was he much
concerned about its literary form. But he did more than throw together an
extraordinary mass of materials descriptive of his own Commonwealth. He
also interjected reflections which gave the work as a whole a philosophical
tone, related it to a far larger region than Virginia, and imparted to it a
quality of timelessness, if not of immortality. If he was not thereby
revealed as a man of genius, he was undoubtedly shown to be a man of
most unusual and diverse talent and of unsullied patriotism.
Despite all his recent troubles as a state official, the former governor
viewed his Commonwealth with deep pride. Marbois had not asked him to
begin with geography, but as the son of a map maker it was eminently
appropriate that he should. The vast domain which Virginia had long
claimed was shrinking. That very year (1781) the State offered to the Union
the territory north and west of the Ohio, though Jefferson himself was back
in Congress before the cession became an accomplished fact. The region he
described consisted of the present State, along with West Virginia andKentucky. It was a roughly triangular area, about one third larger than
Great Britain and Ireland, as he estimated somewhat too generously. If not
quite so large as he believed, it contained more than 100,000 square miles
and was considerably larger than any commonwealth east of the
Mississippi at the present time. This was an empire state, before and
beyond all others. The military impotence of his last year as governor was
now forgotten. He was a citizen of no mean country; in population it stood
first in the American Confederation, and if its potentialities were not
limitless they were immense.
From Monticello he could look into ten or a dozen counties, but some of
his countrymen had seen more of Virginia's imperial domain than he had
— George Rogers Clark, Dr. Thomas Walker, and George Washington, for
example. The only mountain barrier that he had penetrated was the Blue
Ridge; beyond the Shenandoah Valley he had not been and never went. He
had seen Natural Bridge on his own property. He described this as the most
sublime of nature's works, and before he put his Notes into print he had
viewed the passage of the Potomac through the Blue Ridge at Harper's
Ferry, which he regarded as a "stupendous scene." 8 But he never blazed
trails in the wilderness as his
8 To H. G. SpofTord, May 14, 1809, saying that he visited Harper's Ferry
in October, 1783; L. & B., XII, 280. To Volney, Feb. 8, 1805, faying that
he had not
father had. He gained his knowledge of the outlying region from maps,
beginning with that of Fry and Jefferson, from occasional printed accounts,
and from talks with Indians and explorers.
The great western country was a vivid reality in his mind, nevertheless, and
when he started talking he could not hold himself within the boundaries of
Virginia. He spoke not merely of the Potomac, the Rappahannock, the
York, the James, and the Appomattox, but of the Ohio — "the most
beautiful river on earth" — the periodically flooded Mississippi, the muddy
Missouri, the gentle Illinois, the lovely Wabash, and a dozen other major or
lesser streams of the wild interior. In the light of his later deeds as
President, chief interest attaches to what he said about future commerce on
the Father of Waters, namely, that it would be of the first importance. But
his comments on the Potomac, and by comparison the Hudson, are worthy
of passing note. Through one or the other of these waterways, he believed,the interior could be best connected with the Atlantic; and his local feeling
disposed him to recognize the natural advantages of the former. It was
more direct, less impeded by winter ice, less endangered by Indians. He
recognized that there were real difficulties in getting from the headwaters
of the Ohio to those of the Potomac, and he afterwards discussed with
Washington the necessity of opening the upper stretches of these rivers. 9
In this respect history proved that he was not infallible as a prophet; it gave
the verdict to the Hudson gateway and caused New York not Virginia to be
the Empire State. In their immediate setting, however, his remarks are
significant in revealing his genuine concern for internal commerce, and also
in showing his vigorous realism as a local patriot.
He appeared here, however, as far more than a localist. He started with
Virginia but proceeded by irresistible impulse into the vastness of the West.
He began by describing the flora and fauna of his Commonwealth and
drifted into the broader subject of the vegetable and animal life of the North
American Continent, which he compared with that of the Old World. If
Virginia was his microcosm it was, after all, a large one; and, since his
State was so strong relatively, there was no need for him to be envious of
others. Through this wide door-he could
gone farther west than Staunton, Ibid., XI, 63. In the legend of the map he
afterwards published with his Notes he said that for the region west of the
Alle-ghenies he relied on the work of Thomas Hutchins, "who went over
the principal water courses, with a compass and log-line, correcting his
work by observations of latitude," and that he himself made additions
"where they could be made on sure ground." He consulted this geographer
personally before printing; see letter from Hutchins, Feb. 11, 1784, MHS.
For a good discussion of Hutchins, and of Jefferson's reading generally in
this connection, see Marie Kimball, p. 267.
9 For the discussion in the Notes, see Ford, III, 98-100; for comments in his
letter of Mar. 15, 1784, to Washington, see Ibid., Ill, 422-424.
survey the whole American scene and the expanding universe of
philosophy.
It was in no spirit of narrowness or uncritical pride that he described his
"country," developing in detail the broad outline which Marbois had so
conveniently provided. He spoke of its topography and minerals, its birdsand beasts, trees and vegetables, its military force, its aborigines, its
counties and towns, its legal and educational institutions (with obiter dicta
about architecture), its religion and manners, its manufacturing and
commerce, its revenue and expenses, its histories and state papers. Nobody
had ever before given such a description of an American state in such a
spirit. This work may be properly regarded as the precursor of the vast
library of state and federal reports on natural and human resources which
has subsequently been assembled, and in terms of influence it may be
regarded as the most important scientific work that had yet been compiled
in America. 10 No wonder that historians, from that day to this, have been
turning to this treasure house of information and this sourcebook of
Jefferson's own ideas.
His comments on the political organization of the State which he had so
recently ceased to govern deserve first consideration. Together with his
remarks about slavery, which have already been referred to, they
constituted, in his opinion, the most controversial part of the entire work.
To later generations, who are relatively indifferent to the problems of a
single commonwealth at the close of the American Revolution, they will
appear more interesting because, in certain important respects, they
anticipated later attitudes of Jefferson himself to the government of the
United States. After three years as a legislator and two as an executive he
was even more convinced than he had been in 1776 that the constitution of
Virginia did not provide a genuinely representative government. As he had
proposed a constitution before he drafted the Declaration of Independence,
he drafted another within two years of the time that he answered the
questions of Marbois. This draft was afterwards published with the Notes
as an appendix, and it may be regarded as a constituent part of that work. It
was his answer to his own criticisms. 11
He now proposed to include within the electorate of any county, along with
property holders, "all free mail citizens" who had resided there for a year or
had been enrolled that long in the militia. He wanted the suffrage to be
extended, not restricted, and he strongly urged that
10 G. Goode, Beginnings of Natural History in America, p. 88; see also
comments of Merle Curti, Growth of American Thought, pp. 149-150.
11 It can be conveniently consulted in Ford. Ill, 320-333.representation be based on the number of qualified electors in any county.
He wanted to remove the inequities of the existing county-unit system,
which worked to the disadvantage of the more populous districts, and in
increasing degree to that of the regions above the fall-line. 12 Thus he
again aligned himself with the upland, mountain, and transmontane
country, which was under-represented and more democratic than the
Tidewater region in its spirit.
If anybody should be disposed to identify democracy with the dominance
of the popularly elected legislature, however, Jefferson was definitely
opposed to that. To the theoretical objections he had raised in 1776 he
added observations based on his own experience. "All the powers of
government, legislative, executive, and judiciary, result to the legislative
body," he said. "The concentrating these in the same hands is precisely the
definition of despotic government. It will be no alleviation that these
powers will be exercised by a plurality of hands, and not by a single one.
173 despots will surely be as oppressive as one. ... As little will it avail us
that they are chosen by ourselves. An elective despotism was not the
government we fought for, but one which should not only be founded on
free principles, but in which the powers of government should be so
divided and balanced among several bodies of magistracy, as that no one
could transcend their legal limits, without being effectually checked and
restrained by the others." 13
For protection against despotism he relied on the separation of departments
and on a system of checks and balances. Ideas like these dominated the
minds of most of the framers of the federal Constitution a few years later,
and received classic expression in Madison's contributions to the Federalist
Papers. In one of these he quoted Jefferson's very words. 1 * The Jefferson
of this period was certainly not one to make demagogic appeals to the
ignorant multitude, or to tolerate tyranny in democratic any more than in
monarchical guise. His major concern was for freedom as it always had
been, and he would not leave freedom to chance but would buttress it by
law.
It seemed to him that under existing conditions the department of
government most likely to be guilty of encroachment was the legislature.
On the basis of his own experience he could now say: "The direction of the
executive [by the Assembly], during the whole time of their session, is
becoming habitual and familiar." This he attributed neither to ill intentionnor to corruption. Nor did he say, as he could have, and as Alexander
Hamilton probably would have, that meddling
12 Ford, in, 222-223, 322-323.
18 Notes, Ford, in, 223-224.
14 P. L. Ford, ed., Federalist Papers, no. 48, pp. 331-332.
with the executive contributed to administrative ineffectiveness and thus
endangered the security of the State. He was fuller of fears about the future
than of regrets about the past, but he was not specially fearful of disorder.
He was chiefly disturbed by the dangers to liberty in general which would
result from the probable abuse of this unlimited legislative power at a later
time. It seemed to him that the whole idea of a representative republic was
imperiled whenever any part of the government assumed authority beyond
its mandate from the sovereign electorate. This was the main reason why he
again objected, and far more strongly than in 1776, to the framing of a
constitution by a legislative body, rather than by a specially chosen
convention. In his opinion a constitution was superior to ordinary
legislation, and provided far greater safeguards. He rang the changes on
this argument for years without persuading his countrymen to call a
convention and frame a new instrument of government. This conception of
a constitution, however, was the one which came to prevail in the United
States.
In view of the painful legal limitations to which he had been subjected as
governor, particular interest attaches to his specific proposals with respect
to the executive. 18 He did not give a precise description of executive
functions. Unquestionably he wanted to extend these, but he was more
anxious to guard them against encroachment. He would have left with the
Assembly the election of the governor, while making him considerably
more independent of that body by giving him a term of five years, after
which he would be ineligible for re-election. He recommended the
continuance of the Council of State, thus showing that he was still opposed
to anything approaching autocracy.
One proposal of his would have obviated the embarrassment he had
suffered at a time when the conduct of the Assembly deserved investigation
quite as much as his. He advocated the creation of a standing court ofimpeachment, in which all three departments of the government would be
represented and before which any member of any department might be
brought on charges of misbehavior. It was a well-reasoned proposal, and it
would have served as a constant reminder to the legislators that a good rule
works both ways. He devised another check on legislative despotism and
unwisdom in the form of a council of revision, consisting of the governor,
two members of the Council of State, and three judges. This body was to
have the veto power, which he lacked as governor, though it could be
overridden by a two-thirds vote. It might have served a valuable purpose in
connection with the form as well as the substance of legislation. 10
15 Ford, III, 325-328.
16 Ibid.. 329-331.
The sort of government he favored would have been more representative,
better balanced, and more just than the one that existed, and it might have
been considerably more efficient. Under such a system he himself would
almost certainly have been a more effective governor, in either war or
peace, and it is a pity that apathy prevented his wise recommendations from
being seriously considered. He and Madison believed that the chances of
calling a constitutional convention, and of gaining desirable results if one
were called, would have been greatly enhanced by the removal of Patrick
Henry from the scene. Jefferson continued to guard his comments on the
most popular political figure in the State; even when talking about him in
private letters to Madison, he had recourse to cipher. He never lost his
admiration for Henry's pre-Revolutionary services, but he now regarded
him as an ambitious politician, and he was probably correct in believing
that any new constitution framed for Virginia while the orator still lived
would be bad. The presumption is not that Henry would have tried to create
the forms of personal dictatorship, as Jefferson still feared. A more likely
guess is that he would have wanted to leave power with the legislature,
which he generally controlled. As to orderly and well-regulated
administration, if Jefferson's interpretation of the habits of the man was
approximately correct, Henry had very slight interest in that. 17
Jefferson himself advocated a calculated dispersal of functions; and, despite
his wartime experiences, he still favored a government which was mild as
well as reasonable. Incredibly industrious as he was in person, he had not
moved far in the direction of an energetic government such as wasafterwards advocated by Alexander Hamilton on the larger stage. He made
no special provision for the exigencies of war or other dangerous crises,
and he was thinking in long-range terms rather than in those of any
temporary emergency. He regarded this sort of civil organization as
sufficient for a society already practised in local self-government and which
he hoped would be blessed with peace.
He had been one of the instigators of rebellion; and, although he had not
become a soldier like Hamilton and Marshall and Monroe, he had gone
forth to war as truly as any civilian can. He left no possible doubt, however,
that he wanted his Commonwealth and the Confederation to follow
henceforth the paths of peace, insofar as possible. "Young as we are," he
said, "and with such a country before us to fill with people and with
happiness, we should point in that direction the whole generative force of
nature, wasting none of it in efforts of mutual destruction.
"Jefferson to Madison, Dec. 8, 1784, Mar. 18, 1785 (Ford, IV, 16, 35).
Henry was again elected governor in November, 1784.
It should be our endeavor to cultivate the peace and friendship of every
nation, even of that which has injured us most, when we shall have carried
our point against her." 18
He was speaking of not merely Virginia but the whole Union, and the ideas
he expressed on the subjects of commerce, manufacturing, and agriculture
must be viewed chiefly, though not wholly, in this larger setting. He
believed it was in the American interest to throw open the doors of
commerce and to ask European countries to do the same. He set no goal of
national self-sufficiency such as Alexander Hamilton and Henry Clay did
later. In order to avoid the occasion of future quarrels with European
countries he was willing to abandon the ocean, leaving it to others to bring
goods in and carry them away. Such a policy would make America
independent of the Old World, he thought, and would have the result of
turning everybody on his continent to the more salutary occupation of
cultivating the soil. Nevertheless, even before he became necessarily
concerned with commerce as a federal official, he was convinced that the
full abandonment of the sea was but the dream of a philosopher. Americans
as individuals would continue to engage in commerce. Since this would
involve them in some danger of war, he recognized that some provision for
naval defense was necessary.His enthusiasm, however, was not for swords or ships, and certainly not for
looms and spindles. Workshops of the domestic type he liked; in the course
of time his servants and employees made carriages, furniture, and even
nails at Monticello. But he hoped that shops of the industrial sort would
remain in Europe. The industrial revolution was dawning in England but he
did not care to live or labor in that light. With freedom of trade (which he
hoped for) a country would be free to make the economic arrangements
best suited to its circumstances. The young American Republic, richly
endowed with land, should be mated with the pure damsel of agriculture;
commerce was a vixen and manufacturing a diseased harlot beside her.
As a realistic farmer, who had observed in his own region the soil-
exhausting effects of tobacco culture, he looked to the cultivation of grain
crops for the diffusion of plenty and happiness. 19 But it was not primarily
as an economist nor even as an agronomist that he assessed the merits of
agriculture as a way of life. It was as a political scientist (though he did not
use the term) and even more as a moralist that he eulogized the
husbandman in words bordering on the poetic and revealing his own deep
love for nature. Other men should be rooted in
18 Notes in Ford, III, 278-279.
"Reply to Query XX, esp. Ford, III, 271.
the soil as he was, and thus be assured of abiding independence, purity, and
strength.
. . . Those who labour in the earth are the chosen people of God, if ever he
had a chosen people, whose breasts he has made his peculiar deposit for
substantial and genuine virtue. It is the focus in which he keeps alive that
sacred fire, which otherwise might escape from the face of the earth.
Corruption of morals in the mass of cultivators is a phaenomenon of which
no age nor nation has furnished an example. It is the mark set on those,
who, not looking up to heaven, to their own soil and industry, as does the
husbandman, for their subsistence, depend for it on casualties and caprice
of customers. Dependance begets subservience and venality, suffocates the
germ of virtue, and prepares fit tools for the designs of ambition. This, the
natural progress and consequence of the arts, has sometimes perhaps been
retarded by accidental circumstances: but, generally speaking the
proportion which the aggregate of the other classes of citizens bears in anystate to that of its husbandmen, is the proportion of its unsound to its
healthy parts, and is a good enough barometer whereby to measure its
degree of corruption. While we have land to labour then, let us never wish
to see our citizens occupied at a workbench, or twirling a distaff.
Carpenters, masons, smiths, are wanting in husbandry: but, for the general
operations of manufacture, let our work-shops remain in Europe. . . . The
loss by the transportation of commodities across the Atlantic will be made
up in happiness and permanence of government. The mobs of great cities
add just so much to the support of pure government, as sores do to the
strength of the human body. It is the manners and spirit of a people which
preserve a republic in vigour. A degeneracy in these is a canker which soon
eats to the heart of its laws and constitution. 20
Utopia he did not envisage but a vast Arcadia he did. His concern was less
for crops than people; less for the rapid multiplication of numbers than for
the preservation of distinctive political ideals and institutions. The ruthless
exploitation of natural resources and the extraordinarily rapid settlement
which occurred in the United States in the two generations after his death
might have been expected to displease him. Also, if he had maintained the
temper of his post-Revolutionary years, he would have been fearful of the
tide of foreign-born which engulfed the land. He always welcomed
refugees from despotism, and he favored the speedy granting of citizenship
to such foreigners as should come in; but, on political and moral grounds,
he now thought it safer to be
20 Ford, III. 268-269.
patient about future developments and to depend primarily on the natural
increase from the existing stock.
... It is for the happiness of those united in society to harmonize as much as
possible in matters which they must of necessity transact together [he said].
Civil government being the sole object of forming societies, its
administration must be conducted by common consent. Every species of
government has its specific principles. Ours perhaps are more peculiar than
those of any other in the universe. It is a composition of the freest
principles of the English constitution, with others derived from natural right
and natural reason. To these nothing can be more opposed than the maxims
of absolute monarchies. Yet from such we are to expect the greatest
number of emigrants. They will bring with them the principles of thegovernments they leave, imbibed in their early youth; or, if able to throw
them off, it will be in exchange for an unbounded licentiousness, passing,
as is usual, from one extreme to another. ... In proportion to their numbers,
they will share with us the legislation. They will infuse into it their spirit,
warp and bias its directions and render it a heterogeneous, incoherent,
distracted mass. ... Is it not safer to wait with patience . . . for the attainment
of any degree of population desired or expected? May not our government
be more homogeneous, more peaceable, more durable? 21
He did not speak in this way at the end of the century, when his political
foes were advocating a policy of exclusion, and such words as these were
capable of illiberal misconstruction. 22 But they show anew that he was
more concerned and more consistent about ends than means. He often was
conservative in his efforts to safeguard the purity of political society, and as
a reformer he was in no hurry.
Even more interesting than his incidental remarks on immigrants (or
emigrants, as his generation called them) are those he made on the oldest
group of native Americans. He listed tribes of Indians with a fullness and
precision which were uncommon in his age, and he discussed the
characteristics of the savages with an objectivitv which was rare among the
philosophers and naturalists of other lands. Nevertheless, sentimentalism
blurred his scientific vision to some degree, and his enthusiasm for Indian
eloquence caused him to repeat a story which got him into considerable
trouble in later years. His account of the
^Ford, III, 189-190.
22 See, for example, the way S. F. B. Morse used them in Imminent
Dangers . . . through Foreign Immigration (1835); quoted in Thorp, Curti,
and Baker, American Issues, I (1941), 332-333.
murder of the family of a Mingo chief named Logan, who had been
conspicuously friendly to the whites, aroused a more lasting controversy
than his strictures on the constitution of Virginia. It was not challenged
until the last years of the century, however, and the whole matter then
became inextricably involved with the virulent partisanship of that time.
Our main concern here is with what he wrote in the first place, and his
reasons for writing it.While Lord Dunmore was still governor, Jefferson recorded in his ever-
present Account Book the current and accepted story of the murder of
Logan's family. This occurred on a creek which emptied into the Ohio near
Wheeling, and it was an important incident in the outbreak of what is
known historically as Dunmore's War. He could have heard the story in
Williamsburg and read it in the Virginia Gazette, along with the speech
which Logan made afterwards. Both in this speech and the accompanying
story the blame for the woes of the Chief was laid on Colonel Michael
Cresap, a conspicuous leader on the frontier whose direct responsibility
now seems improbable. 23
The authenticity of Logan's little oration was not then questioned, and it
may now be regarded as firmly established. Since Jefferson's main desire
was to perpetuate this, he could not have avoided the use of Cresap's name.
Condemnation of the cruelty of white men to Indians was quite in his
character, but to him Cresap was a symbol rather than a person. The alleged
villain of the piece died in 1775 and nobody bothered to defend him
publicly until it was possible to make political capital by so doing. In his
sympathy for an unfortunate Indian Jefferson unwittingly took the risk of
reflecting unjustly on a white border leader; and, without the strict
verification required by modern historical scholarship, he repeated a
generally believed story. This he did in order to introduce a morsel of
native eloquence which, in his opinion, deserved comparison with any
single passage in Demosthenes or Cicero. It was not merely as a scientist or
historian but also as a man of humane sentiment that he echoed the lament
of the once-friendly Indian: "Who is there to mourn for Logan? — Not
one." **
23 Account Book, 1775, pp. 5-7. The story was in the Va. Gazette, Feb. 4,
1775, the events having occurred in the spring of 1774.
24 The Logan-Cresap passage as originally published in the Notes is
practically identical with the one in Jefferson's Account Book. It is given in
Ford, III, 155-157, and is followed by editorial notes relating to the later
controversy. In 1797— 1798, after two American editions of the Notes had
appeared, Luther Martin of Maryland, son-in-law of Cresap and a vigorous
Federalist, took up the latter's defense in the Baltimore newspapers.
Jefferson naturally regarded the action at this late date as primarily political
and wisely refused to be drawn into public dispute. However, he sought
evidence from various people and in 1800 published as an appendix to theNotes much of the material he had collected, along with
He had no thought of future American controversy in connection with
Logan's speech, except possibly with those who condoned cruelty to the red
men; but he was fully aware, by the time he published his book, that he was
inviting scientific conflict with naturalists across the sea. In certain
passages about the Indians he was directly answering Buffon, and his
exaggerated emphasis on Indian eloquence was part of his larger effort to
demonstrate the excellence of what was native to America. For just the
same reason he wanted to prove that the animals of the New World were
big. All of this harmonized with the task he afterwards assumed in France
when, besides being a diplomat, he also served as a minister of information.
His scientific work was inseparable from his local patriotism, but actually it
was less significant in terms of European controversy than in the light of
American developments. We are more concerned with the latter than the
former at this point. The spirit of scientific curiosity was arising in the
United States, and in connection with this he again proved himself a
pioneer.
About the time he wrote his Notes on Virginia, Jefferson's long association
with the American Philosophical Society began. Eventually he belonged to
a vast number of scientific and agricultural organizations, lending the
weight of his influence and prestige to them in all parts of the United
States, but of all these the American Philosophical Society was the most
important and his relations with it were the most significant. It had been
established in Philadelphia, then the chief intellectual center, for the
promotion of useful knowledge. The wise and witty Franklin was still
president when Governor Jefferson was elected a
a summary of his own. From this it appeared that the original story was
incorrect in detail and that Daniel Greathouse rather than Cresap was in
command when the most cold-blooded of the killings occurred. Jefferson
did not correct the text of his book, however, and made no unequivocal
retraction of the charges against Cresap. Undoubtedly, he still regarded the
latter as culpable in general and he continued to give his sympathies to
Logan. A more serious criticism of Jefferson than the partisan one of
Martin was made considerably later by Brantz Mayer, in Tah-Gah-Jute; or
Logan and Cresap (1867), esp. pp. 149-156. Mayer cited a letter of G. R.
Clark to Dr. Samuel Brown, dated June 17, 1798, and sent to Jefferson
Sept. 4, 1798. This exculpated Cresap from the specific charge which hadbeen made, while connecting him with previous killings and describing the
cruelties as even greater than had been reported. Mayer claimed that
Jefferson suppressed this letter. Ford and L. C. Wroth, in the article on
Cresap in the D.A.B., follow Mayer, and they both assume an unfavorable
attitude toward Jefferson's conduct in the entire controversy. In my opinion
they make too much of the alleged suppression of Clark's letter, for this
actually added little to what Jefferson did publish and there may have been
some other reason why he did not give it out. He undoubtedly manifested
greater concern for historical truth in this confused controversy than his
political opponents did, and he showed himself to be more humane.
member in the year 1780, along with George Washington, Marbois, the
Reverend James Madison, and other men of prominence or scientific worth.
25 Elected a councillor in 1781, he wondered just what was expected of
him, and late in the year he asked his fellow councillor Charles Thomson if
his replies to Marbois would constitute a suitable offering to the Society. In
his mind the thought had dawned that he had not merely supplied factual
information about his State which would be useful to the French ally, but
that perhaps he had also made a contribution of a sort to natural
philosophy.
The Secretary of Congress had not yet seen the replies to the Secretary of
the French Legation, but he thought they would constitute an acceptable
present. 26 In the light of history this remark may be cited as an unintended
but classic example of understatement. Any society in any enlightened land
would have afterwards prided itself inordinately on receiving a copy of
Thomas Jefferson's original manuscript of the Notes on Virginia. Thomson
himself, who came to know the work better than almost anybody except the
author, soon began to wonder if it should not be given a fuller title. During
Jefferson's first year in France Thomson termed it "a most excellent natural
history not merely of Virginia but of North America and possibly equal if
not superior to that of any country yet published." 27 Soon after this the
private printing of the book was finished in Paris. Jefferson did not forget
his philosophical brethren in Philadelphia, but they had to content
themselves with lesser pieces which he presented to them at a later time.
Unwittingly Thomson understated the case before he actually saw
Jefferson's first offering to the shrine of useful information, but no one has
better expressed the spirit which animated them both as they surveyed the
American scene in 1782:This country opens to the philosophic view an extensive, rich and
unexplored field [he said]. It abounds in roots, plants, trees and minerals, to
the virtues and uses of which we are yet strangers. What the soil is capable
of producing can only be guessed at and known by experiment. . . .
Agriculture is in its infancy. The human mind seems just awakening from a
long stupor of many ages to the discovery of useful arts and inventions.
Our governments are yet unformed and capable of great improvements in
police, finance and commerce. The history, manners and customs
25 He was elected a member on Jan. 21, 1780, and councillor on Jan. 5,
1781; Gilbert Chinard, "Jefferson and the American Philosophical Society,"
Proceedings, LXXXVII, esp. pp. 264-265 (1943).
26 Thomson to Jefferson, Mar. 9, 1782, LC, 8:1220, replying to a letter of
Dec. 20, 1781.
"Thomson to Jefferson, Mar. 6, 1785; LC, 12:1977.
of the Aborigines are but little known. These and a thousand other subjects
which will readily suggest themselves open an inexhaustible mine to men
of a contemplative and philosophical trend. And therefore, though I regret
your retiring from the busy anxious scenes of politics, yet I congratulate
posterity on the advantages they may derive from your philosophical
researches. 28
These were words to warm the heart, and when Jefferson read them he
could congratulate himself on his strategic situation. The vexations of his
governorship were then over; the military battle for political independence
had been won and peace was near; in philosophic calm on his little
mountain he could survey a vast unexplored country and its developing
institutions. But he soon found out that his period of undisturbed reflection
was tragically short. He never lost his observing eye, discerning mind, and
enthusiastic spirit; but circumstances forced him to remain an incidental
scientist and philosopher.
28 Thomson to Jefferson, Mar. 9, 1782; LC, 8:1220.
Tragedy and a False Start 1782-1783
JEFFERSON did not yet know all that the war had done to his personalfortunes, for the time had not come to calculate the full effects of the
depreciation of the currency. However, he had speedily estimated the
damage which Cornwallis had wrought during the ten days that he made
headquarters at Elkhill, when, as Jefferson firmly believed, the Earl had
acted in the spirit of "total extermination." Said the former Governor: "He
destroyed all my growing crops of corn and tobacco, he burned all my
barns containing the same articles of the last year, having first taken what
he wanted; he used, as was to be expected, all my stocks of cattle, sheep
and hogs for the sustenance of his army, and carried off all the horses
capable of service: of those too young for service he cut the throats, and he
burned all the fences on the plantation, so as to leave it an absolute waste.
He carried off also about 30 slaves. Had this been to give them freedom he
would have done right, but it was to consign them to inevitable death from
the small pox and putrid fever then raging in his camp. This I knew
afterwards to have been the fate of 27 of them. I never had any news of the
remaining three, but presume they shared the same fate."*
Some of his slaves were still wandering in the lower country late in 1781. 2
The permanent losses in this category were chiefly from Elkhill and
Cumberland County; but, if the old-age story of one of his bondsmen is
believed, the British carried off a number of the house servants
*To Dr. William Gordon, July 16, 1788 (Ford, V, 39). He viewed the
devastation soon after it occurred, and carefully recorded his heavy losses
in his Farm Book, listing the slaves by name.
2 Wythe to Jefferson, Dec. 17, 1781 (LC, 7:1191-1192).
the Governor had had with him in Richmond. 3 His supply of slaves was
not seriously depleted, for he still had more than two hundred, and his very
special "people" — such as the coachmen Jupiter and John, "King" George
and his wife Ursula, the cook Sukey, and the superior Heming family of
"bright" mulattoes — were safe at Monticello after the scourge of invasion
was removed. Life there resumed its normal character and tempo.
The earliest important description of the mansion and its master by a
contemporary dates from the spring of 1782, when the Marquis de
Chastellux, a member of the French Academy and a major general in
Rochambeau's army, made a memorable visit to the little mountain.
Innumerable pilgrims came thither in later years and many left record oftheir impressions, and at least one of the Hessian officers had commented
on the place already, but Chastellux left the best Revolutionary description.
Indeed, it is doubtful if any foreign visitor ever described Jefferson and his
situation more aptly. No object had escaped this extraordinary man, said
the Marquis; "and it seemed as if from his youth he had placed his mind, as
he had done his house, on an elevated situation, from which he might
contemplate the universe." *
The house "in the Italian taste," though not faultless, seemed rather elegant
even to a highly cultivated European. Essentially it had assumed the form
which it retained until this same architect and builder remodeled it more
than ten years later. The pillars of the two porticoes had now been set.
Internally, the major features were the lofty "saloon" on the first floor, not
yet completely decorated in the "antique style" which was intended, and the
library of the same form above it. The wings were small, and this visitor
did not talk about bedrooms. His main interest was in the center of social
intercourse downstairs and the library where the master's treasured books
were, along with the tools he used so ingeniously. Chastellux saw the
results rather than the operations. The Lord of the Manor was fully capable
of turning out a bookcase, and, as an old servant said, he was "as neat a
hand as ever you see to make keys and locks and small chains, iron and
brass." 5 He had not entered upon his most fruitful period as a designer of
furniture and
3 Isaac Jefferson said this in his manuscript Life (UVA), connecting the
events with Arnold's raid. His memory of dates cannot be relied on, but
from his amusing story it appears that he himself as a child was for a time
captive at or near Yorktown.
4 Travels in North-America, in the Years 1180, 1181, and 1182 (2 vols.,
Dublin, 1787), II, 46. (Hereafter called Travels.) References here are to this
edition, II, 40-46, 49-51, although phrases have been drawn from the
French ed., Voyages (2 vols., Paris, 1786), II, 32-45.
8 Isaac Jefferson's Life; see also Randall, I, 375.
domestic devices, but he was sufficiently active in the building of his house
for Chastellux to report that he was often one of the workmen. He did not
actually lay bricks and set timbers, however, so another observation was
more significant: "We may safely aver, that Mr. Jefferson is the firstAmerican who has consulted the fine arts to know how he should shelter
himself from the weather." 6
It was the host rather than the mansion that Chastellux was most eager to
describe. He did not claim that Jefferson was a "perfect whole" like George
Washington, and most notable for the proportions of his character,
personality, and physique, but this he did say: "Let me describe to you a
man, not yet forty, tall, and with a mild and pleasing countenance, but
whose mind and understanding are ample substitutes for every exterior
grace. An American, who without ever having quitted his own country, is
at once a musician, skilled in drawing, a geometrician, an astronomer, a
natural philosopher, legislator, and statesman." 7 Supplementary physical
details can be added from other sources. The tall frame of this inveterate
student was not stooped from study; he was, as a servant said, a "straight-
up man." He had a long face and a high nose; he bowed to everybody he
met; he talked with his arms folded. 8 To a stranger like Chastellux he
seemed serious at first, even cold; but as soon as he discovered kindred
tastes he warmed up, established intellectual intimacy, and displayed
enthusiasms which might have been regarded as extravagant by those who
did not share them.
One joint enthusiasm which he and his guest discovered over the punch
bowl one evening when Mrs. Jefferson had retired, and one which could
have been easily ridiculed afterward, was for the poems of Ossian, which
were not recognized by them as a literary hoax. Some years earlier
Jefferson had described this "rude bard of the North" as the greatest poet
who had ever existed. 9 With the aid of a book which was brought down
and placed near the punch bowl, they now quoted from these "sublime
poems" far into the night. 10 Few of Jefferson's favored companions
stimulated him as much in the realm of verse as this member of the French
Academy. It was to Chastellux, several years
6 Travels, II, 42. For an authoritative interpretation of Chastellux's
description of Monticello, see F. Kimball, Jefferson, Architect, pp. 29-30.
7 Ibid., II, 42. For comments on Washington, see I, 136.
8 Details chiefly from Isaac Jefferson.
9 To Charles McPherson, Feb. 25,'1773 (Ford, I, 113). He was then seeking
from James McPherson the originals, which actually existed only in thelatter's imagination and naturally were not supplied; Charles McPherson to
Jefferson, Aug. 12, 1773 (LC, 1:81).
10 Travels, U, 45.
later, that he addressed his "Thoughts on English Prosody." His own
imagination, however, was not of the poetic sort. He was more interested in
the rules of accent and measure than in mere felicity of phrase, just as he
was more disposed to date the blooming of the narcissus, the feathered
hyacinth, and the hollyhocks in his garden than to comment on the beauty
of his hillside scene. 11 The observations he made to Chastellux on climate
and winds and natural history were more in character than his punch bowl
enthusiasm for the language of any writer.
By this time Jefferson had developed his deer park in a lordly style, but his
visitor judged him to be no sportsman; on the contrary, he amused himself
by feeding the tamed animals from his hand with Indian corn. This was a
pleasing picture to transmit to posterity, but the pity-is that Chastellux did
not give equal space to Mrs. Jefferson and the children. He contented
himself with describing her as mild and amiable and them as charming. He
reported that she was expected every moment to "lie in," and thus make
another addition to the human stock at Monticello.
There were still only two little Jeffersons: Martha or Patsy who was in her
tenth year, and Mary or Polly in her fourth. Early in May, after Chastellux
had gone off to Natural Bridge, another girl arrived. She was given the
same name, Lucy Elizabeth, that had been borne briefly by the daughter
who died in Richmond about a year before. Meanwhile, Jefferson had taken
his sister Martha, widow of Dabney Carr, and her six children into his
family. For upwards of a year he had been teaching the eldest, who came
nearer being his son than any other surviving person, and he had been able
to give him more attention lately. Peter Carr was reading Virgil and about
to start French. Two other boys were coming along, and all of them were of
"very hopeful genius," he said. They must not be abandoned to nature.
Also, there were three girls who were now regarded as marriageable and
were approaching an expensive period. He really had nine children, all told,
and he believed that he owed them a great deal of time and attention. 12
The presence of his sister Carr was doubly welcome at the time of his
wife's accouchement. He anticipated this with grave forebodings, and itwould have been accepted as a sufficient explanation of his refusal at this
time to be drawn back into the public service. But he did not
11 For the "Thoughts on English Prosody," written in France, see L. & B.,
XVIII, 415-451; for his calendar of the bloom of the flowers in 1782, see
Garden Book. p. 94.
12 To Overton Carr, Mar. 16, 1782 (LC, 8:1223-1224).
avail himself of this ready excuse — partly, we may presume, because of
his extreme reluctance to air his personal affairs, partly because this might
have been regarded as only a temporary disqualification, partly, it may be,
because anxiety had already blurred his judgment. Therefore, while his
adored wife lay on what proved to be her death bed he was drawn into
painful correspondence which should have been avoided.
Two days before his daughter was born he wrote to the Speaker of the
House of Delegates, abruptly declining the office of delegate for his County
to which he had recently been elected. 13 It may be assumed that he had
not been present at the meeting of the freeholders, and that if they were
aware of his reluctance to serve they believed that his objections could be
eventually overborne. James Monroe, who had just been elected to the
same body from another county, was in Richmond, anxiously awaiting his
arrival; and, when he did not come, Monroe as a friend informed him of the
state of opinion at the capital. It was said that his fellow citizens of
Albemarle had elected him previously to gratify him (in order that he might
attend the Assembly and defend himself), and that they had now elected
him to gratify themselves. One good turn deserved another, and he was
accused of showing a selfish spirit in refusing this service to his county and
country. 14
Speaker John Tyler, who had laid Jefferson's letter before the House, also
applied polite pressure, reporting that the members did not think the
acceptance of the resignation was warranted, and saying that he would be
glad to yield his own office to him, since he could fill it with more
propriety. "I suppose your [reasons] are weighty," he continued, "yet I
would suggest that good and able men had better govern than be governed,
since tis possible, indeed highly probable, that if the able and good
withdraw themselves from society, the venal and ignorant will succeed. ...
In times of peace men of moderate abilities perhaps might conduct theaffairs of the state, but at this time when the Republic wants to be organized
and requires but your influence to promote this desirable end, I can not but
think the House may insist upon you to give attendance without incurring
the censure of being rigid." 15
Nothing was said here about Mrs. Jefferson's illness. He himself described
it to Monroe as dangerous two weeks after he wrote the Speaker. He
mentioned it towards the end of a long letter, almost casually, almost as
though he hated to admit the fact; but this extraordi-
13 To the Speaker, May 6, 1782 (LC, 8:1232).
"Monroe to Jefferson, May 6, 11, 1782 (Hamilton, I, 15-16).
"Tyler to Jefferson, May 16, 1782 (LC, 8:1235-1236).
nary communication cannot be understood except on the background of
extreme anxiety. His natural sensitivity had been abnormally heightened,
and he explained with painful elaboration the reasons why he was adamant
in his determination to retire wholly from public life. Then he drew around
himself a mantle of impenetrable silence; so far as is known he wrote no
more letters for four months. 16
"Before I ventured to declare to my countrymen my determination to retire
from public employment," he wrote to James Monroe, "I examined well my
heart to know whether it were thoroughly cured of every principle of
political ambition, whether no lurking particle remained which might leave
me uneasy when reduced within the limits of mere private life. I became
satisfied that every fibre of that passion was thoroughly eradicated." This is
one of the few admissions he ever made that at one time he craved public
honor. "I considered," he said, "that I had been thirteen years engaged in
public service, that during that time I had so totally abandoned all attention
to my private affairs as to permit them to run into great disorder and ruin,
that I had now a family advanced in years which require my attention and
instruction, that to these were added the hopeful offspring of a deceased
friend [Dabney Carr] whose memory must be ever dear to me." All of this
was normal and human enough but he began to appear morbid when he
referred to the public ingratitude he had experienced. "I had been so far
from gaining the affection of my countrymen, which was the only reward I
ever asked or could have felt, that I had even lost the small estimation Ibefore possessed." He admitted that the representatives of the people
afterwards relieved him of blame; but in the meantime he had "stood
arraigned for treason of the heart and not merely weakness of the head";
and these injuries had inflicted a wound on his spirit which only the grave
could heal.
Anvone who took his words at their face value would have believed him
wholly unforgiving. On the other hand, almost any normal person would
have interpreted the present attitude of the legislators — their insistence
that he join them again — as a sign that they wanted to forget all the
criticisms of him in the past. Nor was there occasion for him to go into
legalities, as he proceeded to do, in the effort to determine whether or not
the state might require public services of its citizens through an indefinite
period. There was no reason for him to add, as a bitter afterthought, that he
had received a sufficient indication that
16 To Monroe, May 20, 1782 (Ford, III, 56-60). Randall, I, 38172, says
there were no more letters for six months. There was one on Sept. 22, 1782
(see Ford, III, 60) and there may have been others, but to all practical
purposes he ceased to write.
he would not be oppressed with perpetual service. It would have been quite
enough to say that, having spent the best part of his life in public pursuits,
he hoped to pass the rest of it in private quiet.
There is no way of determining just how many of the leaders of the State
knew about this bitter letter. Madison, who was in Philadelphia, was
imperfectly informed of Jefferson's private situation, but he learned of his
general attitude and commented unfavorably on it. "Great as my partiality
is to Mr. Jefferson," he said, "the mode in which he seems determined to
revenge the wrong received from his country does not appear to me to be
dictated either by philosophy or patriotism." 17 Upon the face of the matter
the judgment was undeniably just, but Monroe was in better position to
serve as an understanding friend. Distressed by the news about Mrs.
Jefferson, who had been very kind to him, and by the even more alarming
reports of her condition which were now circulating in Richmond, he
contented himself with an expression of deep sympathy, leaving the
question of his mentor's "retreat" from the public service to the arbitrament
of time. Jefferson himself, crazed by anxiety, was wholly unresponsive.
Under normal circumstances he would have been much pleased to learnthat Monroe had been elected to the Council, but he was in no mood to give
the advice requested "on every subject of any consequence." To him
nothing mattered but what should occur at home. 18
It was not until September 6, 1782, that he recorded the saddest of all the
items in his incredible Account Book: "My dear wife died this day at 11:45
a.m." He did not gratify the curiosity of posterity by leaving a description
of the scene. In the slave quarters it was remembered that the house
servants were allowed to file in before the end; and in the family they
recalled that Mrs. Eppes was there, along with Mrs. Carr. The recollections
of Patsy Jefferson from a time when she was ten constitute the major source
of information. She remembered that for four months her father shared with
his sister and his sister-in-law the task of nursing, always remaining within
call; that he was led from the room almost insensible just before his wife
died and that this strong man then fainted; that he kept his own room for
three weeks afterwards, Patsy herself being continuously by his side. Then
he began to ride incessantly, and by mid-October he emerged from a
"stupor of mind" which had rendered him "as dead to the world as she was
whose loss occasioned it." 19
17 Madison to Edmund Randolph, June 11, 1782 (Hunt, Writings, I,
207-208).
18 Monroe to Jefferson, June 28, 1782 (Hamilton, I, 17-19).
19 The recollections of his daughter are in Randall, I, 382; another story is
in
He found an epitaph for her in the Iliad. This he used for other reasons than
the display of classical learning; he thereby revealed his devotion to the
initiated while veiling it from the vulgar gaze. 20 In the same spirit of
jealous delicacy he carefully preserved and deeply cherished small
souvenirs of his dead wife, but eventually he also saw to it that none of
their letters should ever be open to prying eyes. No one realized more than
he that full details of public conduct must be ultimately revealed, but he
was determined that the sacred intimacies of a lover and husband should
remain inviolate. His wife did not belong to posterity; she belonged to him.
Because of this impenetrable silence on his part, probably we shall never
know much about Martha Wayles Jefferson and her life with him. Suchcontemporary comments by others as have survived leave no doubt that she
was musical and a few of them suggest gaiety of spirit, but the last ones
refer to her gentleness, even to her saintliness. Normally she was stricter
with the children than he was, though she probably grew milder as she
weakened. Toward them as they grew older he was rigorous in moral and
intellectual matters but otherwise indulgent, and towards her it may be
safely assumed that he was always gentle. He was strongly possessive,
nevertheless. He had no advanced ideas about women, and something more
than jocularity may be perceived in his later remark to his sister-in-law
about her woman's "trade." 21 His own wife engaged in it far beyond her
strength. She gave him six children in ten years, after having already borne
one to her first husband. The effort was out of all proportion to the lasting
results, for only two of them attained maturity. Experiences of this sort
were common enough among the gentry at that time, but the widower could
hardly have avoided the poignant reflection that he had asked far too much
of her and that her love for him was her undoing. She had not reached the
age of thirty-four. He himself was now only thirty-nine but, much as he
craved affection, he never looked for another wife.
Even if he had not suffered this irreparable loss, Jefferson could scarcely
have failed to return at some time to the public life he had renounced. But
he would hardly have done so just when he did. In
Pierson, Jefferson at Monticello, pp. 106-107. The final and now-familiar
quotation is from Jefferson's letter to Chastellux, Nov. 26, 1782 (Ford, III,
64), replying to one he received Oct. 17.
20 The Greek epitaph, with Pope's rendering, is in Randall, I, 383. See also
the sensitive comment of Tucker in the note.
21 To Mrs. Eppes, July 12, 1788 (Domestic Life, p. 137).
his mind personal grief quickly swallowed up the pain he had suffered at
the hands of his countrymen and made that seem a minor concern.
Politicians tried to reopen old wounds at a much later time, but he himself
could look back on the years before his wife's death through the haze of
sentimental memory and regard them as the most blessed in his life. Thus
he wrote to a friend of his youth after he had gone to France: "My history .
. . would have been as happy a one as I could have asked, could the
subjects of my affection have been immortal. But all the favors of fortunehave been embittered by private losses." 22 He rarely mentioned public
misfortunes to anybody during the rest of this decade. The public wound
had healed and he wasted little time looking at the scar.
Madison took the initiative in getting the once-embittered Governor back
into affairs of state, by moving in Congress the renewal of Jefferson's
appointment as a member of the commission to negotiate peace. He had
been elected to this position a year and a half before, along with Adams,
John Jay, Franklin, and Henry Laurens; and in declining it he had
expressed deep regret that he could not avail himself of the opportunity to
see at close hand the countries of Europe which he had hitherto admired
from afar. 23 Even then he felt no such distaste for service abroad as he did
for the public business of his Commonwealth; he had had much too large a
dose of that.
Although Cornwallis had surrendered since that summer and the war was
virtually ended, peace had not yet been declared and negotiations were still
going on. Two months after his wife's death it was thought in Congress that
the reasons for Jefferson's original appointment still obtained. A prominent
consideration in the minds of the Virginians was the protection of Southern
interests, and they believed that his presence was the more desirable since
Laurens would probably be unable to participate. That commissioner
unluckily became a prisoner of war, and, though he was eventually released
from the Tower of London and went to Paris, he actually served there for
only a couple of days. Other delegates, besides Virginians and Southerners,
thought it desirable to send fresh advices by Jefferson's hand, and nobody
raised any objection to the renewal of his appointment. 24
If this action seemed to Congress eminently fitting, it came to Jefferson as a
godsend. His cherished plans to seek satisfaction and happiness
22 To Elizabeth Blair Thompson, Jan. 19, 1787; Bixby, p. 21. 03 To
Lafayette, Aug. 4, 1781 (Ford, III, 48-49).
24 Madison to Edmund Randolph, Nov. 12, 1782 (Burnett, Letters, VI,
539); Madison's "Notes on Debates," Nov. 12, 1782 (Hunt, Writings, I,
259-260).
in philosophical activities in the bosom of his family had been shattered; he
welcomed for once the chance to get away from Monticello, where hebelieved he could never be so happy again; and, although Richmond and
the Assembly did not allure him, the vaunted scene of Europe did. Toward
the end of November, therefore, he accepted the appointment. He thought
there was some chance to reach Philadelphia in time to sail on the same
boat with Chastellux, with whom he hoped to play chess and talk on
elevated themes, and he was sure he could get there within a month. 25
He was no longer at Monticello, but at Colonel Archibald Cary's Ampthill
in Chesterfield County, having his children inoculated against smallpox and
serving as their chief nurse. This was a sufficient excuse not to attend the
meeting of the Assembly, though his name was still on the roll. 2 * His
sister-in-law may already have taken the infant daughter to near-by
Eppington, and the widower now arranged to leave the baby and little Polly
there. He was determined to take Patsy with him wherever he went, and
educational arrangements for the young Carrs could wait. He eventually got
Madison to aid him in these. Business matters he left in the hands of
Francis Eppes of Chesterfield and Nicholas Lewis of Albemarle, and he
arrived in Philadelphia late in December, just as he had promised. 27
It was a year and a half before he left for France, however, and if he had
not attained a state of philosophic calm he might have been not only
embarrassed but deeply disappointed. The reasons for delay were twofold
and little short of contradictory. To begin with, the British had not given
him safe conduct across the sea. Congress was reluctant to ask this for fear
of a refusal, and the precedent of Henry Laurens was not encouraging. On
the other hand, advices from Europe already suggested that his belated
crossing might prove unnecessary. The preliminary Anglo-American
articles had been signed before he reached Philadelphia and it looked as
though he might have nothing to do in Paris but join in the celebration of
peace and victory.
Congress still wanted him to go, notwithstanding, and he immediately
began to arm himself for negotiation, having no thought of being
unprepared. He had plenty of time, for the French vessel which was
supposed to take him was not yet ready. Nearly all of the month of January
he spent in Philadelphia, associating pleasantly with Madison
25 To Robert R. Livingston, Nov. 26, 1782 (Ford, III. 61-62); to
Chastellux, Nov. 26, 1782 (Ibid., Ill, 65-<56).
"Journal, Oct. 28, Nov. 6, 1782; Randall, I, 384.27 Ford, III, 67; Madison to Edmund Randolph, Dec. 30, 1782, Burnett,
Letters. VI, 570.
and others who lodged with Mrs. House and her daughter Mrs. Elizabeth
Trist. He strengthened his ties with the American Philosophical Society by
making a cash contribution; he noted in his Account Book that Dr. Franklin
had had another birthday and was now seventy-seven; he bought a
chessboard and chessmen, even though he could not sail with Chastellux;
he sent messages to the Eppes family and the children he had left behind
him; he wrote a little note of appreciation to George Washington, offering
to perform personal commissions for the General in the Old World. 28
Toward the end of the month he spent five days and endured execrable
accommodations and society getting to Baltimore, where he had supposed a
French vessel was ready to bear him off. He wasted a month in that city,
terribly bored as he always was in the absence of employment and
interesting amusement. He had expected to sail with the Chevalier de
Villebrun, commander of the Romulus, who also had the frigate
Guadaloupe with him, but found that the bad weather had forced the
Frenchman to fall down the bay and had cut him off from all
communication. About a week later Jefferson managed to get through in a
boat, after having been stuck in the ice at the halfway point, but the result
of his conference was not encouraging, and he returned to Baltimore. The
British, having little else to do on this side of the Atlantic, had concentrated
their strength against the little naval force of the French, and it was
generally agreed that this was no time to sail. About the middle of February
Jefferson got word from Congress that he should not proceed until he
received further instructions, and he himself feigned indifference as to
whether he went or stayed. Early in March he was back in Philadelphia and
there he spent the month. Not until April 1, after he had pressed Congress
for a decision one way or the other, was he formally released from his
appointment. He then wrote John Jay that he really would not need
lodgings in Paris. 29
His leave-taking in Virginia had been premature, but there was no reason to
rush back to Monticello, so he proceeded home by way of Richmond,
where he discussed affairs with various leaders. Soon the Assembly elected
him a delegate to Congress, to begin service in the fall. The prospect of a
state constitutional convention then seemed bright, and one of the first
things he did after his return to his lonely mountain in early May was tomake the draft, embodying his own ideas, to which we have referred
already. This he sent to Madison some
28 Account Book, Jan. 1783; to Eppes, Jan. 14, 1783, Ford, III, 296-297; to
Washington, Jan. 22, 1783, Ibid., Ill, 297-298.
"Various letters and documents, Jan. 31-Apr. 11, 1783; Ford, III, 298-316.
six weeks later, authorizing him to use it as occasion offered. 30 The
proposed constitution for Virginia showed that the mind of the widower
had fully emerged from stupor. He did not let it lie fallow during this
relatively inactive period.
In the year 1783 he drew up a catalogue of his library which afterwards
became celebrated. 81 Ever since the fire at Shadwell in 1770 he had been
assiduously collecting books, and only during his governorship was his
pursuit of this favorite avocation seriously interfered with. 82 He
maintained contact with booksellers in Williamsburg, made purchases in
Annapolis, and established important connections in Philadelphia. We need
not linger here to make a detailed inquiry into the books he owned, for they
formed part of the developing collection which became a national
possession a generation later. 33 We need only note that he had 2640
volumes in the spring of 1783, by his own count, and that he had adopted a
scheme of classification by then. This went back to Lord Bacon, and it was
continued by the Library of Congress for two generations after he himself
was dead. 84
He was not disposed to leave his books in disorder or to arrange them, as
most people then did, primarily by their size. He preferred an arrangement
by subject matter rather than one that was strictly alphabetical, for even he
could forget an author's name. He found a basis for his system in Lord
Bacon's "table of sciences." Following the division of the faculties of the
mind into memory, reason, and imagination, he classified his books under
the corresponding headings of history, philosophy, and the fine arts. He
drew subdivisions under each, making more detailed provisions for works
on law, government, and political history than a theologian or physician
would have done.
80 To Madison, June 17, 1783 (Ford, III, 334). He had set out for
Monticello from Tuckahoe on May 7. His letter of that date to Madison(Madison Papers, Lib. Cong., 4:17) contains acute comments on various
leaders.
31 The catalogue, in the form of a bound manuscript volume, is in the
MHS. It has naturally been dated by the statement in it that on Mar. 6,
1783, he had 2640 volumes. At that time, however, he was in Philadelphia,
not at Monticello, and it may have been compiled earlier or later. He
probably worked on it at various times, giving considerable attention to the
arrangement of his books during the summer of 1783.
32 This matter is discussed authoritatively by William Pedcn in his
unpublished dissertation, "Thomas Jefferson: Book Collector," ch. 8, which
was made available to me through his kindness and that of the University
of Virginia. The same author has given a brief account in "Some Notes
Concerning Thomas Jefferson's Libraries," W. & M., 3 ser., I, 265-272
(July, 1944).
83 A comprehensive and highly competent study of his library of 1815 is
being made under the auspices of the Library of Congress by Miss E.
Millicent Sowerby.
84 The scheme was discussed by Jefferson himself in letters to George
Watter-son, May 7, 1815, in W. D. Johnston, Hist, of Lib. Cong., I (1904),
143-145, and Augustus B. Woodward, Mar. 24, 1824 (L. & B., XVI,
17-20).
He wanted a well-rounded collection and listed not merely what he had but
also numerous titles he intended to acquire. His library was that of a
practising statesman, but he would neglect nothing important in any field.
In later years one of the servants often wondered how his master came to
have "such a mighty head." When you asked the master about anything he
would go straight to a book and then tell you all about it. He had an
abundance of books; sometimes he would have twenty of them on the floor
at once; he would "read first one, then tother." 35 We may be sure that the
score of friendly volumes on the floor were carefully put back in their
appointed places, for Jefferson kept the house of his mind in order. He
collected books not merely to own but to use them, and for the same
purpose he assiduously assembled ideas and information in his capacious
head. He had a rich and ordered storehouse to draw on when, a period ofquiet having followed one of sharp tragedy, he turned his attention again to
affairs of state. Also, he was thoroughly prepared for the wise men of
Europe when, at last, the opportunity for learned 'conversation with them
came.
86 Life of Isaac Jefferson, UVA.
CxxvnO
An End and a Beginning 1783-1784
JEFFERSON played his final role in the drama of the American Revolution
as a member of the Continental Congress; and his six months' service in
that feeble body, ending with his foreign appointment soon after he became
forty-one, constituted the closing scene of a notable legislative career. He
afterwards presided over the Senate of the United States, but never again
was he a member of a representative assembly or any other sort of
deliberative body. So far as lawmaking was concerned this was the end. At
the last this experienced performer played a stellar part, but the
contemporary audience was small and apathetic, the cast as a whole was
weak, and the setting was unimpressive in the extreme. During much of the
time he operated in a vacuum, for Congress as a working body was often
non-existent. At the outset he did not even know where he should go to find
it.
When he accepted election as one of Virginia's delegates early in June,
1783, he supposed that in the autumn he would have quarters in
Philadelphia, where he could find more kindred philosophical spirits than
on any other American spot. He soon learned, however, that the discredited
Congress of the Confederation had fled to Princeton, a pleasant but
physically inadequate village and not then an intellectual center of wide
renown. Nobody knew where the legislature would sit after that. A group
of mutinous soldiers who were seeking back pay had precipitated the flight.
The authorities of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania had not provided
the necessary safeguards, and there were those who viewed the departure of
the delegates without regret. A disgruntled officer said: "The grand
Sanhedrin of the Nation, with their solemnity and emptiness, have removed
to Princeton, and left a state where their wisdom has long been questioned,
their virtue sus-pected, and their dignity a jest." 1 Even after Congress had been three
months gone Dr. Benjamin Rush said that it was "abused, laughed at and
cursed in every company." 2 The derided body, being determined to
preserve its independence and a modicum of dignity, would not accept the
proffers of hospitality which numerous citizens of Philadelphia now held
out.
On personal grounds Jefferson would have liked to serve there; he could
have lodged pleasantly with Mrs. House and Mrs. Trist, as he had done
briefly in the previous winter, and he could have remained near Patsy,
whom he had decided to leave in the metropolis in any case. Father and
daughter, riding in a two-horse phaeton, reached Philadelphia toward the
end of October, and Jefferson went on to Princeton. Congress was still
there, but on the day he arrived it adjourned to meet in Annapolis about
three weeks later; so, after taking his seat, he came straight back. There was
little time for relaxation at Princeton, but he managed to get a shave. 3
Back in Philadelphia after a meaningless trip, he wrote the Governor of
Virginia about the future residence of this wandering Congress. 4 In this
matter he was admittedly a localist, though no more so than everybody
else. He wanted the permanent seat of Congress to be as near his own State
as possible, and he preferred Georgetown to Annapolis, hoping that the
commercial benefits would accrue to the Potomac rather than Chesapeake
Bay. He went on record at this early date as favoring a Potomac site, and
before he ceased being a legislator he analyzed sectional opinions,
estimated distances, and considered the whole problem with characteristic
thoroughness and realism. 5 He was fully informed on this subject long
before he had any occasion to bargain with Alexander Hamilton.
Before leaving Philadelphia for Annapolis the last week in November he
made more lasting arrangements for his daughter. It was probably on the
suggestion of warm-hearted Elizabeth Trist, who unfortunately
a Maj. John Armstrong to Gen. Gates, June 26, 1783, quoted in Burnett,
Continental Congress, pp. 579-580.
2 Sept. 30, 1783; Ibid., p. 585.
3 He arrived in Princeton on Nov. 4, 1783; see Account Book, and
Dumbauld, p. 230. He voted "no" on the motion that the Commander in
Chief be directed to discharge the federal army except for 500 men after theevacuation of New York by the British; Journals, XXV, 807.
*Nov. 11, 1783 (Ford, III, 340-343).
5 There are several memoranda on the subject in his papers, as LC,
10:1560-1564, 1600; see the materials printed in Ford, III, 458^63. The
precise dates are uncertain but internal evidence indicates the approximate
time. These and other related documents for the years 1783-1784 are
brought together in Thomas Jefferson and the National Capital, ed. by S. K.
Padover (Washington, 1946), pp. 1-12.
was soon to leave town herself, that Mrs. Thomas Hopkinson, mother of
Francis Hopkinson, took the eleven-year-old girl into her home. She was a
widow and rather too old for Martha to regard her as a mother, but this
deeply religious lady was obviously of the kindly sort. The circumstances
facilitated the friendship of Jefferson with Francis Hopkinson, who was not
only a fellow signer of the Declaration but also a musician and author of
some note. Separated from her father, Patsy danced out the old year at the
home of this gentleman with the young Hopkinsons and the children of
David Rittenhouse, whose attainments in astronomy Jefferson so much
admired, while her host played on the pianoforte. 6
This was a circle in which the mathematical and music-loving Virginian
would himself have liked to linger, and he took comfort in the thought that
Patsy would be more "improved" in it than she could have been at
Annapolis with him. He had already planned a serious course of reading for
her — not because of any advanced ideas about the education of girls and
women generally but because of his anticipation of her future
responsibilities. Writing to Marbois, who had kindly undertaken to find a
French tutor for her, he said that he had to look forward to the family she
would have someday. His comments were not complimentary to his
countrymen. "The chance that in marriage she will draw a blockhead I
calculate at about fourteen to one, and of course that the education of her
family will probably rest on her own ideas and education without
assistance. With the best poets and prose-writers I shall therefore combine
a certain extent of reading in the graver sciences." The latter would have to
wait until she rejoined him, however, and in the meantime he hoped that
she would acquire in Philadelphia more taste and proficiency in the arts
than she had been able to in the forest of remote Albemarle. Besides
English and French, the rigorous schedule he worked out for her after hewent to Annapolis called for three hours every day in music, and three
every other day in dancing and drawing. However, the Frenchman who had
been engaged to teach her drawing, and paid a guinea as a retainer, claimed
that she had no capacity for the subject, and he could not be induced to
continue. Jefferson insisted that the unwilling tutor keep the guinea for his
pains. 7
He did not reproach Martha but he did continuously exhort her to
e G. E. Hastings, Life and Works of Francis Hopkinson (Chicago, 1926),
pp. 331-335.
7 To Marbois, Dec. 5, 1783 (Bibliotheque Nationale, courtesy JP); to
Martha, Nov. 28, Dec. 11, 22, 1783 (Randall, I, 390-392); Feb. 18, 1784
(Domestic Life, p. 72).
strive to be good and accomplished. He insisted on her writing regularly to
him and to her aunts, warning her about her spelling — despite the
inconsistency of his own. Following a suggestion from Mrs. Trist, he urged
her to be specially careful of her personal appearance; he hoped that from
the time of rising she would be so neatly dressed that no gentleman could
discover a pin amiss. He was a moralistic parent, urging her to obey the
inner monitor, the conscience God had implanted in every breast, bui Patsy
remembered his kindness best. Her father's wanderings were something of
a trial to her then and thereafter, but she was happier in Philadelphia than
Mrs. Trist had expected. She had inherited his sanguine temperament and
she probably concluded that he had made the best arrangements for her a
homeless widower could.
Madison, who had now become Jefferson's favorite political companion,
journeyed to Annapolis with him but, being no longer a delegate, soon
proceeded homeward, stopping on the way at Gunston Hall to find out how
George Mason stood on various public questions of the moment. The
latter's heterodoxy from the Madisonian and JefTersonian point of view,
which was strongly unionist, lay chiefly in his being "too little impressed
with either the necessity or the proper means of preserving the
Confederacy." 8 A good many others were now heterodox, judging from
the extreme dilatoriness of the delegates in getting to Annapolis. It was
more than two weeks beyond the appointed date before enough of them
were on hand for a meeting at the State House. Twenty were then present,including four Virginians, but only seven commonwealths had two or more
delegates and thus it was impossible to attend to important matters of
business, which required the vote of nine states. 9 It was possible, however,
to give an audience to the Commander in Chief, who wanted to lay down
his sword.
Several weeks earlier Jefferson, who was deeply solicitous for the weary
veteran, saw Washington for the first time in seven years, and noted with
pleasure that the General had more health in his face than he had ever seen
in it before. 10 Jefferson was chairman of the committee that made
arrangements for the public audience two days before Christmas, though
the report on details of ceremony was largely in the hand of Elbridge
Gerry. 11 Congress gave "an elegant public dinner" the day before; some
two hundred guests were plentifully supplied
8 Madison to Jefferson, Dec. 10, 1783 (Hunt, Writings, II, 27-28).9 Dec. 13, 1783; in Journals, XXV, 809-810.
10 To Gov. of Va., Nov. 11, 1783; see Ford, III, 343.
11 Ford, III, 363-364; Journals, Dec. 22, 1783, XXV, 819-820.
with good food and liquor, thirteen toasts were drunk, and thirteen cannon
shots were fired — despite the fact that officially almost half the states were
absent. Jefferson may not have been at the ball that evening in the State
House, but he was at the audience there next day with the other delegates
and numerous spectators. It is said that all of the latter wept when
Washington solemnly resigned his commission, and that most of the
congressmen did. Jefferson, with customary restraint, contented himself
with saying that Washington's address was worthy of him and that it was an
"affecting scene." 12
No one was more anxious than he to do Washington honor, but he was not
feeling very well and was deeply disturbed by the state of public affairs. "I
have had very ill health since I have been here and am getting rather lower
than otherwise," he wrote to Madison on New Year's Day. 13 The health of
the Union was worse; Congress was suffering from anemia at a time when
there was at least one supremely important thing to do. The peace treaty
had been signed on September 3 and delivered to the President of Congress
seven weeks after that. It was then learned that ratifications must be
exchanged within six months of the signing, but until nine states were
represented Congress could not sign. Soon after the first meeting in
Annapolis, when two and a half of the six months had already passed,
Jefferson wrote to the Governor of Virginia: "I am sorry to say that I see no
immediate prospect of making up nine states, so careless are either the
states or their delegates to their particular interests as well as the general
good which would require that they be all constantly and fully represented
in Congress." A week later he reported that the pending departure of a
member would leave only six states represented. There was still a chance
that somebody would show up in time to get the ratification to England by
March 3, but he saw another alarming possibility: if it did not get there on
time the British, of whom he was invariably suspicious, might seize the
excuse not to ratify the treaty unless the terms were changed. 14 He bore
special responsibilities, for he was chairman of the committee on the treaty.Some delegates, including Jefferson's colleague Arthur Lee and two
members of the committee, took the position that the vote of seven states
was sufficient, since the preliminary articles had been accepted by nine and
these were practically the same as the final ones; some even
12 To Gov. Va., Dec. 24, 1783 (Ford, III, 364); Burnett, Letters, pp.
590-591. Trumbull's painting shows the delegates uncovered, but the
committee report indicates that they were covered.
13 Jan. 1, 1784 (Ford, III, 372).
14 To Gov. of Va., Dec. 17, 24, 1783 (Ford, III, 350-351, 364-365).
said that the British need never know. Jefferson did not believe that this
opinion would have prevailed but as chairman thought himself obligated to
take the lead in combatting it. He maintained that ratification by nine states
was expressly required by the Articles of Confederation, that the other
contracting party might reject anything less than full legal action, and that
any deception of the British could be properly regarded as a breach of faith.
15
He fully recognized the desperateness of the situation, nevertheless, and in
the effort to get the requisite number of states he made a proposal which
now seems ludicrous. It probably seemed much less so at the time. Since
Delegate Beresford of South Carolina was too ill to come to Annapolis,
Jefferson suggested that Congress go in a body to his bedside in
Philadelphia — that is, if the expected reinforcement of another state
should come. But this reinforcement did not come immediately, and all he
could be sure of was ratification by seven states. Accordingly, he moved
that a resolution approved by that number be sent to the American
commissioners abroad, that they should seek an extension of time, and that
they be authorized to present this resolution with explanations only if a
ratification by nine states had not arrived by the latest necessary date. 18
By these means he stayed the movement for reckless action until January
14, when the convalescent Beresford and two others appeared in response
to frantic calls. Unanimous ratification by twenty-three delegates
representing nine states followed immediately. There were mishaps even
after this action, and the formal exchange of ratifications took place not in
March but May. About that time Congress received from Franklin theopinion that no objections would be raised by the British on the ground of
delay. At the very end of his service, therefore, Jefferson had good reason
to believe that peace had really come. 17
There was an anticlimactic quality in the final events; and, more
immediately, it looked as though ratification would be followed by the
peace of death. Two days after Congress acted, Jefferson outlined to the
Governor of Virginia the important subjects then pending. 13 He doubted if
a decision on any of these questions could be reached, and he believed that
this puny body would shortly be compelled to adjourn.
"Draft of report, in Ford, III, 365-368; contemporary comments in his letter
to Madison, Feb. 20, 1784, in Ford, III, 397 (more authoritatively annotated
in Burnett, Letters, VII, 447); much later account by Jefferson, Ford, I,
77-81; admirable discussion of the whole matter in Burnett, Continental
Congress, ch. XXIX.
18 To Madison, Jan. 1, 1784, in Ford, III, 371; motion of Jan. 2, 1784, III,
372-375.
17 On Franklin's communication, see Burnett, Letters. 416 n.
18 Jan. 16, 1784; see Ford, III, 379-380.
The trouble was that seven of the states were represented by only two
delegates each, and any one of these fourteen men by differing with the
others could paralyze proceedings at any time. Things turned out to be even
worse than he expected, for the gentlemen immediately began to absent
themselves and not until six weeks later, on March 1, were nine states again
represented. Meanwhile, he was thrown back into another legislative
vacuum.
Among the small body of delegates some were disposed to fill this void
with pretentious words and petty bickering. If Jefferson's later comment on
this Congress is not already a classic it richly deserves to be. "Our body
was little numerous, but very contentious," he said, naming his colleague
John Francis Mercer as one who was "afflicted with the morbid rage of
debate" and "heard with impatience any logic which was not his own."
Mercer, who had had Jefferson's guidance in legal studies several years
before but who, unlike Monroe, had not become a disciple, once asked himhow he could remain silent in the midst of so much false reasoning which a
word would refute. "I observed to him," said Jefferson, "that to refute
indeed was easy but to silence impossible. That in measures brought
forward by myself, I took the laboring oar, as was incumbent on me; but
that in general I was willing to listen." 19 Emulating the examples of
Franklin and Washington, he laid his shoulder to the main point, avoiding
needless and irritating argument. In this very session he wrote to the
General: "An experience of near twenty years has taught me that . . . public
assemblies, where every one is free to act and speak, are the most powerful
looseners of the bands of private friendship." 20 The error of Congress in
1784, he said, lay precisely where it did a generation later — in too much
disputation. But how could it be otherwise, he asked, in a body of lawyers,
"whose trade it is to question everything, yield nothing and talk by the
hour?" 21
While Congress was marking time so vociferously Jefferson urged
Madison, now back in Virginia, to buy some available land near
Monticello, as Monroe and William Short, another protege of his, were
going to do. "With such a society," he said, "I could once more venture
home and lay myself up for the residue of life, quitting all its contentions
which grow daily more and more insupportable. . . . Life is of no value but
as it brings us gratifications. Among the most valuable of these is rational
society." 22 He was not finding much of it in
19 "Autobiography," in Ford, I, 81.
20 To Washington, Apr. 16, 1784; in Ford, III, 466.
21 Ford, I, 82.
22 To Madison, Feb. 20, 1784, in Ford, III, 406.
Annapolis. He cast no aspersions on the charming little capital at the mouth
of the River Severn, nor upon the inhabitants who, as certain Northern
delegates observed, seemed bent only on pleasure, but he had long ceased
to be interested in balls or horseraces and at this time he had little stomach
for social gaiety of any sort. 23 He sought a retired existence and kept
company chiefly with his young friend Monroe. After a time they rented a
place and did joint housekeeping, assisted by a Frenchman who must have
been a factotum since he was called Partout. 24The only other member of the Virginia delegation Jefferson cared for was
Samuel Hardy, whose sole fault in his eyes was his excessive good nature.
He was sharply critical of Mercer on other grounds than verbosity,
describing him as vain, ambitious, and intriguing. 25 How little
compatibility of spirit there was between the former Governor and Arthur
Lee is shown by a slight but revealing story he passed on in cipher to
Madison. "Lee, finding no faction among the men here, entered into that
among the women, which rages to a very high degree. A ball being
appointed by the one party on a certain night, he undertook to give one, and
fixed it precisely on the same night. This of course has placed him in the
midst of the mud." M
The quality as well as the quantity of this legislative body was low. Said a
foreign visitor that spring: "The members of Congress are no longer, in
general, men of merit or of distinguished talents. For Congress is not
respected as formerly; indeed its influence is feared. Besides, the state
governments and the foreign missions absorb the finest characters of the
Union." 27 Jefferson's associates were like the short-growth pines in the
wasteland outside Annapolis, while he was a primeval longleaf. It must
have seemed that his talents were wasted in this vacuity.
Congressional business was trivial, the punch bowls of Annapolis were
unalluring, and at first the returns from correspondence were disappointing.
He wrote Edmund Pendleton soon after he reached
23 Among the comments on Annapolis those of Elbridge Gerry of
Massachusetts and Samuel Dick of New Jersey are particularly interesting;
see Burnett, Letters, VII, 461, 472.
24 His account with Monroe, as of May 10, 1784, showed that they rented
from a Mr. Dulany, beginning on Feb. 25 (LC, 11:1905). See also Monroe
to Jefferson, May 14, 1784; Hamilton, I, 24-26. Previously he had been in
lodgings. For details see Edith R. Bevan, "Thomas Jefferson in Annapolis,"
Md. Hist. Mag., XLI (March, 1946), 115-124; and Dumbauld, pp. 56-57.
25 Jefferson to Madison, Apr. 25, 1784 (Burnett, Letters, VII, 501).
M To Madison, Feb. 20, 1784, deciphered by Burnett, Letters, VII, 448;
incompletely deciphered in Ford, III, 399.
27 G. K. van Hogendorp, quoted in Burnett, Letters, VII, 495 n.Annapolis: "It is very essential to us to obtain information of facts, of
opinions, and of wishes from our own country: with this view I have been
writing by every post to acquaintances in the General Assembly but never
yet have been able to provoke one scrip of a pen from any person of that
honourable body." 28 However, Edmund Randolph, the Attorney General,
promised to send him "all the intelligence which the barrenness of this
place [Richmond] can supply." 29 Jefferson's chief informants about
Virginia affairs in this period were Randolph and Madison, but eventually
he got letters from others, such as Pendleton and John Tyler, and his
attitude of receptivity must have been widely known.
It was also becoming a matter of wide knowledge that he welcomed
interesting information and inquiry of a scientific or philosophical sort. He
and President Madison of William and Mary compared notes about the
temperature; Jean de Crevecoeur wrote him from New York to inquire if in
remote Virginia or Carolina settlements brandy had actually been distilled
from potatoes; a fellow planter gave him information about a "white
negro"; Thomas Hutchins the geographer discussed with him the periodical
floods on the Western waters; and such soldiers and frontiersmen as George
Rogers Clark, John Sullivan, and William Whipple wrote him about
various matters of natural history, particularly the dimensions and
characteristics of the moose. He was collecting his ammunition to fire a
blast at Buffon, who had dared assert that American animals were small. 30
His main business was supposed to be legislative, however, and he was
unceasingly diligent at that. In this petty Congress he served on practically
every committee of consequence and drafted, as has been estimated, no
fewer than thirty-one papers. 81 By March he was at last able to do
something that seemed important. In the middle of the month he wrote to
Madison: "I am considerably mended in my health and hope a favorable
change in the weather which seems to be taking place will reestablish me."
32 The weather in Congress had also improved. Nine states were
represented on March 1 and he had turned immediately to the pressing
problem of the western lands.
28 To Pendleton, Dec. 16, 1783, in Burnett, Letters, VII, 390-391.
29 Jan. 30, 1784 (M. D. Conway, Edmund Randolph, pp. 52-54).
30 From Crevecoeur, Jan. 23, 1784 (LC, 10:1630); from Charles Carter,Feb. 9, 1784 (LC, 10:1638); from Thomas Hutchins, Feb. 11, 1784 (MHS);
from Sullivan, Mar. 12, 1784 (LC, 10:1646); from Whipple, Mar. 15, 1784
(MHS.).
81 The observation and estimate are those of Ford, I, xxviii-xxix. The
Papers of the Continental Congress (LC, reproductions JP) confirm his
great activity as a committeeman.
82 Mar. 16, 1784; Ford, III, 426.
On that date the delegates from Virginia laid before Congress the deed of
cession of their territory beyond the Ohio. 33 For more than three years this
highly important matter had been pending. The original cession of 1781
had been unsatisfactory to Congress; more than a year after that it was
formally rejected; and not until the autumn of 1783 were terms specified by
the federal body and complied with by the State. The arrangement was not
wholly satisfactory to Virginia, for Congress declined to void certain
private claims and to guarantee the rest of the State's western lands.
However, Jefferson now thought compliance by Virginia necessary, as
Washington did, and immediately after the formal acceptance of this
princely gift by Congress, he, as chairman of the committee to prepare a
plan of temporary government, brought in a report. This was recommitted,
presented by him again in a somewhat revised version, and adopted in late
April after amendment. It is known to history as the Ordinance of 1784. Its
essential features were incorporated in the more famous Northwest
Ordinance of 1787, and by means of it Jefferson again revealed his
towering stature as a prophet. 34
The Ordinance of 1784 is most significant historically because it embodied
the principle that new states should be formed from the western region and
admitted to the Union on an equal basis with the original commonwealths.
This principle, which underlay the whole later development of the
continental United States, was generally accepted by this time and cannot
be properly credited to any single man. Jefferson had presented precisely
this idea to his own State before the Declaration of Independence, however,
and if he did not originate it he was certainly one of those who held it first.
It had been basic in his own thinking about the future of the Republic
throughout the struggle for independence. He had no desire to break from
the British Empire only to establish an American — in which the newer
region should be subsidiary and tributary to the old. What he dreamed ofwas an expanding Union of self-governing commonwealths, joined as a
group of peers.
One important feature of the plan which he now brought forward,
distinguishing it from the more renowned but more limited Ordinance of
1787, was its provision for governments, not merely in the territory
83 Rough draft in Ford, III, 406-407. A deed of cession in Jefferson's hand
is in The Papers of the Continental Congress. Expanded, this was spread on
the Journals, XXVI, 113-161. * V
34 For the report of the committee (Jefferson, Chase, Howell) on Mar. 1,
1784, see Ford, III, 407^10; for that of Alar. 22, see ibid., Ill, 429-432; for
the general background and events, see Burnett, Letters, pp. 597-600.
northwest of the Ohio, but in all that should afterwards be ceded by-
individual states. He already wanted his own Commonwealth to permit the
formation of a separate Kentucky, and at this time he urged a further
cession of territory amounting to somewhat more than the present state of
that name. He believed that Virginia should draw her boundary at the
meridian of the mouth of the Great Kanawha (that is, its junction with the
Ohio). "Further she cannot govern," he wrote George Washington; "so far
is necessary for her own well being." 85
In his first bill this far-seeing man drew boundaries for fourteen new states,
even though there were only thirteen in the original Union, and he gave
names to ten. 36 He followed his penchant for mathematical exactitude by
arranging these in tiers. The whole plan was ingeniously logical — too
logical, if anything, for this regular geometrical pattern is not pleasing to
the eye. It was never put into effect but the present map of the American
West suggests that it was influential. In general he translated Indian names
or geographical features into classical form, but his list was not liked then
and has often been ridiculed since that time. Cherronesus, Assenisipia, and
Pelisipia were well lost. No Metro-potamia or Polypotamia came into
existence, but there is a Michigan for his Michigania, and for his Illinoia
there is Illinois. Of his historical names, Saratoga might well have been
preserved, as Washington was. All the names disappeared from his second
report, though they may still be seen on old maps, and in 1787 it was
decided that his boundaries were too small.The specific provisions for government were not to become effective until
after the lands had been purchased from the Indians and offered for sale;
and actually they were superseded by the provisions of the Ordinance of
1787. They were chiefly significant in allowing for successive stages of
government, and for self-government at every stage. The most striking
feature of the report was the statement of the principles upon which both
the temporary and permanent political structures of these states were to be
based. That they should be subject to Congress and the Articles of
Confederation like their elder sisters, that they should be responsible for
their share of the public debt, that the various governments should be
republican in form — these requirements might have been expected in any
proposal of this sort. Much more notable were the provisions that they
should remain forever a part of
85 Mar. 15, 1784 (Ford, III, 421).
36 The boundaries as they would have been applied within the whole of the
territory are shown on the map of David Hartley, from a manuscript in the
William L. Clements Lib., Ann Arbor, Mich., reproduced by their
permission as an illustration in this volume, facing this page.
the United States, that they should admit to citizenship no person holding a
hereditary title, and that slavery should not exist among them after 1800.
Since these provisions applied to the territory ceded and to be ceded — that
is, to the region south as well as north of the Ohio — Jefferson's ordinance
was designed to prevent the spread of slavery as a legal institution outside
of the original states, and it would have made secession impracticable if not
impossible. Only in the light of tragic history can the wisdom of his
preventive measure be fully appreciated.
But Congress struck out the clauses prohibiting slavery and hereditary
titles. Jefferson reported that the former was lost accidentally by a single
vote, and believed that the latter was dropped because the prohibition was
regarded as unnecessary in that particular region. 87 He was quite sure that
sentiment in Congress was against hereditary titles because he had
perceived strong dislike there for the military Society of the Cincinnati,
which had been initiated the year before and was then designed to be
hereditary. There is no better illustration of his own attitude than the
contemporary judgment he passed on the Society.He himself was not eligible to this organization of veterans, and the
original list of members contained no close friend of his except Monroe.
Opposition to it was greatest among men who had remained civilians in the
war, and of these opponents Jefferson has generally been regarded as the
strongest and most persistent. His reasons were not those of personal pique,
however, as George Washington had good reason to know. The General
was president pro tern, and, sensing the opposition, he asked Jefferson's
opinion of the organization about this time. The former Governor was
temperate and judicious in his reply, but he left no doubt that he disliked
and feared the Society and would have preferred that Washington not lend
his great prestige to it. Also, in calmly stating the objections that were most
frequently voiced against it, he not only gave a classic statement of the
civilians' case against the military; he showed at the same time the social
convictions which dominated his own mind. He was still in the mood of the
Declaration of Independence, after all these years of war, and he now
realized even more fully the implications of his own famous words. 38
37 Jefferson to Madison, Apr. 25, 1784 (Ford, III, 471). A broadside of the
final report, with amendments in Jefferson's hand, is in Ford, III, opp. p.
428. He noted that it was passed Apr. 23, 1784, by a vote of ten states out
of eleven present.
38 The whole matter can be conveniently surveyed by reference to General
Washington's Correspondence Concerning the Society of the Cincinnati
(Baltimore, 1941), ed. by E. E. Hume. This contains Washington's letter to
Jefferson, Apr. 8, 1784, and the latter's classic reply of Apr. 16, 1784 (also
in Ford, III, 464-470), Washington's suggestions for changes, and other
important documents with further references. Jefferson's later accounts of
the Annapolis meeting are in the "Anas" (Ford, I, 157), and a letter to
Martin Van Buren, June 29, 1824 (Ford,
The deepest objection to the Society of the Cincinnati was that it was
contrary to the spirit of American political institutions, for the foundation
on which these were built was "the natural equality of man, the denial of
every preeminence but that annexed to legal office, and particularly the
denial of a preeminence by birth." The danger of oppression by hereditary
groups in America he believed to be still remote, but only the moderation
of Washington, probably, had prevented this revolution from closing, like
most others, in "a subversion of that liberty it was intended to establish."
He had found that the organization was opposed with an "anguish of mind"such as he had never observed before, and was certain it would never be
approved by Congress. It could be made unobjectionable only if modified
almost to the point of annihilation.
It never was rendered unobjectionable to him, but Washington stopped by
Annapolis on his way to the general meeting of the Society in New York in
May, and discussed the matter with him by the light of candles until after
midnight. Furthermore, the modifications which the President soon
recommended, including the abolition of the hereditary provision, showed
the clear mark of this counselor's ideas. Jefferson's own deep respect for
Washington had not wavered, and he retained the conviction that the
General would have dropped the organization altogether if circumstances
had not forced him to accept it in modified form. At this stage Jefferson
viewed it as no partisan. He wrote the General: "I consider the whole
matter as between ourselves alone, having determined to take no active part
in this or anything else which may lead to altercation, or disturb that quiet
and tranquility of mind to which I consign the remaining portion of my
life." 39 He was firm in his political faith, he was outdoing himself in the
effort to be constructive, and he far outstripped his congressional fellows in
the daring of his mind, but his aversion to public controversy had in no way
diminished as the quarrelsome session wore on.
He made no public fuss about the changes Congress made in his ordinance,
but it is likely that he was more disappointed than he admitted. The
unamended report got into one of the Philadelphia papers, and, in a letter to
Francis Hopkinson which he tried to make humorous, he termed this a
"forgery." Beneath his irony, resentment may be detected. The exclusion of
hereditary titles and the abolition of slavery in the West were not within the
level of congressional politics, he said;
X, 311-313). These are not contemporary records, and it should also be
observed that Jefferson's comments on the Society were much less
temperate after he became a more partisan figure, as to Madison, Dec. 28,
1794 (Ford, VI, 517). "Letter of Apr. 16. 1784 (Ford, III, 470).
the delegates had no sympathy with such pettyfogging ideas, and he
himself was regarded as a daring innovator. 40 But, behind the scenes, he
won something of a victory over hereditary titles, and sentiment afterwards
shifted in his direction with respect to slavery. In the Ordinance of 1787
slavery was prohibited, though only in the region northwest of the Ohio.Credit for this historic action has been much disputed, but the date and
scope of Jefferson's proposal are open to no question and its later influence
may be presumed. He himself laid little stress on it afterwards, and his state
of mind in 1784 was certainly not one of self-gratulation. He was operating
in an atmosphere of legislative futility and nothing was adopted as he
proposed it.
His lengthy report on the mode of locating and disposing of western lands,
a companion piece to the ordinance on government, was not debated until
after he had left Congress. 41 His proposals were not accepted and if he
influenced later action on this question he did so chiefly by advocating
orderly survey in advance of sales. He advocated the "geometrical mile,"
subdivided into 10 furlongs, 100 chains, and 1000 paces, on the decimal
principle. 42 He was more successful in his attempt to decimalize the
coinage.
This was not the first time he concerned himself with the disorderly
monetary situation. In 1776 he drafted a report on the value of the various
gold and silver coins current in the states, though this was left lying on the
table. 43 The question of coinage came up again, before he returned to
Congress, and Robert Morris, the superintendent of finance, made a report.
Jefferson could not get hold of this but he did see a sketch of the financier's
plan, and he submitted to Morris the notes which he himself threw together.
He had no hope of action at this session, but he wanted his
recommendations to be available at the next meeting, and he had a
sufficiently good opinion of them to print them later on, with explanations
which he added after he heard from Morris. 44
Jefferson's "Notes on the Establishment of a Money Unit, and of a Coinage
for the United States" proved exceedingly influential, and
40 May 3, 1784 (Burnett, Letters, VII, 511-512). 41 Report made Apr. 30,
1784 (Ford, III, 475-483).
42 To Hopkinson,"May 3, 1784 (Burnett, Letters, VII, 512). In his draft of
an ordinance he specified that the geographical mile should be 6086.4 feet
(Ford, 111,476).
43 Jefferson to Robert Morris, Apr. 26, 1784, in Burnett, Letters, VII, 502
and note; various memoranda and drafts preserved in his papers, such as in
LC, 2:217— 221; Wythe to Jefferson, Nov. 11, 1776, LC, 2:312.♦^Ford, III, 446-457; Jefferson to Robert Morris, Apr. 26, 1784, in
Burnett, Letters, VII, 502-503 These notes were printed in Paris in 1785.
despite the technicality of the subject, they make highly interesting reading.
The unit proposed by him was the Spanish silver dollar, which was already
in wide use and of a convenient size. Morris had proposed a unit which was
the largest common divisor of the penny of every state and was calculated
as the 1440th part of a dollar. Jefferson regarded this as too minute for
practical affairs; he saw no use in valuing a horse worth 80 dollars at
115,200 units. Morris later agreed with him on this point and recommended
a new unit which would have the value of 1000 of the first units and 2 % 6
of a dollar, but Jefferson thought the familiar dollar much to be preferred.
The exact relation between this and gold he regarded as a technical
question, and he pressed no precise ratio.
He did insist on the subdivision of the dollar on the basis of tenths and
hundredths. Morris himself had proposed that the coins be in decimal
proportion to one another, but Jefferson made the argument overwhelming.
"The bulk of mankind are school-boys through life," he said. The
perplexities of money-arithmetic are always great to most people, he
observed, and even mathematical heads welcome the relief of a simpler
process. "Certainly, in all cases where we are free to choose between easy
and difficult modes of operation," he continued, "it is most rational to
choose the easy." 45 He wanted to get rid of pounds, shillings, pence, and
farthings; and at a later time he made vigorous efforts to extend the decimal
idea to weights and measures generally. He fully realized the tyranny of
habit over the human mind, however, and sought to systematize the coinage
in the most practicable way. Thus he not only recommended the adoption
of the familiar dollar; he also proposed that the subdivisions would
coincide as nearly as possible with other well-known coins. The tenth
(dime) which he recommended was comparable with the Spanish bit, the
double tenth was like the Spanish pistareen, and the hundredth would be
nearly enough like existing coppers. There was no close companion to the
half-dollar, but the gold Eagle (ten dollars) was near enough to the half Joe
and the double guinea to be quickly estimated. Anyone desiring
information about the coins in circulation at that time, or about the value of
the pound in the various states, will find plenty of details in the notes of this
extraordinarily observant man.
In the end Congress accepted the decimal system of coinage withoutdispute, adopted the dollar instead of Morris's proposed new unic, and
accepted most of Jefferson's suggestions about other coins. The main
difference between his proposals and those of Morris lay in their more
"Ford, 111,447.
immediate practicability. Here he showed himself to be not merely a
prophetic statesman but also in the best sense of the term an oppor-
There was little or nothing of importance in Congress that he did not
concern himself with. For example, he reported on the arrears of interest on
the national debt and made proposals for current financial operations; he
was no ignoramus on that subject when he confronted Alexander Hamilton
at a later time. 47 Nor did he need any reminders from his historic rival
about the desirability of preserving the Union and giving it visible reality.
No one was more concerned than he, except possibly Secretary Charles
Thomson, lest the government go by default during the inevitable recess of
Congress, and he was the moving force in setting up a committee of states
to preserve a "visible head" when the delegates had scurried home, as they
threatened to do at any time. Early in the session he drafted a report,
defining in detail the powers to be exercised; and, this proving too
elaborate, he presented a briefer one at the end of January. 48 The powers
of this interim committee were necessarily slight; and, following the
Articles of Confederation, the vote of nine members was required for any
action beyond adjournment. The committee of states was a weak
instrument but there was doubt in many minds whether there should be any
instrument at all. It was not created until after Jefferson had left — and,
unhappily, it amounted to nothing, in spite of the efforts of his colleague
Samuel Hardy, its chairman. The representatives of nine states could not be
kept together and there was much quarreling among those who did attend.
Charles Thomson wrote to Jefferson in France that he feared the
"invisibility of a federal head" would have bad effects in Europe. 49
Franklin, after hearing of the bickering, told Jefferson a story of
factionalism in a lighthouse in the English Channel, which was wholly
inaccessible in winter. The two keepers quarreled in the fall, divided into
two parties one above and one below, and did not speak till spring. 50
* An excellent summary of later developments is in C. Doris Hellman,
"Jefferson's Efforts towards the Decimalization of United States Weights
and Measures," Isis, Vol. XVI (Nov. 1931), 266-314. Jefferson followeddevelopments in regard to the coinage with keen interest while he was in
France. The mint was not established until after he became secretary of
state, and it was while he was in that office that he was most active about
weights and measures.
47 Report; Ford, III, 434-442.
48 For the earlier draft, see Ford, III, 388-392; for the one presented Jan.
30, 1784, see III, 392-393.
49 To Jefferson, Oct. 1, 1784, in Burnett, Letters, VII, 598-599. On the
whole matter, see Burnett, Letters, pp. 607-611.
60 Autobiography, Ford, I, 76-77.
It was by joining the inimitable Franklin that Jefferson escaped the petty
squabbles of the representatives of the American states. The change in his
prospects came suddenly, when on May 7 he was elected minister
plenipotentiary to share in the negotiation of treaties of amity and
commerce with European nations. Congress had been talking about this
subject from the beginning of the session. As long ago as December
Jefferson had presented a report on instructions to the ministers, and this
formed the basis for the instructions which were adopted on the day of his
own appointment. 51 John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, and John Jay were
already in Europe, and the southern delegates had been clamoring for the
addition to the commission of two ministers who were familiar with the
commercial needs of their part of the country. Congress had balked at this
but was disposed to add one minister; and it was generally expected that
this would be the delegate who had taken the lead in matters relating to the
peace treaty and foreign affairs. 52 The whole situation was cleared by the
news that John Jay was coming home. Congress immediately elected him
to the long-vacant office of secretary of foreign affairs, chose Jefferson to
replace him in Europe, and adopted the instructions. Unanimity prevailed
in Congress and everybody was pleased. A delegate from New England
described Jefferson as a "sensible, judicious man"; and the Virginians,
reflecting on the benefits of his appointment to the Union, regarded
themselves as compensated for the loss of a very able and amiable
colleague. Monroe, who was going to miss him most of all, summed things
up by saying that foreign affairs were now on as excellent a basis as anyone
could desire. 53Not all of the Virginia leaders at home were pleased, however, and John
Tyler was one who voiced regrets. His comments are the more pertinent
because they show just what sort of public servant Jefferson was thought to
be. "If it is your wish to go abroad," wrote Tyler, "to be sure mine would be
to gratify you, . . . but I know it will be hard to supply your place; for those
gentlemen whose abilities are not despisable, are either too sick and
indolent to make any sacrifice for the public or too poor to give up better
prospects for supporting their families. . . . God send you safe to the
destined port, continue you there in health and happiness, as long as you
choose to stay, and waft
"Ford, III, 355-363, 489-493; Journals, XXVI, 357-362.
62 Elbridge Gerry to Joseph Reed, May 5, 1784 (Burnett, Letters, VII,
515).
58 Journals, XXVI, 355-356. Among various letters referring to the matter
the following in particular may be cited: Jonathan Blanchard to Pres. of
New Hampshire, May 15, 1784 (Burnett, Letters, VII, 529); Va. Delegates
to Gov. of Va., May 13, 1784 (Ibid., VII, 525); Monroe to Gov. of Va, May
14, 1784 (Ibid., VII, 527).
you back to your native country, where you will always be acceptable to
the good and virtuous." M The references to Jefferson's character and his
disinterested patriotism were typical; nobody thought of him as one who
had a political ax to grind or was in any sense a troublemaker. "Since your
departure we have done nothing," wrote Samuel Hardy afterwards.
"Congress have been involved in a scene of confusion greater than you can
conceive." 65 There would have been confusion had he remained there, but
those who knew him well realized that he lived on a higher plane.
The best description of him at this time came from no colleague but from
the young Dutchman, Hogendorp, who had such a low opinion of Congress
in general. On his visit to Annapolis he had fallen quite in love with
Jefferson. "I very soon observed that your conversation bent on serious
objects could be more useful to me than that of any gentlemen in town I
had met with," he said. "Your making no hyperfluous compliments, your
retired life, made you appear a man of business. Even your cool and
reserved behaviour prepossessed me in favour of you. . . . With your
writing [a manuscript copy of the Notes on Virginia] I went on solitarywalks in the wood that looks so beautiful from the little meadow behind
your house. At the same time I became acquainted with your state and with
yourself. I grew fond of your benevolent character, as much as I admired
your extensive learning, your strength of judgment. I pitied your situation,
for I thought you unhappy. Why, I did not know; and though you appeared
insensible to social enjoyments, yet I was perfectly convinced you could
not have been ever so. One evening I talked of love, and then I perceived
that you still could feel, and express your feelings." 58
Jefferson introduced this newly embraced friend to Washington as the best
informed man of his age that he had ever seen. He had no liking for
bickering politicians but he loved young men who were full of enthusiasm,
information, and ideas, and throughout life he exerted on them an
irresistible appeal. In another letter this one said: "The esteem of a man of
your character is a great reward of my endeavors to deserve it, but his
affection makes me happy." After his signature he wrote these words: "K.
means Karel, that is Charles, which signature if you will accept of I shall
employ in the future." He had occasion to employ it again in later months.
67
64 To Jefferson, May 20, 1784 (LC, 10:1706). 55 To Jefferson, May 21,
1784 (LC, 10:1710).
66 G. K. van Hogendorp to Jefferson [May 1784] in LC, 11:1908-1909.
67 To Jefferson, May 22, 1784, in LC, 10:1711. On Hogendorp, see
Burnett, Let-ten, VII, 495 n.
The new Minister did not have time to return to Virginia to see his two
little children. Picking up Patsy in Philadelphia, Jefferson set out for New
York and after six days went on to Boston. He carried with him the
manuscript of his Notes on Virginia, having been disappointed in his hope
of getting them printed inexpensively in Philadelphia. He also bore more
than a score of commissions authorizing him, Adams, and Franklin to
negotiate treaties with as many countries. 68 Since he was to deal mainly
with questions of commerce, he wisely sought to familiarize himself with
the commercial needs of the different localities as he proceeded through the
successive seaport towns. 59 He expected to be far more than a
representative of Southern interests, and he made a special point of
acquainting himself with the needs of New England, which he had nevervisited before.
He was treated with the utmost cordiality. Leaving Providence, he was
attended for a few miles by some of the "principal inhabitants,'' and soon
after he arrived in Boston the General Court of Massachusetts ordered that
a chair be assigned him if he was disposed to attend the meetings of the
House. Also, a special committee was appointed to confer with him and
give him useful information about the State. 60 His time was not wholly
given to business, however; much of it was occupied with the hospitalities
and civilities of Boston, which he experienced in the "highest degree." His
hospitable reception was partly owing to letters of introduction given him
by his recent congressional colleague Elbridge Gerry, and before sailing he
left as a present for Gerry what the latter described as "an elegant travelling
desk." 61 He went as far north as Portsmouth, New Hampshire; and Patsy
congratulated herself on having seen so many states. Her father's score was
identical. He had missed only Georgia and the two Carolinas of the
thirteen.
Jefferson did not regard himself as merely a commissioner of commerce,
and was not so regarded by others. Roger Sherman, delegate to Congress
from Connecticut, had given him a letter to President Ezra Stiles of Yale,
describing him as a gentleman of much philosophical as well as political
knowledge, and predicting that his conversation would
68 More than twenty are preserved, MHS, under the dares May 12-June 3,
1784. Thomson wrote him about them May 16 (in LC, 10:704).
69 Details of his itinerary are shown in Account Book. Further information
about the journey is given in Dumbauld, pp. 57-59, with excellent notes.
60 June 21, 30, 1784; Journal, Mass. House Reps., 1784-1785, pp. 77, 103.
61 Jefferson to Gerry, July 2, 1784; Gerry to Jefferson, Aug. 24, 1784 (J. T.
Austin, Life of Elbridge Gerry, 1, 1828, pp. 452^156). His close personal
contacts with New England, through the Adams family and others, will be
referred to in the early chapters of the next volume of this work.
prove entertaining. So it did. He told the President of Yale about a new
piece of electrical apparatus and about the great bones that had been dug up
on the Ohio, these marvels suffering no diminution in the telling. He sawthe library and apparatus of the College, talked about the state of academic
affairs at William and Mary, and impressed his host as a truly scientific and
learned man, excellent in every way. 62 It is not surprising that he and
Stiles afterwards exchanged long, philosophical letters; and that, a couple
of years later, he was awarded the degree of LL.D. by Yale. This honor
anticipated by two years a similar one from Harvard, but he already had the
degree of D.C.L. from William and Mary. 63 Unlike Franklin, he was
rarely referred to by academic title, but Dr. Jefferson was recognized in
New England no less than in Virginia or Philadelphia as a leading literary
and scientific light.
He arranged with others besides Ezra Stiles to communicate with him about
the wonders of natural history. One of these correspondents, General John
Sullivan of New Hampshire, writing him further about the moose,
expressed a hope which was in many minds — that his success in his new
endeavor might equal the zeal he had always shown in the cause of his
country. 64 Jefferson himself was using the latter term in its more
provincial sense when, on relinquishing his seat in Congress, he wrote to
the Assembly of his own Commonwealth: "I have made the just rights of
my country and the cement of that union in which her happiness and
security is bound up, the leading objects of my conduct." The statement
was correct. He had been a good Virginian and a consistent unionist
throughout his public life. He made a further observation in a final letter to
Madison: "I find the conviction growing strongly that nothing can preserve
our confederacy unless the band of union, their common council, is
strengthened." 65
This serious and highly cultivated gentleman who was so averse to
controversy continued to view the young Republic as a whole and to
advocate the strengthening of the feeble Union, but actually he left his
worst fears of disunion and disorder behind him when he sailed from
Boston on the good ship Ceres on July 5, 1784, at 4 a.m. The contrast
which impressed him first and most in the Old World was not between
European order and American anarchy, but between ancient tyrannies
62 Ezra Stiles, Literary Diary, III, 124-126; Stiles to Jefferson, July 7, 1784
(LC, 11:1755).
63 Stiles to Jefferson, Sept. 13, Dec. 8, 1786 (LC, 24:4177, 26:4487-4488);
Jefferson to Stiles, Dec. 24, 1786 (L. & B., VI, 25). The date of the degree
from William and Mary was Jan. 1783, MHS. President Willard wrote himabout the Harvard degree Sept. 24, 1788; Jefferson to Willard, Mar. 24,
1789 (L. & B., VII, 325).
64 Sullivan to Jefferson, June 22, 1784 (LC, 11:1751-1752).
65 Jefferson to Assembly, May 11, 1784 (LC, 10:1720); to Madison, July
1, 1784 (Ford, III, 502). 7
and the political liberties which his countrymen so generally enjoyed. He
remained more than five years on the vaunted scene of Europe, witnessed
without alarm the beginnings of a revolution that shook the world, and
returned home to be embroiled in more bitter wrangles than he had ever
known before. But he did not anticipate this when he embarked on the
Ceres with his daughter, and sailed pleasantly across calm seas. He was
only forty-one years old, but a distinguished career of patriotic service and
personal achievement already lay behind him, and he thought this almost if
not quite enough. He expected more quiet and greater richness in the new
phase which had begun.
<. J
s s s s s s s_ s
Appendices
I Genealogy
A. The Early JefTersons
B. The Randolphs
1. The Tuckahoe Randolphs
2. The Line of Isham Randolph
C. Children of Peter Jefferson and
Jane Randolph
D. The Wayles FamilyE. Children of Thomas Jefferson and
Martha Wayles
II The Jefferson Estate
A. The Estate of Peter Jefferson
B. Lands and Slaves of Thomas Jefferson
1. Patrimony, 1764-1773
2. Consolidation of the Patrimony,
1774-1782
3. The Wayles Inheritance, 1774-1800
4. Losses from the Enemy, 1781
[^APPENDIX I^|
Genealogy
A. The Early Jeffersons
VARIOUS efforts have been made to trace the line beyond the person
designated in this work as the first Thomas Jefferson (died 1697). Thus
Paul Berghaus has compiled a genealogy (copy at University of Virginia)
in which he connects the Virginia Jeffersons with the West Indies and takes
the name back, through Jeaffreson, to a remote Norman origin. However,
the sources seem too scanty and unauthentic to warrant such conclusions.
The earliest dependable sources are the unpublished records of Henrico
County in the Virginia State Library. My attention was first called to these
by Miss Maude H. Woodfin of Westhampton College, who generously
made available her extensive notes on the early Jeffersons before I had an
opportunity to examine the materials in person. I have not succeeded in
going beyond her in this field and have been able to use only a small
portion of the many items she collected. For helpful clues I am also deeply
indebted to Mr. Edgar C. Hickish of Portsmouth, Va., whose unpublishedstudy of Peter Jefferson I was privileged to examine in 1941, along with a
valuable map drawn by him which shows land grants. A fresh and
painstaking investigation was made by Marie Kimball who utilized her
findingsln her valuable study, Jefferson: The Road to Glory (1943).
The net result of all these inquiries, including my own, is to show that the
early Jeffersons were rather more prosperous and prominent than has
commonly been supposed. In both the unpublished work of Mr. Hickish
and the published study of Mrs. Kimball, however, it seems to me that the
reaction has been carried a little too far. The financial status of Thomas
Jefferson I was modest, and though there are numerous references to him in
the county records these are to minor matters. The most important fresh
information is that concerning the official position of Thomas Jefferson II,
for this identifies him clearly with the lesser gentry.
The following chart outlines the genealogical story of the early Jef-fersons
as far as it relates to the subject of this work.
Thomas Jefferson I (d. 1697)» m. Mary Branch 2
Thomas Jefferson II (c. 1677-1731) 3 Martha Jefferson m. Mary Field (d.
Aug. 13,1715) 4 m. Winn
I \ i i i I
Judith 6 Thomas Field Peter Mary Martha
(b. Aug. 30,1698) (Sept. 24,1700- (Mar. 6,1702- (Feb. 29,1707/08- (b.
1709 (b. after
m. Farrar Feb. 14,1723) Feb. 10, 1765) Aug. 17, 1757) or later) 1709)
m. Jane Randolph m. Thomas Turpin
Thomas Jefferson (1743-1826)
1 Will proved Oct. 1697; Henrico Order Book, 1694-1701, p. 169.
Inventory, Va. Mag., I, 208-212.
2 Afterwards married Joseph Mattocks, Charles City County. Marriage
contract, Nov. 16, 1700; license, Nov. 17, 1700; Henrico County Deeds,etc., 1697-1704, p. 213; Stanard, Extracts, p. 185.
8 Will dated Mar. 15, 1725, proved April, 1731; Henrico County,
Miscellaneous Court Records, 1650-1807, p. 849.
4 Daughter of Major Peter Field and his wife Judith, widow of Henry
Randolph and daughter of Henry Soane; Va. Mag., XXIII, 173 n. Date of
license to marry Thomas Jefferson II, Oct. 20, 1697, date of death from
Tyler's Mag., VII, 121. The evidence pointing to the probable remarriage of
Thomas Jefferson II is as follows. In 1721, a Thomas Jefferson of Henrico
County acknowledged a deed and his wife Ailce (Alice?) relinquished her
dower rights to the land conveyed. (Henrico Minutes, 1719-1724, p. 116.)
Since there was a similar transaction two years later (Ibid., p. 276), the
reference was not to the Captain's son of the same name, who was then
dead. No wife is mentioned in Captain Jefferson's will, drawn in 1725. The
best guess is that he did remarry between 1715 and 1721 and that he was
again a widower in 1725; but we cannot be absolutely sure that there was
not still another Thomas Jefferson in Henrico County.
5 Birth dates for the children, from Judith to Peter from data in an old
Bible, Tyler's Mag., VII, 121-122. Mary and Martha are mentioned in their
father's will of 1725 as then being under sixteen; the latter, about whom I
have no further information, was to be cared for by her aunt, Martha Winn.
The name of Mary, who married Thomas Turpin, appears in several places,
as in Tivo Unpublished Letters from Thomas Jefferson to His Relatives the
Turpins, ed. by Marie Dickore (Oxford, Ohio, 1941).
APPENDIX I
B. The Randolphs l
1. THE TUCKAHOE RANDOLPHS 2
Thomas of Tuckahoe (c. 1683-1729)
Second son of William of Turkey Island (c. 1651-1711) and Mary Isham
m. Judith Fleming
IWilliam of Tuckahoe (c. 1712-1745) m. Maria Judith Page (d. before Mar.
2, 1742)
I
Judith
m. William Stith
(an executor of will
of William of Tuckahoe)
Mary m. James Keith (grandparents of John Marshall)
Judith (c. 1736-?) m. Edmund Berkeley
Mary (c. 1738-?) Thomas Mann (1741-1793) m. Tarlton Fleming
m. (1) Anne, d. of Archibald Cary m. (2) Gabriella Harvie
I I
numerous children, numerous children
including Thomas Mann (1768-1828) m. (1790) Martha, daughter of
Thomas Jefferson
1 No attempt is made here to trace the vast ramifications of the genealogy
of the Randolphs. On the family in general, see W. C. Bruce, John
Randolph of Roanoke (1922), I, 9-17; W. G. Stanard in W. & M., 1 ser.,
VII, 122-124, 195-197; VIII, 119-122; R. I. Randolph, Randolphs of
Virginia (1931); H. J. Eckenrode, The Randolphs. The Story of a Virginia
Family (1946).
2 Chart is based on works cited for the family as a whole, and, in addition:
Will of William of Tuckahoe, Goochland County Will & Deed Book, No.
5, p. 73, attested copy UVA; Va. Mag., XXXII, 390-395, containing three
photographs of Tuckahoe; J. R. Anderson, Ibid., XLV, 55-86, and Annual
Report of the Monti-cello Asso., 1936, pp. 9-35. Further references on
Tuckahoe are T. T. Waterman, Mansions of Virginia (1945), pp. 85-92; R.
A. Lancaster, Jr., Historic Va. Homes and Churches (1915), pp. 168-173;Thomas Anburey, Travels through the Interior Farts of America (1791), II,
318-319.
APPENDIX I
429
2. THE LINE OF ISHAM RANDOLPH
Isham Randolph of Dungeness (c. 1685-1742) l Third son of William of
Turkey Island (c. 1651-1711) and Mary Isham
Jane (1720-1776) m. Peter Jefferson
Thomas Jefferson (1743-1826)
Mary m. Charles Lewis
I
Numerous other children
Charles Lilburne Lewis
m. Lucy (1769),
sister of Thomas Jefferson
Anne Jefferson Lewis
m. Randolph (1780),
brother of Thomas Jefferson
1 For Isham's inheritance from his father in what afterwards became
Goochland County, see Henrico Records, 1710-1714, Pt. I, pp. 215-218.
The first grant to him there appears to have been for 1200 acres on May 6,
1730, and the largest, for 3000, on May 4, 1734; see Council Journals,
Colonial Va., IV, 218, lv, 323, 349; other grants and patents are on pp. 313,
409. Marie Kimball in The Road to Glory, p. 308, note 31, says that
between 1730 and 1736 he patented 8800 acres adjoining his original
inheritance in Goochland. In my opinion the total of Isham Randolph'sholdings in Goochland was smaller than this estimate, but he was
unquestionably a large landholder in the county and he received extensive
grants elsewhere, whether or not all of these were perfected.
Further details on his service as adjutant general and the surrounding
circumstances are as follows: Governor Gooch was present at the meeting
of the Council on Aug. 28, 1740, but did not attend again until Oct. 15,
1741. Isham's service as chief military officer, accordingly, occurred
between these two dates. On Gooch's participation in the expedition see W.
& M., 1 ser., XVI, 18; Va. Mag., XXX, 1-20, 390-391. Capt. Lawrence
Washington was the ranking Virginia officer under Gooch, and afterwards
named his place Mount Vernon for the commander of the naval forces.
APPENDIX I
C. Children of Peter Jefferson (Feb. 29,1707/08-Aug. 17, 1757) and Jane
Randolph {February, 1720-Mar. 31,1776) 1
1 Based on entries in Peter Jefferson's prayer book, in handwriting of
Thomas Jefferson (reproduced by Randall, I, 17), with supplementary
information and minor corrections from other sources. Some of the dates of
death are unknown.
2 The date of the death of Elizabeth Jefferson is taken from Jefferson's
Account Book, Mar. 1, 1774, where he says: "My sister Elizabeth was
found last Thursday being Feb. 24." The funeral service was performed on
Mar. 7. This contemporary record takes precedence over the date, Jan. 1,
1773, based on a later record. Jefferson probably wrote some of the dates in
the prayer book from memory, but he was more than a year off in this
instance.
3 Martha's husband, Dabney Carr, died on May 16, 1773. His
circumstances appeared modest to Jefferson when he wrote John Page on
Feb. 21, 1770 (Ford, I, 373); but according to W. G. Stanard (Va. Mag., II,
22-28) the inventory of his estate showed that he was a prosperous man at
the time of his death, when his home appears to have been in Goochland.
On Dec. 1 Jefferson paid Dr. Gilmer a substantial bill on account of the
estate, to which he was himself indebted because of two substantial loans
from his friend. (See account with the estate in his Fee Book.) I have beenunable to substantiate the traditional account of the death of Dabney Carr
and of subsequent events as given by Randall, I, 83-84. It is entirely
possible that the first burial was at Shadwell, and that the remains were
reinterred. There is no doubt that the grubbing in the graveyard, described
in Garden Book, May 22, 1773, was on account of Dabney Carr or that he
was the first person buried there. He left six children, three boys and three
girls. I know of no precise evidence that they were living at Monticello
until somewhat before Mrs. Jefferson's death, and it seems unlikely that
room could have been found for them in 1773. The Carrs probably came to
live at Monticello by 1781. In a letter to Overton Carr on Mar. 16, 1782
(LC, 8:1223-1224), Jefferson says that he had been teaching Peter for
upwards of a twelvemonth. In this letter he also implied that his sister had
managed the estate, greatly aided by Sam Carr during his lifetime (see also
Domestic Life, p. 270). I have found no account of his own as executor.
His account with the estate in his Fee Book balanced various payments
made by him with his own debt to Carr. In 1782, Jefferson wanted Overton
Carr to assume the education of the second son, Sam, and apparently he
did. On his own departure for France in 1784, he asked James Madison to
serve as Peter's guardian. (See Elizabeth D. Coleman, "Peter Carr of Carr's-
Brook, 1770-1815," Papers Albemarle County Hist. Soc, IV (1944), pp.
5-23.)
4 See Thomas Jefferson and His Unknown Brother Randolph, Introduction
by Bernard Mayo (Charlottesville, 1942).
D. The Wayles Family 1
John Wayles (Jan. 31, 1715-May 28, 1773), born in Lancaster, England;
married on May 3, 1746, Martha Eppes.
Martha Eppes (Apr. 10, 1721-Nov. 5, 1748), born at Bermuda Hundred,
was the daughter of Col. Francis Eppes. 2 At the time of her marriage to
John Wayles she was a widow. Jefferson gives the name of her first
husband as Llewellin Epes, but there is doubt about it and it is unimportant
here. She bore John Wayles twins, who did not survive. She then bore
Martha, and died very soon thereafter.
Martha Wayles (Oct. 19/30, 1748-Sept. 6, 1782) married, on November 20,
1766, Bathurst Skelton (June, 1744-Sept. 30, 1768), who was the son of
James and Jane Meriwether Skelton and the younger brother of ReubenSkelton. 3 She bore him, on November 7, 1767, a son John who died on
June 10, 1771, according to Jefferson's memorandum. 4 Martha, on January
1, 1772, married Thomas Jefferson.
John Wayles, after the death of Martha's mother, married as his second
wife Miss Cocke, according to Jefferson's memorandum. She bore him one
daughter who died and three who survived him: Elizabeth, Tabitha, and
Anne.
Elizabeth Wayles (b. February 24, 1752) married Francis Eppes, often said
to have been the brother of the first wife of John Wayles, but apparently her
nephew. 5 This marriage probably preceded that of Jefferson; for the
codicil to the will of John Wayles, Feb. 12, 1773, shows that by that date
this couple had two children, Richard and John Wayles Eppes (Apr. 1772-
Sept. 15, 1823). The latter married Mary or Maria Jefferson on October 13,
1797. Francis and Elizabeth Eppes may have been living at the Forest at the
time of Jefferson's marriage, and they almost certainly were for some years
after the death of John
1 This account is based largely on a memorandum of Jefferson, copied in a
notebook in the Edgehill Randolph Papers, UVA, which appears to be
generally-accurate as far as it goes. Supplementary items have been gained
from Tyler's Mag., VI, 265-270, containing the will of John Wayles, and
from other sources as indicated by the notes. In this connection, Randall, I,
62-63, is rather inaccurate. See also Appendix II, B, 3, on the Wayles
Inheritance.
2 Va. Mag., Ill, 395; Burgesses, Journals, 1113-1116, p. 83.
8 W. & M., 1 ser., XII, 61-42; 2 ser., IX, 209-213, signature of Bathurst
Skelton opp. p. 216.
4 The day may be inexact. Jefferson was at the Forest on June 9, but not on
June 10, and he did not return immediately, as might have been expected.
There is no record that the child was ever at Monticello.
5 Va. Mag., Ill, 393-396.
Wayles, for Jefferson visited them there. Later they lived at Epping-ton in
Chesterfield County.Tabitha Wayles (b. Nov. 10, 1753) may be presumed to have married
Robert Skipwith shortly before Jefferson's marriage. Jefferson, writing to
him on August 3, 1771, referred to "our dear Tibby," and Skipwith spoke
of Martha as "my sister Skelton." 6 In the codicil to his will, dated Feb. 12,
1773, John Wayles left him ^250, but he did not sign the notices of lands to
be sold and does not appear to have been an executor like the other sons-in-
law.
Anne Wayles (b. Aug. 26, 1756) married Col. Henry Skipwith of
Cumberland County on July 7, 1773. 7 He was one of the executors, with
Francis Eppes and Jefferson, and engaged in certain land transactions with
the latter. Jefferson's relations with him, however, were never so intimate as
with Francis Eppes.
John Wayles, following the death of his second wife, married in January,
1760, Elizabeth Lomax, the widow of Reuben Skelton, elder brother of
Bathurst. 8 She died on Feb. 10, 1761, without issue.
6 Ford, I, 399; to Jefferson, Sept. 20, 1771, MHS.
7 Va. Mag., XXIII, 87.
8 W. & M., 1 ser., IV, 119; 2 ser., VII, 103.
APPENDIX I
E. Children of Thomas Jefferson 1 and Martha Wayles {Oct. 19/30,1748-
SepL 6,1782)
1 This chart is based chiefly on the register in Jefferson's prayer book in his
own handwriting, reproduced by Randall, I, 383, and on items in Jefferson's
Account Book; see also Tyler's Mag., VI, 267.
2 From his Account Book, Jefferson is shown to have been at Monticello in
September, 1775, until the 25th, when he set out for Philadelphia, but he
does not refer to the death of this child.
8 In his Account Book, Jefferson refers on both Apr. 3 and June 4, 1777, to
"our son," but gives the child no name.
4 Numerous references to Mary Jefferson will be given hereafter.6 Name not given in prayer book, but in reference to death; Account Book,
Apr. 15, 1781.
6 Reference to birth in Account Book.
[^APPENDIX II^|
The Jefferson Estate
A. The Estate of Peter Jefferson
IT seems impossible to determine the exact amount of land that Peter
Jefferson acquired and held in the Province before his death, and it would
certainly be unsafe to add up the acres mentioned in the various grants
made to him by the Council. In his case, as in others, there was a
considerable degree of overlapping and duplication, and certain of these
grants appear never to have been followed by an actual patent. Permission
to survey large tracts in outlying districts was often obtained by planters in
a spirit of speculation, and in many instances, perhaps in most instances,
formal title was never acquired. 1 To cite an example, it is exceedingly
doubtful if one of the largest grants to Peter Jefferson of which we have
record was ever perfected. This was made to him, William Randolph, and
four others for 50,000 acres, "beginning at a place called the Crab Orchard
... on the head Springs of Sher-rando [Shenandoah] River & runing [sic]
South Westerly between the Blue Ridge & third Ridge." 2
The safest procedure is to start, not with the lands granted, but with those
known to have been and to have remained in his possession. The latter
tracts are not listed specifically in either his will or the inventory afterwards
filed with it. The available records of Thomas Jefferson, however, are more
detailed. Thus, in his Farm Book he gives his land roll for 1794, with
annotations showing the dates of acquisition of the
1 For valuable information about the granting and patenting of lands during
this period, I am indebted to Manning C. Voorhis, whose doctoral
dissertation at the University of Virginia, "The Land Grant Policy of
Colonial Virginia, 1607-1774," I have been privileged to examine, and to
Prof. T. P. Abernethy of that institution, under whose direction the study
was made. For going over this Appendix, I am indebted to Prof. Edwin M.
Betts, who is now editing Thomas Jefferson's Farm Book, and Charles VV.Watts, who has made a careful study of lands in colonial Albemarle. My
figures tally closely with theirs, and our general conclusions are essentially
the same.
different tracts actually held by him; 3 and in his Fee Book, under the
heading "Personal Estate in Account with Real Estate," he records his land
transactions, 1764-1779. 4 Since he inherited all of his father's lands in the
Rivanna district and appears to have sold none of them, it may be assumed
with considerable confidence that his father acquired no tract there, or at
least kept none, which he did not list. For supplementary information we
can turn to such contemporary records of grants and patents as exist. 5
On his land roll, Thomas Jefferson shows no tract that was acquired before
July 19, 1735, when 1000 acres, including the later Monticello site, were
patented. 6 On June 14, 1734, the Council had granted Peter permission "to
have three Surveys lying on the North Side of North River" [Rivanna],
beginning at the Secretary's Ford and running down the river and back to
the Secretary's line. 7 The wording is loose and the acreage is not specified.
When he first came into possession, however, Peter did not have enough
land north of the river for a homesite, and on November 1, 1734, he was
authorized to patent 1200 acres, in three surveys, on the south side. 8
Presumably, this was the tract that he actually patented on July 19, 1735,
despite the slight difference in acreage; and Thomas Jefferson appears to
have been correct in his belief that the Monticello tract was the first
acquired.
The next transaction was the famous one with William Randolph for 200
acres for a homesite. 9 This was completed on May 16, 1741, by the
addition of 200 acres and the payment of ,£50, current money of Virginia.
10 Meanwhile, Peter had acquired a little tract of 150 acres south of the
river known as Portobello. 11 He received other grants elsewhere before
his son was born, but the strong presumption is that he had in the Rivanna
district in April 1743 only the Monticello, Shadwell, and Portobello tracts,
including from 1550 to 1750 acres.
After his return to Shadwell from Tuckahoe Peter rounded out the Rivanna
estate which his elder son inherited, and created the comparable estate on
the Fluvanna which ultimately went to the younger. In connection with the
former, he purchased 650 acres at Pantops, north of the river, and patented
150 at Tufton, south of it. 12 He also acquired3 MHS, photostat UVA; reproduced in Randall, II, 237-238. 4 HEH,
photostat UVA.
5 Marie Kimball, Road to Glory, pp. 309-311, gives a documented list of
entries, prepared after painstaking investigation of many sources. This is
most helpful, though it gives the impression that Peter held more land than,
in my opinion, he actually did hold.
6 The date checks precisely with Va. State Land Office Patents, 16, 1735.
7 Council Journals, Colonial Va., IV, 330. s Ibid., IV, 340.
9 May 18, 1736, W. & M., 1 ser., V, 112.
10 .Goochland County Deed Book, No. 3, Pt. 2, p. 535. The original deed
has generally been described without reference to its sequel.
11 Patented Sept. 16, 1740; Farm Book.
12 Farm Book. Pantops transaction undated; Tufton patented Sept. 10,
1755.
a tract which was identified on his son's land roll as "Pouncey's" and which,
even at a much later time, was valued mostly for its timber. Peter devised
100 acres of this, on Carrol's Creek, to James Spears (Speirs, according to
Thomas), but his son afterwards repurchased this. Thus the Rivanna estate
included the following tracts:
The Fluvanna estate may not have been quite as large as this, though it was
doubtless equally or more productive. In 1754 Peter procured south of the
river (still in Albemarle County) a tract of 2050 acres, 500 by purchase and
the rest by virtue of an order of Council. 13 With this he devised in his will
a small body of land on the Hardware River called Limestone, but in the
course of time this came into the possession of Thomas, rather than
Randolph, under unknown circumstances. The disposition of the houses
opposite the courthouse near the ferry landing which Peter owned and
rented to Richard Murray, ordinary keeper, is uncertain. 14 At all events,
the Snowden tract of 2050 acres represented the bulk of the Fluvanna
estate.
Judging from the records of Thomas's land transactions and his later landrolls, the bulk of his additional landed inheritance as residuary legatee was
also in Albemarle, as constituted at the time of his father's death. The Fine
Creek property, which was in Cumberland County by 1764, appears to
have gone to him, for an incomplete entry of that year suggests that he
expected to sell it, though apparently he did not. He also inherited land in
Bedford County, for he sold some of it, but the description of the important
holdings that he had afterwards at Poplar Forest tallies, not with his
inheritance, but with his wife's. The best guess is that the residual estate
amounted to approximately as many acres as the Rivanna holdings; and
that, apart from speculative claims of which no advantage seems to have
been taken, Peter Jefferson at the time of his death held approximately 7500
acres of land, much the larger part of which was in Albemarle. 15 Such
holdings as he had elsewhere turned out afterwards to be unimportant.
A few details follow about the executors of Peter Jefferson's will and the
administration of his estate.
18 Albemarle County, Surveyor's Book No. 1, sect. 1, p. 293; undated, but
flanked by entries for that year. See also his will.
14 John Harvie's Account Book, HEH, pp. 12, 40.
15 In 1757, John Harvie as executor paid quitrents on 4375 acres in the
County, but the total holdings appear to have been considerably larger.
John Harvie of Belmont, the active executor until Thomas Jefferson
attained his majority, died in 1767. 16 Colonel Peter Randolph, who had
been associated with Peter Jefferson as an executor of William Randolph,
was a member of the Council. Thomas consulted him before going to
William and Mary; he also died in 1767. Thomas Turpin, husband of Mary
Jefferson, and brother-in-law of Peter, had engaged with the latter in
surveying in Albemarle and elsewhere, and in various land transactions. He
was one of the first magistrates of Cumberland County. 17 John Nicholas,
brothe. of Robert Carter Nicholas, married the daughter of Joshua Fry. He
was the clerk of Albemarle, 1750-1792, and was succeeded by his son
John. 18
The surviving accounts of John Harvie are in three supplementary
segments which overlap to some degree. They can be consulted
conveniently at the University of Virginia, where copies or photostats of allof them have been assembled.
"1760, Dr. The Estate of Colo. Peter Jefferson deced in acco. with John
Harvie one of the Executors & a Guardian of the orphans." 19 This
contains the best summary to its date.
"The Estate of Peter Jefferson to John Harvie as Settled with the Court" 20
(Albemarle County, 1760).
"Account Book of John Harvie as executor of Peter Jefferson, 1757-1765"
21 (Albemarle County). This has the largest number of individual accounts
and the fullest details.
From these records we learn that in 1759 there were three overseers: Martin
Dawson (Snowden), Joseph Dawson, and Fred Gilliam. The last of these
produced only c. 5000 lbs. of tobacco, but he appears to have been at
Shadwell, where much corn was grown. There was also a steward, John
Moore, 1758-1760 and possibly longer, who was paid at the rate of ,£20 a
year. The profit from the water-mill in 1758 was ,£41, and from the tobacco
crop in 1759 was ^ 188. The credit balance at the end of three years was
over £300. The names of other overseers are given at one time or another,
but they appear never to have numbered more than three, while there were
only two in some years. The best guess is that there were three farms. The
account of the surveyor's office is rendered in detail.
The accounts of Dr. Thomas Walker with the estate, chiefly 1757-1765, are
in the papers of the former, W. C. Rives Collection, Library of Congress
(permission of Mrs. Philip M. Rhinelander, Washington, D. C). These are
most interesting as showing visits to Peter Jefferson
16 Woods, Albemarle, p. 224; Va. Mag., XXVI, 318.
17 Alexander Brown, The Cabells and Their Kin (1895), p. 50.
18 Woods, Albemarle, p. 289; on the latter, who became a bitter Federalist,
see M J.Dauer, "The Two John Nicholases," Am. Hist. Rev., Jan. 1940, pp.
338-353.
19 Will Book No. 2, Albemarle County, pp. 83-87, typewritten copy, UVA.
20 MHS, photostat UVA. 21 HEH, photostat UVA,during his last illness, and payments made on Thomas Jefferson's account
at William and Alary.
B. Lands and Slaves of Thomas Jefferson
1. patrimony, 1764-1773
As shown in the previous section, Thomas Jefferson inherited from his
father some 2650 acres of land on the Rivanna, and approximately as many
more elsewhere. 22 He did not come into legal possession of the Shad well
tract until after his mother's death in 1776, but from 1765 he farmed it,
renting from her certain slaves (five, to begin with) at a specified rate and
crediting her at a given rate with the board of the children. 23 He inherited
the water-mill immediately that he came of age, and this probably
continued to be profitable until 1771, when it was swept away in the "great
fresh." His later efforts to rebuild it caused him great trouble and expense
but these need not concern us here. 24
Except for his assumption of responsibility for the Shadwell farm, his land
transactions prior to his marriage on January 1, 1772, were on the negative
side, for he divested himself of more acres than he acquired. Probably
because he needed cash, he sold 700 acres of land in Amherst County in the
year that he became twenty-one, receiving a total of ,£190 in two
transactions. 25 Apparently he did not sell to John Scott the Fine Creek
property, for he left both the acreage and the selling price blank in his
entry, and he sent his family there at least once during the Revolution, but
he did not list it on later land rolls. In September, 1771, he sold and bought
lands in Bedford County, one transaction balancing the other from the
monetary point of view. From this time forward, his interests centered in
Monticello, and not until his wife came into her inheritance in 1774 did he
make any important deals in land. He did some buying in 1773, acquiring a
lot in Richmond and 300 acres in Bedford, but the latter he did not long
keep. During this year, also, he was granted leave to survey 1000 acres in
the Southwest Mountains. 26 Judging from the description, this land
adjoined his own and that of Thomas Mann Randolph north of the Rivanna,
but it corresponds to nothing on his later land roll except possibly an
unnamed tract of 730 acres, most of which was surveyed for him at a date
not given. Presumably it was woodland that ran up the mountain-side. Later
in 1773 he entered into a deal with Augustine Claiborne, whereby
22 This total considerably exceeds the estimate of T. J. Randolph that hisgrandfather got 1900 acres; Randall, III, 675.
23 Account with Jane Randolph Jefferson, Fee Book, HEH, photostat
UVA.
24 The fullest account of the mill that I have seen is in LC, 232:42029,
"Grounds for Estimating the Value of the Shadwell Mills," etc. Another
good reference is LC, 211:37573, dated Aug. 17, 1817.
""Personal Estate in Account with Real Estate," 1764-1779, in Fee Book.
26 Mar. 11, 1773, Council Journals, Colonial Va. (Photostat, UVA).
he was to have a share, estimated by him as at least 10,000 acres, of a tract
on Little River in Augusta County which had been granted in 1750; but I
have found no record of this beyond a statement in his Account Book on
October 29, 1773.
By his father's will, Thomas inherited at least twenty slaves. His
transactions in slaves he recorded in his personal account with real estate in
his Fee Book, but prior to his marriage these were unimportant. He
continued to hire from his mother certain slaves who worked on the
Shadwell lands, and on September 29, 1773, she conveyed these to him
along with others of whom she retained the use during her lifetime. They
came to eleven altogether, and the transfer was made because of large sums
of money which he had advanced and she had no means of repaying. 27
Earlier in the same year, and almost exactly a year after his marriage he had
purchased three slaves from the executor of James Skelton. In effect the
deal was made on behalf of his wife.
Jefferson's first entry about his "proper" slaves in his Farm Book (January
14, 1774) shows that he then had forty-one, plus eleven he had title to from
his mother. Of these, twenty were laborers in the ground and four were
discharged from labor because of age or infirmity.
2. CONSOLIDATION OF THE PATRIMONY, 1774—1782
So far as his own lands were concerned, as distinguished from those he
acquired on behalf of his wife, Jefferson's transactions during the
Revolution consisted of ridding himself of more distant properties and
consolidating his holdings in Albemarle. In the years 1775 and 1776 hesold approximately 1300 acres, 400 on Bold Branch in Albemarle and
nearly 900 on Tomahawk and Rockcastle Creeks in Bedford and Amherst.
The latter property included the lands bought in Bedford in 1771 and 1773
and, judging by the selling price, it was valuable. Outside of Albemarle, he
made one acquisition of interest. On July 5, 1774, he patented 157 acres in
Rockbridge County which included Natural Bridge. 28
His purchases in the home neighborhood aggregated about 1500 acres. In
1774 or 1775 he acquired the tract of 819 acres which he afterwards
described as Lego. 2 * In 1777 he bought 169% acres at a high price and
added them to the farm at Pantops, also north of the river. 30 In the same
year he acquired from his neighbor, Colonel Edward Carter, nearly 500
acres on High Mountain (Montalto), adjoining Monticello.
27 Photostat of Indenture at UVA; references also in Farm Book.
28 Land Roll of 1794 in Farm Book, Randall, II, 238. Plat of survey MHS,
I, 30; photostat UVA.
29 In his Fee Book he dates the purchase "]an. 1775," but in his Farm Book
he assigns four slaves to Lego in 1774. His own survey of the fields there,,
made in 1794, is reproduced in Garden Book, Plate XV.
30 Fee Book, Aug. 7, 1777. The price was £1254*
This he doubtless intended to leave in its wooded state. In 1782 he was
assessed for 4125 acres in Albemarle, and probably had somewhat more.
By 1794, when he gave the first full land roll that I have seen, he had added
about 150 acres to the Monticello and Montalto properties, but he regarded
only 500-600 acres as arable. 31
He began his Farm Book in 1774, and odd items about crops and overseers
appear in his personal records even earlier. 32 But his interest in agriculture
was greatest after his retirement in 1794, and long after that he denied ever
having given minute attention to farming. 33 His occupations forbade it, he
said. We may assume, therefore, that he was unable to give to his
properties very close personal attention at this time.
He was not the largest landowner in Albemarle. In 1782, Edward Carter
was assessed for 9700 acres. He was followed by the estate of RobertCarter Nicholas with 7500 acres, Thomas Walker with 6050, and John
Coles with 5000. Jefferson stood fifth on the list, but he was above John
Walker, who was assessed for 3000 acres. 34 His patrimony, which he had
maintained in effect though not precisely in its original form, made him a
substantial landowner but not a great one by Virginia standards. However,
the lands which his wife inherited and which lay outside of Albemarle
doubled his holdings, as he said. Through this inheritance he became,
relatively, an even larger owner of slaves. In his own county in 1782, only
Edward Carter had more than he.
3. THE WAYLES INHERITANCE, 177^1—1800
John Wayles died on May 28, 1773, and his large estate was divided early
in 1774. Jefferson was one of the executors. 35 It is not clear on just what
basis the division was made. So far as Jefferson's wife was concerned,
matters were complicated by the fact that a settlement with respect to her
had been made previously by her father and mother; and all of the heirs
were affected by the fact that John Wayles also transmitted a heavy debt.
We need not go into all the ramifications of complicated transactions,
however, in order to ascertain approximately what Jefferson acquired on
behalf of Martha. Altogether, her inheritance consisted of 135 slaves and
more than 11,000 acres of land, along with her share of the debt. In order to
cover the latter, Jefferson shortly sold approximately half of the land,
retaining Poplar Forest, Elk Island,
81 To Samuel Biddle, Dec. 12, 1792, Papers, MHS, pp. 43-45.
82 Such, for example, as an estimate of the tobacco crop at Monticello,
July 31, 1769, cited in Garden Book, p. 17; and "Hints for Contracts with
Overseers," Account Book, 1773, entry following that of Aug. 4.
33 To T. M. Randolph, Jan. 31, 1809, Papers, MHS, p. 134.
84 Land Tax Book, Albemarle, 1782-1799, Auditor's Office of Va., X, at
Va. State Lib.
85 For the will, see Tyler's Mag., VI, 268-270; for advertisements of land
to be sold, July 15, Sept. 16, 1773, see Ford, I, 417.
and Elkhill. 36 As we shall see, however, he afterwards had to provide forthe debt all over again.
Elk Island in the James (330 acres), which Thomas and Martha acquired,
was connected with the estate of Bathurst Skelton and appears not to have
entered into the division. 37 Jefferson wanted to join this as a plantation
unit with Elkhill (266 acres) on the mainland; and to effect this purpose he
made what amounted to a swap of certain lands in Cumberland for Elkhill.
38 He also sold most of the other inherited lands of hers in the latter
county. These Cumberland lands, however, had belonged originally to
Martha's grandfather, Francis Eppes, and were entailed. Accordingly,
Thomas Jefferson and Martha his wife petitioned the House of Burgesses to
dock the entail on 2400 acres in Cumberland and to settle lands of the same
value in Goochland, and this request was granted. 39 Here is one instance
of personal difficulties which Jefferson faced in connection with entailed
property, before he himself effected a revision of the law.
According to one of his estimates, the Poplar Forest property in Bedford
consisted of 4819 acres when John Wayles died. As listed in his own land
roll in 1794, it comprised about 200 acres less, though all of his lands in
Bedford and Campbell counties then added up to about 5100 acres. Despite
the fact that his father had once had lands in the Poplar Forest
neighborhood, this favorite property of his must be credited to the Wayles
inheritance. He made a trip there on September 8, 1773, which appears to
have been his first. 40
Apart from the swap by which he gained Elkhill, Jefferson's early sales
from the Wayles lands were as follows:
1774, Jan. 26. To Henry Skipwith, 1200 acres, Cumberland ,£2000
1775, Sept. 29. To James Gatewood, 2000 acres, Bedford ,£1000
(possibly a part in Amherst)
1778, June. To James and Gatewood, 1850 acres on
Fluvanna and Judith's Creek ,£2836 4-
5050 acres £5836 4-
These sales were made despite his characteristic reluctance to part with
land. "Of all things it is that of which I am most tenacious," he said later.41 By that time he knew that he had gained nothing by parting with these
acres.
Most if not all of the Wayles debt which Jefferson assumed was to
36 His transactions to 1779 are recorded in his Fee Book, under "Personal
Estate in Account with Real Estate"; several estimates about the Wayles
lands are in his Account Book, 1773; and the slaves are listed in his Farm
Book, in the year 1774.
37 Fee Book, Account with the Estate of Bathurst Skelton; will of Skelton,
Tyler's Mag., VI, 268; Jefferson's Account Book, 1773.
88 Transactions of Jan. 14, 26, 1774, with Henry Skipwith.
39 Burgesses, Journals, 1113-1116, pp. 83-84, May 9, 20, 1774.
40 Garden Book, p. 42.
41 To Col. Harvie, Feb. 22, 1796, MHS.
William Jones (later Farrell & Jones) of Bristol. Writing Jones a decade
after he made these sales, Jefferson said: "I offered the bonds of the
purchasers to your agent Mr. Evans, if he would acquit me, and accept of
the purchasers as debtors in my place. . . . These debts, being turned over to
you, would have been saved to you by the treaty of peace, but he declined
it." 42 Failing in this effort to relieve himself of Mr. Jones, he made
another. When he himself was paid in paper money two or three years after
the lands were sold, he deposited "the identical money" in the treasury of
the State, which then stood engaged, by the loan-office provisions of the
bill he himself had drawn, to pay the British creditors after the war. This
money was used in the conduct of the war, he said; he might have said that
it went down the rathole. 43 It became all too clear that the State could not
meet these obligations in hard money, and he recognized that his personal
obligation was still binding. Before he went to France and while he was
there he arranged that all of the proceeds of his own farms should go to his
creditors, and he then thought the matter was honorably settled. 44
His grandson said that his share of the Wayles debt was ^3749. The Farrell
& Jones account probably approached this amount in the first place; as
entered in his own Balance Account in the spring of 1794 it was for morethan ,£4544, but more than a third of this was for accumulated interest. He
was also involved in a considerable debt to Henderson, McCaul &
Company, which amounted in the spring of 1794 to more than ,£2000, and
if this was not originally a part of the Wayles debt it doubtless resulted
from it indirectly. While "scuffling to pay what I could of that," he said, "I
suffered my own accounts to accumulate." Alexander McCaul was a good
friend of his, however, and he had his greatest difficulties with the other
firm. 45
In the late eighties and the nineties a plaintive note appeared in many of his
letters. "I am miserable till I shall owe not a shilling," he wrote from Paris
to Nicholas Lewis, who was managing his local affairs: "the moment that
shall be the case I shall feel at liberty to do something for the comfort of
my slaves." He had been forced to sell some of them, and at least to talk of
hiring out some of the others. Several years later, saying that the necessity
of paying the Wayles debt all over again had compelled him to mortgage
all his tobacco, as it were, to that purpose,
42 To Jones, Jan. 5, 1787; Ford, IV, 354. He told essentially the same story
in other letters.
43 Ford, IV, 355; II, 200. Account Book entries of May 21, 1779, when he
deposited £1000, and Feb. 2, 1780, when he paid in slightly more than
£1666. There may have been other payments.
44 His general attitude toward the American debt question is well
expressed in his letter of Apr. 19, 1786, to Alexander McCaul; Ford, IV,
201-205. He demurred about interest during the war years, but, so far as
Farrell & Jones were concerned, apparently he did not escape it.
45 Randall, III, 676; Balance Account in Fee Book; Jefferson to Col.
Robert Lewis, Oct. 5, 1791, MHS
he added: "It consequently cripples all my wishes & endeavors to be useful
to others, and obliges me to carry on everything starvingly." ** In a
business letter of January 1, 1792, he said that for seven years he had not
drawn for his own use one shilling from the profits from his lands, and that,
finding these measures still insufficient, he had again sold enough property
to pay the Whole debt. "Not having the power of creating money, I know
not what more I could have done." 47In 1791, he had sold the last of his Cumberland lands, but Richard Hanson,
representing Jones, preferred Jefferson's bonds to those of the purchaser. 48
Previously, he had rented Elkhill but collections fell in arrears, and early in
1793 he completed the sale of that place. 49 This was not the end, however.
In 1795, a suit was brought by Hanson against the Wayles executors as
security for the late Richard Randolph, under circumstances which seemed
to Jefferson as a lawyer not sufficient to cause them to be liable.
Nonetheless, judgment went against them and, expecting his portion to be ,
£ 700-/800, he thought of selling Poun-cey's in Albemarle. 50 Apparently
his part of this debt, including interest, turned out to be nearly ,£ 1000. 51
Under these circumstances, desiring to protect Henderson, McCaul & Co.,
he conveyed to them fifty-two slaves. 52 By that time he was paying off
one by one a series of personal bonds to Farrell & Jones, payable
1791-1797, which were covered by bonds due him from various
individuals. He devoted himself to this troublesome business during the
period of his retirement, 1794—1797. In 1800, he expressed the hope that
he might soon close the "last remnant of Mr. Wayles's debts," which he had
been "working off ever since the peace." M A monograph on his financial
history could be written, but the general state of his affairs has been
described with sufficient fullness for present purposes. 64
Of all the land gained from the Wayles inheritance, in the end Jefferson
retained only Poplar Forest. Some of the 135 slaves that he acquired he also
had to sell, and before those sales were made he had lost about thirty in the
Revolution, besides suffering other heavy losses
46 To Lewis, Dec. 19, 1786, Ford, IV, 343; to Mr. Carr, May 8, 1791,
MHS. 47 To J. Dodson, Jan. 1, 1792; MHS.
48 Apr. 5, 30, 1791; MHS.
49 Jefferson to Daniel L. Hylton, Jan. 20, 1793, MHS; see also Ford, V,
281.
60 To James Lyle, May 12, 1795; to Col. Harvie, Feb. 22, 1796, MHS. A
fairly full account of this case, which led to political rumors, is in a letter of
S. T. Mason to D. C. Brent, Oct. 25, 1796, LC, 100:17236-17237.
51 John Wickham to Jefferson, Dec. 8, 1796, MHS. The debt was then to
Cary & Welch and troublesome Hanson was out of the picture, but Eppes
and Skipwith were involved and it appears to have been the same matter."May 12, 1796, Indenture, MHS; he had paid off numerous bonds to them
previously.
63 To L. W. Tazewell, Mar. 17, 1800, MHS.
64 His papers in the MHS are full of letters and memoranda dealing with
finance.
at Elkhill. 56 Between 1783 and 1794 the number of his slaves decreased
from 204 to 155, presumably by sale, and had not again reached the higher
figure by 1810.
His own statement that the ease of his circumstances was doubled by the
Wayles inheritance was conservative, so far as the immediate effects were
concerned. At no time in his entire life did he appear to be as prosperous as
he was from 1774 until depreciation ensued toward the end of the
American Revolution; and never was he so warranted in living in the grand
manner as during the period of his married life. It is by no means
impossible that the financial difficulties into which he fell as the Revolution
neared its close contributed to his willingness to return to public life after
his wife's death. During his stay in France he tried to live on his salary,
while continuing to play the part of a fine gentleman. The troubles which
he faced thereafter may have had a good deal to do with his later adoption
of a simpler form of life. The references to his simplicity in dress are from
the later, not the earlier, period.
His unfortunate experiences after the Revolution, when he was involved in
debts not of his own making and could not collect from people who owed
him, also left a mark on his own thinking. It was probably because of them
that he became so painfully aware of the extravagance of his countrymen in
Virginia. Furthermore, his own difficulties illustrated the relentlessness of
creditors in England, and they could hardly have endeared the British to
him. Here also is the personal background for the philosophy of economy
and hostility to debt which he voiced in public life, both as Secretary of
State and President. The whole of his later life was colored by the fateful
Wayles inheritance, which first enriched and then impoverished him.
4. LOSSES FROM THE ENEMY, 1781
In a letter to Dr. William Gordon, who was preparing a history of theAmerican Revolution, Jefferson described his personal losses from
Cornwallis at Elkhill. Since the most important part of this letter is quoted
in the text of Chapter XXVII, it need not be repeated here. 66 These losses
he listed at the time, or soon after the event, in his Farm Book. 57 He gave
by name the thirty slaves who fled to the enemy and died from smallpox
and camp fever. They were chiefly from Elkhill and Cumberland, though
there were two runaways from Shadwell and one from Monticello who
returned and died. He also listed his other losses. These included 9 horses
and colts, 59 cattle, 30 sheep, and 60 hogs, along with quantities of corn,
wheat, tobacco, hemp, flax, cotton,
"Farm Book, p. 29.
56 July 16, 1788, Ford, V, 38-40
67 Page 29.
and barley, either stored or growing, and 1000 barrels of flour. Of
additional monetary expenses which resulted he gave items amounting to
more than j£100. He afterwards said that the total loss to him was more
than equivalent to his entire debt to Farrell & Jones. 58 For Virginia he
estimated, in his letter to Gordon, that it was about three millions sterling.
58 To William Jones, Jan. 5, 1787; Ford, IV, 354.
[^APPENDIX III^I
The Walker Affair 1768-1809
THE Walker affair appears not to have come into the open until Jefferson's
presidency, when it became a public scandal. Historically, it is inseparable
from the campaign of abuse which was waged against him at the height of
his political career; and our scanty knowledge of what actually took place
between Jefferson and Mrs. Walker in his young manhood is derived, not
from records contemporary with the events, but from documents dated a
generation later. In order to arrive at the unvarnished truth it is necessary to
divest these of their political coloration, while allowing also for the
inaccuracy of memory. This is an exceedingly difficult task.
According to the statement of John Walker, made a generation later, thechronological outline of the affair was as follows: it began in 1768, before
Jefferson was married; it continued until 1779, some years after he was
married; and it did not become known to Walker himself until after
Jefferson had gone to France in 1784 and the lady had given her husband
the full story. From other evidence it cannot be doubted that Jefferson and
Walker maintained the most amicable of relations throughout the
Revolution; and occasional remarks in Jefferson's own letters while he was
in France lead to the supposition that he then regarded their old friendship
as unmarred.
The beginnings of political divergence, after his return to America, may
have been connected with the election of his protege, James Monroe, to the
United States Senate in 1790 over Walker. 1 Information about his personal
association with his old friend in that decade is scanty, but there is evidence
that cordial relations with other members of the Walker connection
continued. It was in 1793, however, that Henry or Light-Horse Harry Lee
married Ann Hill Carter,
justly renowned as the mother of General Robert E. Lee. She was the niece
of Mrs. John Walker. Henry Lee was distrusted by Jefferson and became
his implacable political foe, and it was he who later served as mediator
between Jefferson and Walker. 2 There is little reason to doubt that Lee's
major role was that of troublemaker.
By 1802, there was an open personal breach between Jefferson and Walker.
In that year the notorious scandalmonger, James Thomson Callender, gave
wide currency to the story about Mrs. Walker, along with a much more
unsavory one about one of Jefferson's slaves. 3 The Walker story had
probably been bandied about somewhat earlier and had led to some
correspondence which Callender had seen or heard about and which he
threatened to publish. Walker said that he "constantly wrote" to Jefferson,
without saying when. Apparently these letters have not been preserved, but
the presumption is that they were not written before Jefferson's presidency.
Whatever may have passed between the alienated friends, the ugly story
continued to go the rounds. It was published, with others that reflected on
Jefferson's morals, in the New-England Palladium on Jan. 18, 1805, and
entered into a debate in the House of Representatives of Massachusetts. 4
Goaded by all these circumstances, Walker demanded further satisfaction
from Jefferson, Henry Lee serving as his intermediary. 5This was in the spring of 1805. In the summer Jefferson communicated the
matter to particular friends because he wished "to stand with them on the
ground of truth,' , and to one of them, speaking of the attacks of his
enemies, he said: "You will perceive that I plead guilty to one of their
charges, that when young and single I offered love to a handsome lady. I
acknolege its incorrectness [that is, the incorrectness of his own conduct]. It
is the only one founded in truth among all their allegations against me." 6
The kernel of indubitable truth is that he made improper advances to his
friend's wife before he himself was married. Added to this is the virtual
certainty that he gave to Walker a statement wholly exculpating the lady
from blame. 7 As a gentleman he could do no less, but it certainly need not
be assumed that he placed the stamp of truth on the whole of Walker's ex
parte account of the events and circumstances.
Walker's statement, as preserved in the handwriting of General Lee, was as
follows:
2 Va. Mag., XXV, 436; D. S. Freeman, R. E. Lee, I (1934), 7, 8.
8 Especially in Richmond Recorder, Oct. 27, 1802; on Callender see article
in D. A. B.
* Especially Jan. 25, 31, 1805; Defense of Young and Minns, Frinters to
the State (Boston, March, 1805).
6 Walker to Lee, Mar. 28, 1805; LC, 148:25833.
6 To Robert Smith, Sec. of the Navy, July 1, 1805, Bixby, p. 115. The
enclosed copy of a letter to Mr. Lincoln which apparently contained a fuller
statement has not been found.
7 Henry Lee to Jefferson, Sept. 8, 1806; LC, 161:28252-28253.
I was married at Chelsea the seat of my wifes father on 6th [5th?] of June
64. I was educated at Wm & Mary where was also educated Mr J.
We had previously grown up together at a private school & our boys
acquaintance was strengthened at college. We loved (at least I did
sincerely) each other.
My father was one of his fathers exr & his own guardian & advancedmoney for his education. . . .
I took Mr J. with me the friend of my heart to my wedding. He was one of
my bridemen.
This as I said above took place in 64.
In 68 I was called to Fort Stanwix being secretary or clerk to the Virginia
commission at the treaty with the Indians there held by Sir W Johnson
which was composed of Gen'l A Lewis & my father.
I left my wife & infant daughter at home, relying on Mr Jefferson as my
neighbor & fast friend having in my will made before my departure, named
him first among my executors.
I returned in Novr. having been absent more than 4 months.
During my absence Mr J conduct to Airs W was improper so much so as to
have laid the foundation of her constant objection to my leaving Mr J my
exct telling me that she wondered why I could place such confidence in
him.
At Shadwell his own house in 69 or 70 on a visit common to us being
neighbors & as I felt true frds. he renewed his caresses placed in Mrs W!
gown sleeve cuff a paper tending to convince her of the innocence of
promiscuous love.
This Mrs W on the first glance tore to pieces.
After this we went on a visit to Col. Coles a mutual acquaintance & distant
neighbor. Mr Jefferson was there. On the ladys retiring to bed he pretended
to be sick, complained of a headache & left the gentlemen among whom I
was.
Instead of going to bed as his sickness authorized a belief he stole into my
room where my wife was undressing or in bed.
He was repulsed with indignation & menaces of alarm & ran off.
In 71 Mr J was married and yet continued his efforts to destroy my peace
until the latter end of the year 79.One particular instance I remember.
My old house had a passage upstairs with a room on each side & opposite
doors.
Mr J and wife slept in one. I & my wife in the other.
At one end of the passage was a small room used by my wife as her private
apartment.
She visited it early & late. On this morning Mr J' knowing her custom was
found in his shirt ready to seize her on her way from her chamber —
indecent in manner.
In 83 Mr J went to France his wife died previously.
From 79 Mr J desisted in his attempts on my pence.
All this time I believed him to be my best frd & so felt & acted toward him.
All this time I held him first named in my will, as exct. ignorant of every
thing which had passed.
Soon after his sailing for France was known Mrs W then recurred to my
will & being as before asked her objections, she related to me these
base transactions apologizing for her past silence from her fear of its
consequence which might have been fatal to me.
I constantly wrote to him. You have our correspondence & you go now to
Mr. J. My injury is before you. Let my redress be commensurate. It cannot
be complete & therefore ought to be as full as possible. 8
In the light of our knowledge of Jefferson's temperament and personality
and of the surrounding circumstances, only the part of the statement
referring to the year 1768 is wholly convincing; and this part of it is quite
in line with his own admission. The alleged advances of 1769 and 1770 are
not in conflict with that admission, since he was still unmarried, but such
gaucherie, and such personal aggressiveness in the face of rebuffs, were not
characteristic of him as a man. He was more sensitive than the average and
appears to have been diffident toward women until after he had acquired awife and family of his own. Such comments of his on love and marriage as
remain show that in these respects his standards were thoroughly, if not
excessively conventional. It is hard to believe that under these discouraging
circumstances his lapses were several times repeated.
That he should have continued to make advances to his friend's wife after
his own marriage is little short of inconceivable, in view of his single-
minded devotion to his wife and the degree of happiness he enjoyed with
her. One of his friends afterwards said that there was no whisper in the
neighborhood at the time, and there is no evidence that there was. 9 It is
equally difficult to believe that he could have carried on an affair over a
period of eleven years, during which time the husband remained in
complete ignorance and the lady constantly repulsed him. The only sensible
procedure seems to be to disregard the details of these "base transactions"
as reported at secondhand long afterwards and to leave the matter just
where he left it. As has been said, he was guilty of "an unmoral, not an
immoral act." 10 But for political rancor and the activities of
scandalmongers, it would have been left in that oblivion where it long
rested and where it should have remained.
Inviting John Page to spend a summer holiday with him at Monti-cello in
1803, Jefferson said: "You have another old friend too [John Walker] in the
neighborhood to attract you: and tho' he & I have unhappily fallen out by
the way, yet both cherish your friendship, and neither says with Achilles
'my friend must hate the man who injures
8 LC, 155:27117-27121, corrected only by insertion of periods at end of
sentences. The original of this statement was probably enclosed in Walker's
letter of Mar. 28, 1805, to Lee; LC, 148:25833. Certain of the details were
known to Callender in 1802, but he may have received them orally. These
documents are not a constituent part of the Jefferson Papers as he left them.
They were acquired later by the Library of Congress and incorporated in
them, with doubtful propriety.
9 Richmond Enquirer, Sept. 27, 1805.
10 W. C. Ford; Bixby, p. xiv.
me.'" u In reply, among other things, Page said this: "Curses on the Tongue
of Slander! Perdition seize the wretches who would open the scars ofwounded Friendship, to gratify private resentment & party spirit." "
Even Henry Lee recognized Jefferson's desire to make amends. Said he: "I
repeated [to Walker] my conviction of yr. sincere desire to do every thing
which truth & honor would warrant to give peace to his mind & oblivion to
the cause of his disquietude." 13 Also, he reported the mutual hope that old
friendship might be restored. To some extent it was, when John Walker lay
dying and his wife also was feeble and low. After Jefferson had retired
from the presidency his neighbor, James Monroe, passed on to him the
suggestion that a visit to his old friend at Belvoir would be considered as an
act of great kindness and be received with much sensibility. Presumably he
did not go, but he dispatched a gift of fruit which was gratefully
acknowledged. 1 * In the end perhaps John Walker concluded that
Jefferson, as well as he, had received undeserved injury.
"March 18, 1803; LC, 130:22504-22505.
12 Apr. 25, 1803; LC, 131:22632-22633.
18 To Jefferson, Sept. 8, 1806; LC, 161:28252.
14 Monroe to Jefferson, Sept. 4, 1809; Hugh Nelson to Jefferson, Sept. 4,
1809, both writing from Albemarle County; LC 188:33464-33465. The
editor of Monroe's Writings, V, 102, says his letter was endorsed "not
sent." It was endorsed by Jefferson, however, as received on Sept. 4.
Acknowledgments
FULL acknowledgment of the innumerable services and kindnesses done
me while preparing this book is impossible. I have made specific reference
to a great many of them at appropriate points in the notes, appendices,
bibliography, and elsewhere, but my indebtedness to certain institutions
and individuals is so great as to require special mention.
The first word of special thanks must go to the University of Virginia, not
only because this project was conceived there years ago, but also because
the concentrated work on this volume was begun and for nearly two years
was centered there. The choice of locality was natural and appropriate, for
no other place except Monticello itself is so hallowed by memories of
Jefferson, and nowhere else can his beginnings and local setting be studiedso advantageously. I was received as an old friend, with more than
traditional hospitality, and the rich resources of the Alderman Library were
at my entire disposal. My old colleague Harry demons, the librarian, and
his associates — especially Jack Dalton, Miss Louise Savage, and, after
they got back from the war, John C. Wyllie, Jr. and Francis L. Berkeley, Jr.
— gave me the fullest possible co-operation. As one example of their
continuing interest, Messrs. demons, Wyllie, and Berkeley read the chapter
on the Notes on Virginia in galley proof and gave me the benefit of their
comments. Of the many other people at the University who helped me with
materials and suggestions mention should be made of Professors Thomas
Perkins Abernethy (who kindly read several chapters), Edwin M. Betts,
then working on his edition of the Garden Book, and James Southall
Wilson. Miss Mary Topping did a vast amount of typing with a speed and
accuracy which I have found difficulty in matching elsewhere.
Some months after I began to give my major attention to this work, a grant
in support of it was made by the Rockefeller Foundation. Without this
generous financial aid the continuance of the undertaking on its projected
scale would have been impossible. For the arrangement which enabled me
to continue it I am particularly indebted on the one hand to David H.
Stevens, who sympathetically comprehended the requirements of the task
from the beginning, and on the other to President John Lloyd Newcomb of
the University of Vir-
ginia, who assumed the necessary institutional sponsorship of the grant.
This volume was not completed until after I had taken up residence in
Columbia University — where again I received wholehearted co-operation
— but it remains predominantly Virginian. The responsibility and faults of
execution are wholly mine, but whatever credit may accrue to the book I
want to share chiefly with the University where I did most of the work and
the Foundation which so greatly aided it.
Obviously, the resources and facilities of the Library of Congress have
been indispensable. I was permitted to go through the appropriate volumes
of the Jefferson Papers there at the only time they were available during the
abnormalities of the war period —when they were out of storage
temporarily for purposes of cataloguing and microfilming. Mrs. Helen
Duprey Bullock, who was indexing all of them while I was going through
only a part, made invaluable suggestions as she went along, besides passing
on many bits of information from her great store of knowledge aboutcolonial Virginia and Jefferson's musical interests. Since the end of the war
I have been able to work under highly favorable conditions in the Division
of Manuscripts, receiving countless kindnesses from St. George L.
Sioussat, Thomas P. Martin, and others; but most of the research work on
this volume was done in the abnormal period. Among the many other
persons in the Library of Congress who have helped me, special mention
should be made of Miss E. Millicent Sowerby, who is making a
thoroughgoing study of Jefferson's library of 1815, and who generously
placed at my disposal far more of her extensive information about his
books than I have yet been able to use.
As is stated more fully in the Bibliography, Julian P. Boyd greatly
facilitated my work by permitting me to check my materials against the
comprehensive files he has assembled at Princeton in the course of
preparing a genuinely comprehensive edition of Jefferson's Papers. He and
his associates, Lyman H. Butterfield and Mrs. Mina R. Bryan, were to the
highest degree co-operative, as I tried to be in turn with them, and I shall
always be grateful for their sympathy and understanding.
My use of the Jefferson materials in other repositories is sufficiently
described in the Bibliography, but at least a word of appreciation should be
spoken here. Since I enjoyed the hospitality of the Massachusetts Historical
Society in the earliest stages of my detailed study of Jefferson, my debt to
them is of long standing, and at all times they have been generous in
granting permission to reproduce their unique materials. For similar
courtesies I am indebted to the Huntington Library, and particularly to Miss
Norma Cuthbert. The William L. Clements Library has no specialized
Jefferson collection, but Randolph G. Adams informed me about rare
documents and an interesting map, and granted permission to reproduce or
use them.
In Virginia I am particularly indebted to the Virginia State Library
(especially to William J. Van Schreeven), Colonial Williamsburg, Inc., the
College of William and Mary, the Valentine Museum, Richmond
(especially to Mrs. Louise T. Catterall), and the offices of the Clerks of
Albemarle and Goochland Counties.
To Yale University I return belated thanks for the grant of a Sterling Senior
Fellowship years ago. This enabled me to follow Jefferson to France, which
I cannot do in this volume, but it also started me on my detailed research inhis career. For this generosity Yale has received very slight return up to this
time.
Despite the references in the notes, certain persons besides those already
mentioned should be thanked individually:
Professor Verner W. Crane of the University of Michigan, for materials
from England and suggestions about the reception of Jefferson's Summary
View there;
Edward Dumbauld, Department of Justice, Washington, for personal
comments supplementing his admirable Thomas Jefferson, American
Tourist, and for reading the chapters on Jefferson'6 legal education and law
practice;
Miss Adrienne Koch of Newcomb College, for reading chapters dealing
with Jefferson's thought and making valuable comments on them;
Anthony Marc Lewis of Washington, for letting me see in advance of
publication two admirable articles (listed in Bibliography);
William H. Peden, then at the University of Virginia, for materials and
suggestions about Jefferson's books;
Charles W. Watts, then at the University of Virginia, for the privilege of
examining his excellent unpublished study of Colonial Albemarle, and for
valuable corroborative judgments on land holdings;
Miss Maude H. Woodfin of Westhampton College, for the use of her
extensive notes on the early Jeffersons, and for many valuable comments
on Virginia history.
Finally, I want to thank Douglas Southall Freeman of Richmond for his
unfailing interest in this project and for invaluable suggestions about
procedure — of which I fear I have availed myself most imperfectly; I want
to express my appreciation of the patience and wise counsel of my
publishers, Little, Brown and Company, who have gone far beyond the line
of duty; and I want to express sympathy for my long-suffering wife in
having a scholar and writer in the family who may be properly fastidious
but who must often have seemed painfully slow.List of Symbols and Short Titles 1 Most Frequently Used in Footnotes
Jefferson's informal account books, in various repositories. Cited by date
only.
American Historical Review.
Journals of the House of Burgesses of Virginia.
Letters of Members of the Continental Congress, ed. by E. C. Burnett.
Commonplace Book of Thomas Jefferson, ed. by Gilbert Chinard.
Executive Journals of the Council of Colonial Virginia.
Dictionary of American Biography.
Journal of the House of Delegates of Virginia.
Domestic Life of Thomas Jefferson. by Sarah N. Randolph.
Writings of George Washington, ed. by J. C. Fitzpatrick.
American Archives, ed. by Peter Force.
Writings of Thomas Jefferson, ed. by P. L. Ford.
Thomas Jefferson's Garden Book, annotated by E. M. Betts.
Writings of James Monroe, ed. by S. Al. Hamilton.
Henry E. Huntington Library, San Marino, California. Unless otherwise
indicated, references are to the Jefferson manuscripts.
1 Repositories are designated by Roman capitals run together, the names of
editors and authors are in Roman type, and the abbreviated titles of printed
works arc in italics. To avoid excess of italics, however, in the
Bibliography which follows, long titles are in Roman. Further details about
these works, and about others frequently used but more easily identified
from the references in the notes, are in the Select Critical Bibliography
which follows.
Account BookA.H.R. Burgesses, Journals
Burnett, Letters
Commonplace Book
Council Journals, Colonial Va.
D.A.B.
Delegates, Journal
Domestic Life
Fitzpatrick
Force
Ford
Garden Book
Hamilton
HEH
LIST OF SYMBOLS
Hening
Hunt JP
L. &B. LC
Literary Bible MHS
O. L.
Papers, MHS Randall Tyler's Mag. UVA
Va. Council Journals, State
VHS VSLVa. Mag.
W. & M.
The Statutes at Large: Being a Collection of All the Laws of Virginia, ed.
by W. W. Hening.
Writings of James Madison, ed. by Gaillard Hunt.
Papers of Thomas Jefferson, Princeton University; files for edition by J. P.
Boyd. Citations include specific references to the sources made available
through their courtesy.
Writings of Thomas Jefferson, ed. by A. A. Lipscomb and A. E. Bergh.
Library of Congress. Unless otherwise indicated the references are to the
Jefferson Papers.
Literary Bible of Thomas Jefferson, ed. by Gilbert Chinard.
Massachusetts Historical Society. Unless otherwise indicated the references
are to the Jefferson Papers.
Official Letters of the Governors of the State of Virginia.
Jefferson Papers, Collections Massachusetts Historical Society, 7 ser., I.
Life of Thomas Jefferson, by H. S. Randall.
Tyler's Quarterly Historical Magazine.
Alderman Library, University of Virginia. Unless otherwise indicated the
references are to the Jefferson manuscripts.
Journals of the Council of the State of Virginia.
Virginia Historical Society.
Virginia State Library.
Virginia Magazine of History and Biography.
William and Mary Quarterly Historical Magazine.Select Critical Bibliography
A. Manuscripts
THE most important collections of Jefferson's papers bearing on this period
or his life are in the following repositories:
Library of Congress, Washington (LC)
Massachusetts Historical Society, Boston (MHS)
Alderman Library, University of Virginia, Charlottesville (UVA)
Virginia State Library, Richmond (VSL)
Henry E. Huntington Library, San Marino, California (HEH)
In the notes I have indicated the location of the manuscripts referred to,
whether the latter are in these major collections or elsewhere.
The materials assembled at Princeton University, for the edition of the
Papers of Thomas Jefferson that is being prepared there, comprehend all
the manuscript collections along with items drawn from many other
quarters. I have been privileged to check my own findings with these
inclusive files, and thus to supplement them, although my procedure has
necessarily been selective.
In the final volume of this work I will publish a detailed account of the
manuscript sources for Jefferson's life as a whole, unless the publication of
the Papers by Princeton is then so far advanced that such an account would
be superfluous. Meanwhile, recourse may be had to the excellent survey by
Helen D. Bullock, "The Papers of Thomas Jefferson," American Archivist,
IV (1941), 238-249. Also, I can repeat the observation already made by me
in the Introduction that the personal sources before Jefferson became an
important public figure are scanty in comparison with those for all the rest
of his life.
The letters in the Library of Congress (LC) dating from the period
1743-1784 are chiefly to be found in the first eleven volumes of his Papers,
in the Manuscript Division, though numerous items bearing on this period
are in later volumes. (The documents are not all arranged chronologically,as is shown by the fact that I used an important one for the year 1779 from
Volume 232. The explorer is now greatly aided, however, by the full index
which is available.) To most students the value and fascination of these
manuscripts lies less
in the formal documents, the most important of which were long ago
selected from the mass for printing, than in the letters. Through no other
means can one gain such intimate acquaintance with Jefferson as by
reading his letters just as he wrote them, and the investigator is likely to
find more clues to the causes and meaning of events in such informal
sources than in formal papers. I myself have found the letters to Jefferson
even more illuminating than those from him, chiefly because fewer of the
former have been printed and many of the latter repeat what is already well
known. In my citations I have given names, dates, and volume and folio
numbers, but I have distinguished between autograph letters, press copies,
and drafts only when there was reason for doing so. Specific reference is
also made in the notes to other collections in the Library of Congress which
I have used. For this period the Papers of James Madison, Vols. I-V, and
the Papers of the Continental Congress are the most important.
The Jefferson Papers in the Massachusetts Historical Society (MHS), which
I began to go through many years ago, I have cited merely by names and
dates. The originals of the Garden Book and Farm Book, of a number of
the Account Books, and of many architectural drawings are in this
collection, which is second in size only to that of the Library of Congress.
In general it is more personal and less public, but there is overlapping all
along the line.
The manuscripts at the University of Virginia (UVA), which are specially
rich for family connections and local associations, fall into several
categories besides the Jefferson Papers themselves — such as the Edgehill
Randolph Papers, the Carr and Cary Papers, and the Maury Deposit of
related materials — and some of them are the particular property of the
McGregor Library of that institution, though all are housed together. I have
tried to make proper acknowledgment in all citations. The checklist at the
University of Virginia, which represented the first significant attempt to
cover all the Jefferson materials everywhere, proved invaluable. The
Alderman Library also has an important collection of photostats and
microfilm, and I used this extensively. There are few other places where
Jefferson can be studied so conveniently.The materials in the Virginia State Library (VSL) bear chiefly on
Jefferson's ancestors, land grants, patents, tax rolls, and the like (see details
in Appendices I and II), and on his services as legislator and governor.
Manuscript items dealing with the latter I saw chiefly in the reproductions
at Princeton.
For this volume the materials at the Henry E. Huntington Library (HEH)
are most valuable for the accounts and estate of Peter Jeffer-
son and for Thomas Jefferson's legal career (see especially Appendix II and
the notes on Chapter IX), and I used them mainly in photostatic form at the
University of Virginia.
Other items were secured from the clerks' offices of Albemarle and
Goochland Counties, Virginia; from Colonial Williamsburg, Inc.; from the
William L. Clements Library, and elsewhere —as is shown sufficiently in
the notes and Bibliography.
A further word should be said about the Account Books, which are cited
only by date in this work and will probably not be published until late in
the course of the Princeton project. Complete photostatic sets are at the
University of Virginia, where I used them most, and in the Library of
Congress. The location of the originals, for this period, is as follows:
(Property of Gen. J. R. Kean)
Partly because of physical difficulties these have not been used extensively
by writers until relatively recent years (except by Randall, before they were
scattered). By means of them it is possible to follow Jefferson's movements
almost, if not quite, day by day, as Edward Dumbauld has done for the
period of travel in Thomas Jefferson, American Tourist. The Account
Books contain many items besides the financial, but unfortunately they do
not often reveal what Jefferson was thinking about.
B. Jefferson's Published Writings
When the Papers now being edited at Princeton by Julian P. Boyd are
published they will inevitably supersede all other printed collections. The
chronological form o( citation which I have followed will facilitate
reference to that edition when it appears, for the arrangement there will belargely chronological. In the meantime, my page and volume references to
existing printed collections, while not essential in all cases, will be useful.
A good account of these existing collections is given by Helen D. Bullock
in the article already cited. Using the other large ones only for purposes of
supplementation, I have drawn chiefly on the two following:
The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, ed. by Paul Leicester Ford (10 vols.,
New York, G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1892-1899). This edition is well
annotated, though with a slight bias against Jefferson; it is limited in scope,
especially in non-political matters, but is generally reliable as to form; and I
have cited it whenever possible.
The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, ed. by A. A. Lipscomb and A. E. Bergh
(20 vols., Washington, 1903). Often referred to as the Memorial Edition,
this is the most extensive collection and the easiest to acquire. It is
practically without annotation and cannot be relied on for exact
transcription; also, the arrangement is confusing and individual items are
often hard to locate.
The following smaller collections are generally reliable:
The Jefferson Papers, Collections Massachusetts Historical Society, 7 ser., I
(Boston, 1900).
Thomas Jefferson Correspondence. Printed from the Originals in the
Collection of William K. Bixby. With notes by W. C. Ford (Boston, 1916).
Very little of this volume falls in the period 1743-1784.
Official Letters of the Governors of the State of Virginia. Vol. II: The
Letters of Thomas Jefferson. H. R. Mcllwaine, gen. ed. (VSL, 1928). This
preserves Jefferson's idiosyncrasies of capitalization and spelling and has
useful notes. It is invaluable for the governorship.
The Letters of Lafayette and Jefferson. Introduction and notes by Gilbert
Chinard (Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1929). Excellent within its
limits.
Some Jefferson Correspondence, 1775-1787, ed. by W. C. Ford. (Reprinted
from New-England Historical and Genealogical Register, 1901-1902).
Letters to Jefferson.Because of the letters and documents it contains, H. S. Randall's Life is to a
considerable extent a sourcebook, and this is true to a lesser degree of
Sarah N. Randolph's Domestic Life. Occasional letters from this period are
in print elsewhere, but, having explored the main collections and the
manuscripts, I have not always cited minor printed sources.
Although the references in the notes to particular writings of Jefferson may
be deemed sufficient, the following separate publications deserve special
mention:
The Commonplace Book of Thomas Jefferson. A Repertory of His Ideas on
Government. With an Introduction and notes by Gilbert Chinard
(Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1926). Invaluable for the period before
the Declaration of Independence.
The Literary Bible of Thomas Jefferson. His Commonplace Book of
Philosophers and Poets. With an introduction by Gilbert Chinard
(Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1928). Important in showing the scope of
Jefferson's early interests.
Thomas Jefferson's Garden Book, 1766-1824. Annotated by Edwin M.
Betts (Philadelphia, American Philosophical Society, 1944). The
painstaking notes extend to Jefferson's agricultural as well as horticultural
interests.
Reports of Cases Determined in the General Court of Virginia. From 1730
to 1740, and from 1768 to 1772 (Charlottesville, published by the legatee
of Jefferson's manuscript papers, 1829). This work contains a few of his
own cases.
A Summary View of the Rights of British America. With an introduc-
duction and a bibliographical note by Thomas P. Abernethy (New York,
Scholars' Facsimiles & Reprints, 1943). Despite the excellence of this
edition, I have cited the text in Ford, I, 421-447, for convenience of
reference.
The Declaration of Independence. The Evolution of the Text as Shown in
Facsimiles of Various Drafts by its Author, Thomas Jefferson. By Julian P.
Boyd (revised edn., Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1945).
Invaluable for the expert appraisal, as well as the documents.Report of the Committee of Revisors [Jefferson, George Wythe, and
Edmund Pendleton] Appointed by the General Assembly of Virginia in
1776 (Richmond, 1784).
Notes on the State of Virginia. This famous work appeared in many
editions, but since it was not published until after Jefferson went to France
its literary history does not greatly concern us here. For convenience of
reference I have cited the text in Ford, III, 68-295.
C. Official and Semiofficial Collections
PROVINCE AND STATE OF VIRGINIA
Executive Journals of the Council of Colonial Virginia (5 vols., VSL,
1930-1945). The fifth volume ends with May 7, 1754. Virginia Journals of
Council reproduced from the Public Record Office
of England. (Photostats UVA.) Cover the years 1726-1774. Journals of the
House of Burgesses of Virginia (6 vols., VSL, 1905-
1906). Calendar of Virginia State Papers and Other Manuscripts,
1652-1781,
ed. by W. P. Palmer (Vol. I, Richmond, 1875). The Statutes at Large, Being
a Collection of All the Laws of Virginia,
ed. by W. W. Hening (13 vols., Richmond, 1809-1823).
Journal of the House of Delegates of Virginia. Various volumes covering
the years 1776-1785 (Richmond, 1827-1828).
Journals of the Council of State of Virginia, 1776-1781, ed. by H. R.
Mcllwaine (2 vols., VSL, 1931-1932). Unfortunately, the record for most
of Jefferson's governorship is missing.
A Register of the General Assembly of Virginia, 1776-1918, and of the
Constitutional Conventions, by E. G. Swem and J. W. Williams
(Richmond, 1918).
BRITISH PARLIAMENTParliamentary History of England, Vol. XVI, 1765-1771; Vol. XVIII,
1774-1777 (T. C. Hansard, London, 1813). This and the following are of
interest because of the comments on the affairs of America and Virginia.
Sir Henry Cavendish. Debates of the House of Commons, 1768-1771 (2
vols., London, 1841).
UNITED STATES
Journals of the Continental Congress (34 vols., Washington, 1904-
1936). The most important years for Jefferson are 1775-1776, 1783-
1784. Peter Force. American Archives (Washington, 9 vols., 1837-1853).
Contains documents not readily accessible elsewhere. Revolutionary
Diplomatic Correspondence of the United States, ed.
by Francis Wharton (6 vols., Washington, 1889).
CHURCH AND SCHOOL
William S. Perry, ed. Historical Collections Relating to the American
Colonial Church. Vol. I, Virginia (Hartford, 1870).
"Journal of the Meetings of the President and Masters of William and Mary
College" (1758-1764), in W. & M., 1 ser., Ill, 62-64, 128-132, 195-197,
262-265; IV, 43-46, 130-132, 187-192; V, 224-229. Strictly speaking, not a
collection, but cited here because of its value.
D. Contemporary Writings *
1. CORRESPONDENCE AND DIARIES
Adams, John. Works, ed. by C. F. Adams (10 vols., Boston, 1856)'. Of
value in this period, but of more later.
Ambler Family. "An Old Virginia Correspondence," Atlantic Monthly,
Vol. 84 (July-December 1899), 535-549. Slight but illuminating bits about
the British invasion.
1 At various points in the footnotes, contemporary books and pamphletsknown or supposed to have influenced Jefferson are referred to, but it has
not seemed desirable to list them here.
Bland, Theodorick, Jr. The Bland Papers, ed. by Charles Campbell (2 vols.,
Petersburg, 1840-1843). Several revealing letters.
Burnett, E. C, ed. Letters of Members of the Continental Congress (8 vols.,
Washington, Carnegie Institution, 1921-1936). This important work gives
some of the best clues to contemporary opinion.
Byrd, William. The Secret Diary of William Byrd of Westover, 1709-1712.
Ed. by Louis B. Wright and Marion Tinling (Richmond, Dietz Press, 1941).
This and the following contain items about Jefferson's ancestors.
. Another Secret Diary of William Byrd of Westover, 1739-1741.
Ed. by Maude H. Woodfin, tr. and coll. by Marion Tinling (Richmond,
Dietz Press, 1942).
Carter, Landon. Letter to George Washington (in Force, 5 ser., II, 1306). A
direct attack on the repeal of entails.
Clark, George Rogers. "George Rogers Clark Papers"; Collections Illinois
State Historical Library, VIII (1912). Valuable for Western developments
in Jefferson's governorship and shortly before.
Fithian, Philip Vickers. Journal and Letters, 1767-1774. Ed. by J. R.
Williams (Princeton, Princeton University Library, 1900). This has no
direct bearing on Jefferson but is probably the best social sourcebook for
Virginia in its period. Cited by dates.
Gilmer, George. "Papers, Military and Political, 1775-1778"; Collections
Virginia Historical Society, n. s., Vol. VI (1887), 71-140. Gilmer was an
intimate friend of Jefferson's.
Jones, Joseph. Letters of Joseph Jones of Virginia, 1777-1787. Ed. by W.
C. Ford (New York, Historical Printing Club, 1889). Jones was the uncle of
James Monroe.
Lafayette, Marquis de. Writings in:Chinard, Gilbert. Lafayette in Virginia: Unpublished Letters (Baltimore,
Johns Hopkins Press, 1928).
Gottschalk, Louis. Letters of Lafayette and Washington (New York, 1944).
Lee, Richard Henry. Letters. Ed. by J. C. Ballagh (2 vols., New York,
Macmillan, 1911-1914). Lewis, Thomas. The Fairfax Line: Thomas
Lewis's Journal of 1746.
Footnotes and index by J. W. Wayland (New Market, Virginia,
1925). Of special interest for Peter Jefferson.
Madison, James. Writings. Ed. by Gaillard Hunt (9 vols., New York, G. P.
Putnam's Sons, 1900-1910). Obviously an important supplement to
Jefferson's own writings.
Maury, James. "A Dissertation on Education in the Form of a Letter from
James Maury to Robert Jackson, July 17, 1762," ed. by Helen D. Bullock;
Papers Albemarle County Hist. Soc, II (1941-1942), 36-60. Casts fresh
light on Jefferson's first important teacher.
Monroe, James. Writings. Ed. by S. M. Hamilton (7 vols., New York, G. P.
Putnam's Sons, 1898-1903). Valuable for Jefferson at an even earlier date
than the writings of Madison.
Riedesel, Mrs. General. Letters and Journals Relating to the War of the
American Revolution. Trans, by W. L. Stone (Albany, 1867).
Stiles, Ezra. Literary Diary of Ezra Stiles, ed. by F. B. Dexter (3 vols., New
York, Charles Scribner's Sons, 1901).
Washington, George. Writings. Ed. by J. C. Fitzpatrick (33 vols.,
Washington, 1931-1941). Of special importance during Jefferson's
governorship.
2. TRAVELS AND MEMOIRS
Anburey, Thomas. Travels through the Interior Parts of America (2 vols.,
Boston and New York, 1923). Virginia part in Vol. II, covering the years
1779-1780.Bacon, Edmund. See Pierson, Hamilton W.
Burnaby, Andrew. Travels through North America. Reprinted from the 3d
and enlarged edn. of 1798, ed. by R. R. Wilson (New York, Wessels &
Bissell Co., 1904). The travels occurred in 1759-1760, and the 1st edn. was
in 1775.
Chastellux, Marquis de. Travels in North America, in the Years 1780,
1781, and 1782 (2 vols., Dublin, 1787). Contains one of earliest
descriptions of Jefferson and Monticello.
Darlington, William. Memorials of John Bartram and Humphrey Marshall
(Philadelphia, 1849). Bartram visited Isham Randolph.
Mazzei, Philip. Memoirs . . . 1730-1816. Trans, by Howard R. Mar-raro
(New York, Columbia University Press, 1942). Unreliable for factual
details but good for atmosphere.
Page, John. "Autobiography," in Virginia 'Historical Register, III
(Richmond, 1850), 142-151. A valuable bit from an old friend.
Pierson, Hamilton W. Jefferson at Monticello (New York, 1862).
Reminiscences of Edmund Bacon, chief overseer and business manager of
Jefferson's estate. Most valuable for a later period.
Randolph, Edmund. "Essay on the Revolutionary History of Virginia,
1774-1782," Va. Mag., XLIII-XLV. An approach to a contemporary
judgment, though written after the events described.
Riedesel, Major General. Memoirs, and Letters and Journals, during his
Residence in America. Trans, by W. L. Stone (2 vols., Albany, 1868).
Schoepf, Johann David. Travels in the Confederation. Trans, and ed. by A.
J. Morrison (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1911). Covers the years
1783-1784.
Smyth, J. F. D. A Tour in the United States of America (2 vols., London,
1784).
Tarleton, Lieutenant Colonel. A History of the Campaigns of 1780 and1781, in the Southern Provinces of North America (London and Dublin,
1787).
E. Newspapers and Periodicals
Newspapers are relatively unimportant for this phase of Jefferson's career,
though the Virginia Gazette, Williamsburg, contains some details of
information. There were concurrent papers of that title and publishers
changed. My citations include the name of publishers, as well as dates.
The materials in the following historical periodicals, made accessible by E.
G. Swem's indispensable Virginia Historical Index (2 vols., 4 parts,
Roanoke, 1934) are of uneven quality but very considerable value,
especially for the early chapters.
Tyler's Quarterly Historical Magazine (Tyler's Mag.). Virginia Magazine of
History and Biography (Va. Mag.). William and Mary College Quarterly
(W. & M.).
F. Secondary Works and Articles 2
Abernethy, Thomas Perkins. Western Lands and the American Revolution
(New York, 1937). Valuable for political alignments in Virginia as well as
the land question.
. Three Virginia Frontiers (Louisiana State Univ., 1940).
Anderson, Dice R. "Jefferson and the Virginia Constitution," American
Historical Review (A.H.R.), XXXI, 750-754 (July 1916). An admirable
brief study.
Becker, Carl. The Declaration of Independence (New York, Peter Smith,
1940).
Beveridge, Albert J. Life of John Marshall (4 vols., Boston, Houghton
Mifflin Co., 1916-1919).
Blanton, W. B. Medicine in Virginia in the Eighteenth Century (Richmond,
1931).
Bowers, Claude G. The Young Jefferson, 1743-1789 (Boston, Houghton
Mifflin Co., 1945).Boyd, Julian P. The Declaration of Independence. The Evolution of the
Text (revised edn., Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1945). Already
described in B, above.
2 This very select list contains the titles of indispensable works and others
to which I personally am most deeply indebted.
Brant, Irving. James Madison, the Virginia Revolutionist (Indianapolis and
New York, Bobbs-Merrill Co., 1941).
Bridenbaugh, Carl and Jessica. Rebels and Gentlemen (New York, 1942).
Bullock, Helen D. My Head and My Heart (New York, G. P. Putnam's
Sons, 1945).
Burk, John Daly. History of Virginia (4 vols., 1804-1816).
Chinard, Gilbert. Thomas Jefferson, the Apostle of Americanism (Boston,
Little, Brown and Co., 1939).
Cresson, W. P. James Monroe (Chapel Hill, University of North Carolina
Press, 1946).
Curti, Merle. Growth of American Thought (New York, Harper,
1943). Davis, R. B. Francis Walker Gilmer (Richmond, Dietz Press, 1939).
Dickore, M., ed. Two Unpublished Letters from Thomas Jefferson to His
Relatives the Turpins (Oxford, Ohio, 1941).
Disbrow, Natalie J. "Thomas Walker of Albemarle," Tapers Albemarle
County Historical Society y Vol. I (Charlottesville, 1941).
Dorfman, Joseph. "Thomas Jefferson: Commercial Agrarian Democrat," in
The Economic Mind in American Civilization (New York, The Macmillan
Co., 1946), I, 433-447.
Dumbauld, Edward. Thomas Jefferson: American Tourist (Norman, Okla.,
University of Oklahoma Press, 1946). Useful for this period, but much
more for the next.Eckenrode, H. J. The Randolphs: The Story of a Virginia Family
(Indianapolis and New York, Bobbs-Merrill Co., 1946).
. The Revolution in Virginia (Boston, Houghton Mifflin Co.,
1916). Best for the period before Jefferson's governorship. Sources now
available for the latter change the picture considerably.
. Separation of Church and State in Virginia (VSL, Richmond,
1910).
Fitzpatrick, John C. The Spirit of the Revolution (Boston and New York,
Houghton Mifflin Co., 1923).
Flippin, P. S. The Royal Government in Virginia (New York, Columbia
University Press, 1919).
Garlick, R. C, Jr. Philip Mazzei, Friend of Jefferson (Baltimore, Johns
Hopkins Press, 1933).
Gilman, Daniel Coit. James Monroe (Boston and New York, Houghton
Mifflin Co., 1911).
Goodwin, Edward Lewis. The Colonial Church in Virginia (Milwaukee and
London, Morehouse Publishing Co. and A. R. Mowbray and Co., 1927).
Goodwin, Rutherfoord. A Brief and True Report concerning Williamsburg
in Virginia (3 ed., Williamsburg and Richmond, Colonial Williamsburg
and Dietz Press, 1941). Because of the quotations, practically a
sourcebook.
Gottschalk, Louis. Lafayette and the Close of the American Revolution
(Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1942).
Grigsby, Hugh Blair. The Virginia Convention of 1776 (1855). Contains
interesting sketches of Jefferson's contemporaries, as does the following.
. History of the Virginia Federal Convention of 1788 (2 vols.,
1890-1891).Harrell, I. S. Loyalism in Virginia (Durham, Duke University Press, 1926).
Harrison, Fairfax. "The Northern Neck Maps of 1737-1747," W. &
M., 2 ser., IV, 1-15 (January, 1924). . "A Portrait of Governor Fauquier,"
Fauquier County Historical
Society Bulletin, No. 4 (1924), pp. 323-340.
Hastings, G. E. Life and Works of Francis Hopkinson (Chicago, University
of Chicago Press, 1926).
Hazelton, John H. The Declaration of Independence: Its History (New
York, 1906). Contains many documents.
Hemphill, W. E. George Wythe the Colonial Briton: A Biographical Study
of the Pre-Revolutionary Era in Virginia (Doctoral Dissertation, UVA,
1937).
Henderson, Archibald. "Dr. Thomas Walker and the Loyal Company of
Virginia," Proceedings American Antiquarian Society, n.s., XLI
(Worcester, 1932), 77-178.
Henline, Ruth. "A Study of the Notes on the State of Virginia as an
Evidence of Jefferson's Reaction against the Theories of the French
Naturalists," Va. Mag., LV, 233-246 (July, 1947).
Henry, William Wirt. Patrick Henry. Life, Correspondence and Speeches (3
vols., New York, Charles Scribner's Sons, 1891). Too favorable but
contains numerous letters and is thus an important source.
Hilldrup, Robert L. Life and Times of Edmund Pendleton (Chapel Hill,
University of North Carolina Press, 1939). Gives valuable clues to his
relationship with Jefferson.
Honeywell, Roy J. The Educational Work of Thomas Jefferson
(Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 1931). An
admirable monograph.
Jensen, Merrill. The Articles of Confederation (Madison, Wisconsin,
University of Wisconsin Press, 1940).Kean, Jefferson Randolph. "Origin of the Monticello Graveyard";
"Genealogy of the Jefferson Eppes"; "Genealogy of the Jefferson
Randolphs"; in Ann. Report of the Monticello Asso., 1922, pp. 9-20; 1925,
pp. 11-14; 1929, pp. 9-11, and thereafter.
Keim, Clarence R. "Influence of Primogeniture and Entail in the
Development of Virginia," in University of Chicago Abstracts of Theses,
Humanistic Series, V, 289-292. Brief but important.
Kimball, Fiske. "In Search of Jefferson's Birthplace," Va. Mag., LI
(October 1943), 313-325. The best study of Shadwell.
. "Jefferson and the Arts," Proceedings American Philosophical
Society (hereafter abbreviated), CXXXVII (1943).
. Thomas Jefferson, Architect (Boston, 1916). The classic work
on the subject.
Kimball, Marie. Jefferson: The Road to Glory, 1743 to 1776 (New York,
Coward-McCann, Inc., 1943).
. Jefferson, War and Peace, 1776 to 1784 (New York, Coward-
McCann, Inc., 1947).
Kirkpatrick, John E. "The Constitutional Development of the College of
William and Mary," W. & M., 2 ser., VI, 95-108.
Koch, Adrienne. The Philosophy of Thomas Jefferson (New York,
Columbia University Press, 1943).
Lewis, Anthony M. "Jefferson's Summary View as a Chart of Political
Union, Its Place among Contemporary Tracts on the Connection with
Britain." Article accepted by William and Mary Quarterly. Seen in advance
by me through the courtesy of the author and editors.
. "Jefferson and the Kentucky Pioneers, 1774-1781." Article accepted by
the Mississippi Valley Historical Review. Seen in advance by me through
the courtesy of the author and editors.Lingley, Charles R. The Transition in Virginia from Colony to
Commonwealth (New York, Columbia University Press, 1910). Still the
best work on the subject.
Macmillan, Margaret B. The War Governors in the American Revolution
(New York, Columbia University Press, 1943). This monograph shows
what other governors besides Jefferson faced.
Maury, Ann. Memoirs of a Huguenot Family (New York, 1872).
Maury, Anne Fontaine. Intimate Virginiana, A Century of Maury Travels
by Land and Sea (Richmond, Dietz Press, 1941).
Mead, Edward C. Historic Homes of the South-west Mountains, Virginia
(Philadelphia, 1899).
Meade, William. Old Churches, Ministers and Families of Virginia (2 vols.,
Philadelphia, J. B. Lippincott Co., 1857).Morris, Roland S. "Jefferson as a Lawyer," Procs. Am. Philos. Soc,
LXXXVII (1943), 211-215.
Morton, Louis. Robert Carter of Nomini Hall (Williamsburg, Colonial
Williamsburg, Inc., 1941).
Nock, Albert Jay. Jefferson (Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1926).
Palmer, John McAuley. General Von Steuben (New Haven, Yale
University Press, 1937). Distinctly anti-Jefferson but with some reason.
Peden, William. "Some Notes concerning Thomas Jefferson's Libraries,"
W. & M., 3 ser., I, 265-274 (July 1944).
. Thomas Jefferson: Book Collector (Doctoral Dissertation UVA,
1942). Very helpful for Jefferson's libraries.
Perry, Ralph Barton. Puritanism and Democracy (New York, Vanguard
Press, 1944). Particularly valuable here for the treatment of the Declaration
of Independence.
Randall, Henry S. The Life of Thomas Jefferson (3 vols., New York, 1858).
The most extensive of the biographies.
Randolph, Robert Isham. The Randolphs of Virginia (Chicago, 1936).
Randolph, Sarah N. The Domestic Life of Thomas Jefferson (New York,
Harper and Bros., 1871). A 3d edn. by Mary R. N. McAdie (Cambridge,
Massachusetts, 1939) does not follow the original pagination.
Rawlings, Mary. The Albemarle of Other Days (Charlottesville, Michie
Co., 1925).
Rowland, Kate Mason. The Life of* George Mason, 1725-1792, including
his Speeches, Public Papers, and Correspondence (2 vols., New York,
1892). Practically a sourcebook.
Slaughter, Philip. Memoir of Col. Joshua Fry (1880).
Smith, Glenn Curtis. "Parson's Cause," Tyler's Mag., XXI, 140-171,193-306 (1939).
Smith, Preserved. History of Modern Culture (New York, Henry Holt and
Co., 1934).
Stevens, B. F., ed., The Campaign in Virginia: An Exact Reprint of Six
Rare Pamphlets on the Clinton-Cornwallis Controversy (2 vols., London,
1888).
Swem, Earl G. "Maps Relating to Virginia," Bulletin VSL, VII (Richmond,
1914).
Trent, William P. "The Case of Josiah Philips," A.H.R., I, 444-^54 (1896).
Jefferson was involved in this.
Tyler, Lyon G. Letters and Times of the Tvlers (2 vols., Richmond,
1884-1885).
Tyler, Moses Coit. Patrick Henry (Boston, Houghton Mifflin Co., 1887).
Voorhis, Manning C. The Land Grant Policy of Colonial Virginia,
1607-1774 (Doctoral Dissertation UVA, 1940).
Warren, Charles. A History of the American Bar (Boston, Little, Brown
and Co., 1913).
Waterman, Thomas T. The Mansions of Virginia, 1706-1776 (Chapel Hill,
University of North Carolina Press, 1945). Has much to say about
Jefferson's architecture.
Wertenbaker, T. J. The Old South (New York, Charles Scribner's Sons,
1942).
William and Mary. The History of the College of William and Mary from
its Foundation, 1660, to 1874 (Richmond, 1874).
. "Notes Relating to Some of the Students who Attended the College of
William and Mary, 1753-1770," W. & M., 2 ser., I, 27-42.
. A Provisional List of Alumni, Grammar School Students, Members of the
Faculty, and Members of the Board of Visitors of the College of Williamand Mary in Virginia, from 1693 to 1888 (Richmond, 1941).
Wirt, William. Sketches of the Life and Character of Patrick Henry
(Philadelphia, 1817). Based in part on materials provided by Jefferson.
Woodfin, Maude H. "Contemporary Opinion in Virginia of Thomas
Jefferson," in Essays in Honor of William E. Dodd, ed. by Avery Craven
(Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1935), pp. 30-85. Gives the best
clues I have found to local attitudes.
Woods, Edgar. History of Albemarle County, Virginia (Charlottesville,
1901).
Wright, Louis B. The First Gentlemen of Virginia (San Marino, California,
publication HEH, 1940).
. "Thomas Jefferson and the Classics," in Procs. Amer. Philos. Soc,
LXXXVIII (1943), 223-233.
Adams, John, legal education, 66-7; on study of law, 69; on Revolution,
173; on Congress, 203; on TJ, 203-04; on petitions and addresses of
Congress, 207-08; and Declaration of Independence, 219-22; committee-
man with TJ (1776), 242-43; letter from TJ, 276; commissioner in Europe,
398, 419
Adams, Samuel, 203
Adams, Thomas, 156, 164
Agriculture, praised by TJ, 383-84
Albemarle County, organized, 18; in TJ's boyhood, 27-30; represented byTJ, 130—31; re-elects TJ and John Walker as burgesses (1774), 180;
revolutionary committee, 192
Alberti, Francis, 159, 191
Allen, Ethan, TJ protests against treatment of, 213, 291-92
Ambler, Betsy, reports confusion in Virginia (1781), 358-59
Ambler, Jacquelin, in college, 59; successful suitor of Rebecca Burwell,
83; political associate of TJ, 307; during British invasion, 359; transmits
TJ's replies to Marbois, 375
Ambler, Mary, marries John Marshall, 83^
American Philosophical Society, TJ's early association with, 387-88
Anglican (see Church, Anglican; Clergy, Anglican)
Annapolis, visited bv TJ C1766), 98-9; visited by TJ (1775), 202; social
life (1784), 410
Architecture, TJ's early interest in, 143— 44; severe judgment on buildings
of Virginia, 145; influenced by Palladio and his disciples, 146-48; plans
Monti-cello, 148-50 (see Monticello)
Aristocracy, TJ's attitude to, xiii-xv, 177-78, 251-52
Arms, Coat of, TJ inquires about (1771), 156
Arnold, Benedict, raids Virginia, 336-
40; invades Virginia, 349; leaves Virginia, 353
Assembly (see Virginia, Province; Virginia, Commonwealth)
Association, signed in Virginia (1769), 137; signed in Virginia (1770), 140:
Continental, 191-92
Bacon, Francis, 101, 103, 401
Ballendine, John, 318Banister, John, 365-66
Baptists, in Virginia, 276
Barbe-Marbois, Francois, Marquis de, queries about Virginia, 374, 377;
and American Philosophical Society, 388; letter to, 405
Bartram, John, 15
Beccaria, C. B., 269
Bellini, Charles, 285
Blair, Anne, 63, 139
Bland, Richard, 133, 195, 209; in Burgesses, 89; in Stamp Act controversy,
93; An Inquiry into the Rights of the British Colonies, 134; on right of
emigration, 185; books bought by TJ, 286
Bolingbroke, Viscount, quoted by TJ, 106, 109
Boiling, John, marries Mary Jefferson, 38-9
Books, TJ's inheritance from his father, 32-3; early purchases in
Williamsburg, 103-04; losses in Shadwell fire, 126-27; purchases during
Revolution, 286; catalogue of 1783, 401-02
Boston Tea Party, commented on by TJ, 187
Botetourt, Norbornc Berkeley, Baron de, arrives in \ irginia, 128-29; opens
Assembly (1769), 131-32; dissolves Assembly, 134; calls new election,
137; makes conciliatory announcement, 138; popularity, 138-39; death, 140
Braxton, Carter, 209, 240-41
Brooke. Robert, 23, 24
INDEX
Buffon, Comte de, replied to, in Notes on Virginia, 376; TJ collects
materials against, 411Burgesses, House of (see Virginia, Province)
Burgoyne, General, 293
Burke, Edmund, criticizes Botetourt, 139; and TJ's Summary View, 189-90
Burwell, Lewis, and Fry & Jefferson map, 25; father of Rebecca, 81
Burwell, Rebecca, 307, 359, 375; account of, 81-2; marries Jacquelin
Ambler, 83-4
Byrd, William (the first), 6
Byrd, William (the second), dines with Thomas Jefferson II, 8; comments
on William Randolph of Tuckahoe, 13; friend of Isham Randolph, 13-14;
compared with TJ, 150
Callender, James Thomson, and Walker affair, 448
Camden, American defeat, 325-26
Canada, American expedition to, 211, 218
Capitol (Williamsburg), described by TJ, 63-*
Caractacus, horse of TJ, 197, 198, 358
Carr, Dabney, 127, 393, 395; schoolmate and friend of TJ, 42, 81; marries
Martha Jefferson, 85; happiness, 155-56; political debut, 170-71; death and
burial, 160-61, 165, 431 72.
Carr, Martha Jefferson, 39, 161; lives withTJ, 393, 396, 431 n.
Carr, Peter, 156, 393
Carter, Edward, political rival of TJ, 129-30
Carter, Landon, condemns abolition of entails, 254-56
Carter, Robert (of Nomini Hall), 40, 50,79
Carter's Mountain, affair of, 358, 359Cary, Archibald, 363, 428; in Burgesses (1769), 134; speaker of Senate,
lodges with TJ, 354; writes of resolution of investigation, 362; visited by
Jeffersons (1782), 399
Charleston, fall of (1780), 322
Charlottesville, established, 29
Chastellux, Marquis de, visits Monti-cello, 391-93, TJ hopes to sail with
(1782), 399
Chatham, Earl of, and Summary View, 190; resolutions approved by TJ,
199
Christianity (see Religion)
Church, Anglican, disestablishment in Virginia favored by TJ (1776), 237;
accomplished, 274-79 (see Clergy, Anglican)
Cincinnati, Society of, TJ's objections to, 414-15
Clark, George Rogers, 30, 377; victor in Northwest, 308-09; official
relations with TJ, 312-13; and projected expedition against Detroit, 334-36
Clark, William, 30
Clay, Rev. Charles, 165, 172 n.
Clergy, Anglican, struggle with political authorities in colonial Virginia,
43-4, 51-3, 60; attitude to Enlightenment, 103; TJ's attitude toward, 109;
and struggle for disestablishment in Virginia, 274-79 (see Dissenters)
Clinton, George, compared with TJ as governor, 305-06
Clinton, Sir Henry, General, 322-23, 331
Coigne, John Baptist de, Indian Chief, address of TJ to, 225, 352-53
Coinage, TJ's "Notes on the Establishment of a Money Unit," etc., 416-18
Coke, Sir Edward, Coke upon Littleton, 70-72, 270
Commerce, TJ's attitude to, in Notes, 383-84Concord, battle of, 197-98
Confederation, Articles of, debate on (1776), 243^*4
Congress, Continental: (1774), 181-82, 191; (1775), 203-08, 211-13;
(1776), 219-23, 228-30; (1783-84), 403-19; TJ on residence of, 404;
comments on, 409-10
Constitutions, TJ's view of, 235-36, 304-05, 369, 381
Convention prisoners, 293-97, 333-34
Cornwallis, Charles, General, 330, 331; victor at Camden, 325; invades
Virginia, 350, 353, 355; surrenders, 365; damages TJ's property, 390, 445
County courts, account of, 119-20
Cresap, Michael, 386-87
Crevecoeur, Jean de, 411
Crime, TJ's bill for proportioning crimes and punishments, 269-73
Dandridge, Nathaniel West, 89 Davies, Colonel William, 333; Virginia
commissioner of war, 348-49
475
Dawson, Rev. Thomas, President College of William and Mary, 50, 52
Debts, of Virginians to British, 193, 199, 201, 250, 259-60, 443
Declaration of Independence, committee, 219; drafting, 220-21;
congressional debate and changes, 222; literary qualities, 223; philosophy,
224, 226-28; charges against King, 224-26; charter of American
democracy, 227; adoption and reception, 229-31
Dejean, Philip, 309, 310
Democracy, attitude of TJ toward, before Declaration of Independence,
177-78; in Declaration, 227-28; in TJ's proposals to Virginia convention
(1776), 238-39; in his program of 1776-79 for Virginia, 251-52; in hisNotes on Virgima, 380; in his objections to Society of Cincinnati, 415 (see
Aristocracy)
Destouches, Chevalier, and naval aid to Virginia, 344, 346
Detroit, projected expedition against (1780-81), 313, 334-36
Dickinson, John, draft of declaration on necessity of taking up arms,
204-07
Dictatorship, movements for, in Virginia (1776), 305; (1781), 360-61
Dissenters, in Virginia, 274, 276-77, 285
Douglas, Rev. William, teacher of TJ, 39-40
Duane, James, comment on TJ, 204
Dungeness, 13, 14, 15
Dunmore, Earl of, Governor of Virginia, arrives, 142; early relations with
Assembly (1773-74), 169-72; on suspension of government, 192; powder
episode, 198-99; off coast (1775-76), 215, 243
Du Simitiere, Pierre Eugene, designs seals for Virginia and U.S., 242-43
Education, TJ's bills for, in Virginia, 280-85
Elkhill, acquired by TJ, 162, 442; damaged by Cornwallis, 356, 390, 445
Elk Island, acquired by TJ, 162, 442
Empire, British, TJ on imperial organization, 182-83, 189; attitude to
(1775), 210, 212-13
Enlightenment, embodied in America by TJ, xv, 101-02
Entails, abolition in Virginia, 251-56
Epicureanism, philosophy approved by TJ, 108
"E Pluribus Unum," suggested as motto (1776), 242-43Eppes, Elizabeth Wayles (sister-in-law of TJ), 157, 214, 241, 432; at
Monti-cello when Mrs. Jefferson died, 396; takes charge of TJ's younger
children, 399
Eppes, Francis (brother-in-law of TJ), 59, 157, 162, 164, 191, 207, 213-14,
241, 432; manages TJ's affairs in his absence, 399
Fabbroni, Giovanni, letter to, 288-89
Fairfax Line, expedition of 1746, 22-4
Farrell & Jones, TJ's debt to, 443-46
Fauquier, Francis, Lieutenant-Governor of Virginia, 88, 90; described,
75-8; TJ associates with, 53, 73-4, 78; personified social ideals, 86; in
Stamp Act controversy, 91-2, 94-5; death and will, 96-7; represents
Enlightenment, 102
Fine Creek, early home of Peter Jefferson, 9, 10, 12, 339, 437, 439
Fleming, William, college friend and early correspondent of TJ, 59, 81, 83;
reassures TJ of his popularity (1776), 240-41
Fluvanna River, 28-9
Forest, the, place of John Wayles, 153, 156, 160, 162, 214, 241
Franklin, Benjamin, 256, 290, 400; representative of Enlightenment, 101;
on power of Parliament, 183; meets TJ (1775), 204; and Declaration of
Independence, 219-22; and seal of the U.S., 242-43; regrets TJ's declination
of French mission, 245; commissioner, 398, 419; tells story, 418
Fry, Joshua, helps organize Albemarle County, 18; on Fairfax Line
expedition, 23; surveys dividing line with Peter Jefferson, 24-5; Fry and
Jefferson map, 25-6; services to Peter Jefferson, 26
Garth, Thomas, steward at Monticello, 301w.
Gates, General Horatio, aided by Virginia, 323-34; defeated at Camden,
325-26; relieved of command, 332
Geismar, Baron de, Hessian prisoner in Albemarle, 295General Court, account of, 120-21
George III, status, 187-88; comments of TJ on (1775), 212-13; charges
against (1776), 218, 224-26
Gerry, Elbridge, meets TJ (1766), 100; in Congress, 406; introduces TJ in
New England (1784), 421
Gibbs, James, 147
Gilmer, Dr. George, gives TJ letter of introduction (1766), 99; attends Dab-
ney Carr, 161; in powder episode, 198 n.\ acts for TJ at Virginia convention
(1776), 240; comments on TJ, 367
Godwin et al. vs. Lunan, TJ's argument, 122
Graff, Jacob, Jr., landlord of TJ in Philadelphia, 216
Greene, General Nathanael, commander Southern department, 332;
reinforced by TJ, 333, 343, 347-48
Hamilton, Alexander, 49, 291, 380, 383
Hamilton, Henry, case of, 308-12
Hancock, John, 198, 229
Hardy, Samuel, colleague of TJ in Congress, 410, 418; writes TJ, 420
Harper's Ferry, scene admired by TJ, 377
Harrison, Benjamin, the signer, in Burgesses (1769), 134; in convention
(1775), 195; in Congress, 203; comments on paper of Dickinson, 206-07;
re-elected, 209; dropped from delegation (1776), 240-41; conservative in
Virginia affairs, 248, 258, 367; speaker, lodges with TJ, 354; flees, 359
Harvard College, awards LL.D. degree to TJ, 422
Harvie, John, executor of Peter Jefferson's will, 28, 32, 43, 47, 438; letter
to, 49
Harvie, John, the younger, writes TJ (1777), 288; reports sentiment inAssembly (1781), 365
Hazard, Ebenezer, 191
Henderson, McCaul & Co., TJ's debt to, 443-44
Henley, Samuel, books bought by TJ, 286
Henry, John, map of Virginia, 26
Henry, Patrick, in Parsons' Cause, 43; early associations with TJ, 89-91;
speaks against Stamp Act, 92-4; becomes political leader, 95-6; as lawyer,
119,121, 124; in Burgesses (1769), 133-34; in Burgesses (1773), 170,
171-72;
political standing (1774), 181; in Congress, 190, 204; in convention
(March, 1775), 194-96; in powder episode, 198; in convention (summer,
1775), 208-09; in convention (1776), 236; elected governor, 239;
condemned by Landon Carter, 255; on Josiah Phillips, 292; TJ writes,
about Convention prisoners, 293, 319; political status in TJ's governorship,
303; and Clark's expedition, 308; opposes co-operation against inflation,
316; dominates Assembly (1780), 328; anecdote about flight, 359;
connection with movement for dictatorship and investigation of TJ's
conduct as governor, 360-61 (also 305 n.)\ TJ's suspicions of, regarding,
state constitution, 382
Hessians, prisoners in Albemarle County, 293-97
Hogendorp, G. K. van, comments on Congress and TJ (1784), 410, 420
Hopkinson, Francis, 405; letter to (1784), 415-16
Hopkinson, Mrs. Thomas, 405
House, Mrs., TJ lodges with, 400, 404
Howell vs. Netherlands TJ's argument, 121-22
Hutchins, Thomas, corresponds with TJ, 378 tz., 411
Illinois, Clark's expedition in, 308-09; TJ's relations with js governor, 312Immigration, questioned by TJ, 385
Indians, TJ's contacts with in college days, 60-61; on importance of
studying race, 267, 285; comments on, in Notes on Virginia, 385-87
Inflation, in Virginia in TJ's governorship, 315-16
Jay, John, 204, 398, 400, 419
Jefferson, Anna Scott (sister of TJ),
38, 116, 430 Jefferson, Elizabeth (sister of TJ), 38,
116-17; death, 165, 430-31 Jefferson, Field (brother of Peter), 9,
10, 427 Jefferson, Fort, 312-13, 336 Jefferson, Jane (sister and early
favorite
of TJ), 38, 39, 48, 152, 430 Jefferson, Jane Randolph, mother of TJ
(see Randolph, Jane) Jefferson, Jane Randolph (daughter of
TJ), 165, 210, 434
477
Jefferson, Lucy (sister of TJ), 38, 116, 430
Jefferson, Lucy Elizabeth (first), daughter of TJ, 349, 434
Jefferson, Lucy Elizabeth (second), daughter of TJ, 393, 434
Jefferson, Martha, sister of TJ (see Carr, Martha Jefferson)
Jefferson, Martha (Patsy), daughter of TJ, 160, 287, 393, 399, 434;
recollections of mother's death, 396; in Philadelphia (1783-84), 404-05;
accompanies TJ to New England and France, 421, 423
Jefferson, Martha Wayles Skelton, wife of TJ (see Wayles, Martha)
Jefferson, Mary (sister of TJ), marries John Boiling, 38-9, 430Jefferson, Mary (Polly), daughter of TJ, 287, 393, 399, 434
Jefferson, Peter, 3, 4, 5; birth and boyhood, 9; early career in Goochland,
10-12; marries Jane Randolph, 13, 17; acquires lands on Rivanna, 17; helps
organize Albemarle County, 18; at Tuckahoe, 19-20; helps mark Fairfax
Line, 22-4; map of Northern Neck, 24; surveys dividing line with Fry,
24-5; Fry & Jefferson map, 25-6; at Shadwell, 26-7; succeeds to Fry's
offices, 26-7; creates estates on Rivanna and Fluvanna, 28-9; death and
will, 31-2; legacy to Thomas, 32-3; genealogy, 427; children, 430; estate,
435-38
Jefferson, Randolph (brother of TJ), 28, 32, 116, 191,430
Jefferson, Thomas I (d. 1697, greatgrandfather of TJ), account of, 6-7;
genealogy, 426-27
Jefferson, Thomas II (c. 1677-1731, grandfather of TJ), account of, 8-10;
genealogy, 426-27
Jefferson, Thomas (1743-1826), subject of this book and referred to as TJ:
Personal History
Birth at Shadwell, 3; paternal ancestry, 5-12 (see Jefferson, Peter); maternal
ancestry, 12-17 (see Randolph, Jane); boyhood at Tuckahoe, 4, 21-2; in
Albemarle, 26-7; paternal heritage, 32-3; family life at Shadwell, 37-9; at
school in Goochland, 39-40; Maury's
school, 40-6; acquires accomplishments, 47-8; attends William & Mary,
49-61; studies law, 64-74; associates with Fauquier, 75, 77, 78; in musical
concerts at Palace, 78-9; social activities in Williamsburg, 80; love affair
with Rebecca Burwell, 81-4; relations with social environment, 86-7;
makes northern trip (1766), 98-100; practises law, 113-14, 118-27, 193;
inherits lands on Rivanna, 114, 436-37; moves to Monticello after
Shadwell fire, 126; builds at Monticello, 143-52, 287-88; affair with Mrs.
John Walker, 153-55, 447-51; courts and marries Martha Wayles Skelton,
153, 156-60 (see Wayles, Martha); inheritance on behalf of wife, 162-63,
260, 441-45; children, 160, 165, 287, 349, 393, 434; loses mother, 216;
does public work at home, 286-87; residence as governor, 301-02; leaves
Monticello to British (1781), 357-58; goes to Poplar Forest, 358; personal
losses in Revolution, 390-91, 445-46; visited by Chastellux, 391-93; illnessand death of wife, 394-98; arrangements for children, 399, 404-05; life in
Annapolis (1783-84), 409-11; visits New England, 421-22; sails for France,
423
Public Career
Preparation: as student in Williamsburg, 60-61, 88-96; in early study of
government, 173-74
Local service: improves navigation of Rivanna, 115-16; county lieutenant,
140, 210-11, 286-37; justice of peace, 287; draws county resolutions
(1774), 180; heads county committee to enforce Association (1774-75),
192; esteemed at home, 130
Provincial service: elected to House of Burgesses (1768), 129-31; attends
(1769), 131-38; (1770), 140; (1771), 142; (1773), 170; (1774), 171-72;
(1775), 198-201; signs Association, 137, 140; plays part in creation
committees of correspondence, 170; proposes day of fasting and prayer,
171-73; unable to attend Virginia convention (1774), sends paper
(Summary Vieiv) denying authority of Parliamenr, 180-83; attends
convention (March, 1775),
INDEX
193-96; (Aug. 1775), 208-09; replies to Lord North's motion, 199-201;
drafts constitution for Virginia (1776), 218, 235-39
Continental service, 1775-76: attends Congress (1775), 201-08, 211-13;
drafts declaration on necessity of taking up arms, 205-06; drafts reply to
Lord North's motion, 207; protests against treatment of Ethan Allen, 213;
attends Congress (1776), 235, 242-44; drafts Declaration of Independence,
219-28; declines re-election to Congress, 240-41; collaborates with
Franklin and Adams on seal of U.S., 242-43; declines mission to France,
245
Legislative service to State, 1776— 79: in House of Delegates, 247-50;
abolishes entails and primogeniture, 251-57; takes liberal position on
western lands, 257-58; seeks to relieve debtors to British, 259-60; revises
Virginia laws, 261—63; favors emancipation, 264-68; advocates relaxation
of penal code, 269-73; advocates religious freedom, 274-80; efforts forpublic education, 280-55; for public library, 285
Governorship: election, 301-02; political status (1779), 302-04; weakness
of position, 304-08; treatment of Henry Hamilton, 308-12; relations with G.
R. Clark, 308-09, 312-13, 334-36; problems before invasion — financial,
314-16; ordnance, 317-19; food, 319; soldiers, 320-22; improves service of
information after fall of Charleston, 324; increases efforts after Camden,
326-27; wishes to retire (1780), 327-28; Leslie's raid, 331-32; urges
continued support of South, 333; removes Convention prisoners, 333-34;
plans expedition against Detroit, 334-36; relations with Steuben, 342-43,
346, 347-48; welcomes Lafayette, 345; invasion of Phillips, Arnold, and
Cornwallis, 349-51, 353; term expires in chaos, 355; conduct investigated
by legislature and vindicated, 361-66; effects on career, 367-68; considered
as governor, 368-69; desires to retire from public life, 394-96
Return to service: accepts renewed foreign appointment, 398-99; unable to
sail and released, 399-400; drafts constitution for Virginia (1783), 400;
in Continental Congress (1783-84), 403-19; and ratification of peace treaty,
407-08; Ordinance of 1784,412-16; on coinage, 416-18; urges committee
of states, 418; elected commissioner, 419; visits New England, 421-22;
sails for France, 423
Papers (see Bibliography)
Personal records: skill at, 116-17; Literary Bible, 104; Commonplace
Books, 72-3, 173-74; Garden Book, 117; Account Books, 117-18; Case
Book, 118; Fee Book, 118; reported legal arguments, 121-22; Farm Book,
163; catalogue of library (1783), 401-02
Public papers: resolutions, Burgesses (1769), 132-33; reply to North's
motion, 199-201, 207; draft of declaration on necessity of taking up arms,
205-06; protest against treatment of Ethan Allen, 213; Declaration of
Independence, 220-31; bills against entails and primogeniture, 251, 254;
for relief of debtors to British, 260; Report of Revisors, 263; bill on
citizenship, 269; for proportioning crimes and punishments, 269-72; for
establishing religious freedom, 278-79; educational bills, 280-84;
Ordinance of 1784, 412-16; "Notes on the Establishment of a Money Unit,"
416-18
Political and philosophical: Summary View, 181-90; proposed constitutionfor Virginia (1776), 235-39; (1783), 379-82; Notes on Virginia, 373-89;
"Thoughts on English Prosody," 393
Philosophy and Opinions
In general: exemplification and embodiment of Enlightenment, xv, 101—
03; fundamental liberalism, xiv-xv, 178-79; regards philosophical activities
as important, 289-90
Religious: influence of Maury and Parsons' Cause, 43-4; of controversy at
William & Mary, 52-3; early religious struggles, 106-^09; religion a pri-
479
vate matter, 275-76; freedom of religion, 109, 237; inseparable from
intellectual freedom, 278-79
Political: development, 173-74; natural rights, 175-76, 184-85, 188, 227;
self-government and dictatorship, 178— 79, 305, 360; republicanism, 177;
aristocracy and democracy, xiv, 178-79, 227, 231, 251-52, 380, 414-15;
property, 227, 256-57, 258; imperial organization, 182-83, 189 (see Public
Career); on Union, 191-92, 319-20, 406, 422-23; view of constitutions,
235-36, 304-05, 369, 381; suffrage and representation, 238-39, 379-80;
checks and balances, 380-82; agriculture, commerce, and manufacturing,
383-85; civilized warfare, 291-92 Architectural: 146-48, 150 Educational:
281-85, 405-06 Scientific: delights of mathematics and natural philosophy,
54; observations of weather, 77, 229, 288; risks inoculation, 100; natural
history section of Notes on Virginia, 375-76
Comments and Descriptions
At seventeen, 48; by Henry Adams, xi; John Adams, 203-04; Betsy
Ambler, 359; Chastellux, 392; congressional colleagues (1784), 419; James
Duane, 204; F. W. Gilmer, 56; George Gilmer, 367; Hessian officers,
295-96; Hogendorp, 420; Isaac Jefferson, 391— 92, 402; Joseph Jones,
322; John Page, 58, 328; Roger Sherman, 421; Ezra Stiles, 422; John
Sullivan, 422; St. George Tucker, 304; John Tyler, 419
Personal Qualities and Characteristics
Amiability, xvii, 85, 419; cheerfulness, 108, 288; civilian type, 291;disinterestedness, xii, xvi, 249, 257, 303-04, 322, 367; domesticity, xviii,
143, 286-88; formality, xviii, 153; health, xviii, 48, 56-7, 216, 407, 411;
humor, xviii, 57, 98, 314, 316, 318, 410; industry, 55-6, 67-8, 103, 248,
304, 307, 411; morality, 87, 108; politeness, 86-7; ruthlessness in public
matters, 293, 311-12; sensitiveness, xvii, 48, 133, 362, 364-66, 394;
uncontentiousness, 203, 210, 409, 415; versatility, viii
Jones, Gabriel, 118, 134, 292
Jones, Joseph, comments on TJ, 322; advises Monroe, 325; transmits
queries of Marbois, 374
Jones, Strother, 292
Jouett, John, Junior (Jack), outrides Tarleton, 355, 356-57
Jupiter, servant of TJ, 64, 124, 159, 391
Kaskaskia, 309
Kentucky, TJ and settlers, 312-13; secession movement, 335; separate state
favored by TJ, 413
King, British (see George III)
Lafayette, Marquis de, 330; welcomed by TJ, 345; abandons expedition
against Arnold, 346-47; saves Richmond, 349-50; military situation (1781),
353-54; comments on TJ's future, 364
Lamothe, Captain William, 309, 310
Land, small grants favored by TJ, 238; abolition of entails and
primogeniture, 251-56; TJ's attitude to western lands (1776), 244; western
lands in Virginia policy, 257-59; Virginia cession, 412; Ordinance of 1784,
412-16
Laurens, Henry, 398, 399
Law, studied by TJ, 65-70; practised, 113-14, 118-27, 193 (see
Constitutions)
Law, natural (see Rights, Natural)Laws, Revisal in Virginia, 261-73
Lee, Arthur, 245, 407, 410
Lee, Francis Lightfoot, 170, 209
Lee, Henry, and Walker affair, 447-48, 451
Lee, Richard Henry, 203, 209, 212, 241, 244, 249, 347, 358, 361, 367; in
pre-Revolutionary politics, 95-6, in Burgesses (1769), 134; and committees
of correspondence, 170-71; at convention (March, 1775), 195; resolutions
in Congress (1776), 219; comments on Declaration, 230; on TJ's accession
as governor, 304; on treatment of Henrv Hamilton, 310; letter to (1779),
315; against inflation, 316; unpopularity, 328
Lee, Thomas Ludwell, 261-62
Lego, 440
Leslie, General Alexander, leads landing party in Virginia, 330, 331-32
Lewis, Charles, 208
Lewis, Charles Lilburne, 116, 429
INDEX
Lewis, Meriwether, 30, 46-7
Lewis, Nicholas, manages TJ's affairs, 399
Lewis, Thomas, account of expedition (1746), 23
Lexington, battle of, 197, 198
Library, public, TJ's bill for, 285
Library, TJ's (see Books)
Lincoln, Abraham, compared with TJ, viii, 5; on Declaration of
Independence, 226, 228Livingston, Robert R., 219
Livingston, William, on committee with TJ, comments on paper, 204-05;
good writer, 212; compared with TJ as governor, 306, 342
Locke, John, in trinity of immortals, 101, 102; TJ's familiarity with, 175,
275; and phraseology of Declaration, 227
Logan, Indian chief, speech, 386-87
Loyal Land Co., 252
Luzerne, Chevalier de la, letter to (1780), 317
McClurg, James, 285
Madison, James, 40, 192, 331, 368, 399; on Council of State, 306-07; and
Re-visal of laws, 263, 269; and fight for religious freedom, 278-79; and
TJ's educational proposals, 283; on TJ's retirement (1782), 396; moves
renewal of foreign appointment, 398; comments on Mason's views, 406;
letters to (1784), 407, 409, 410, 411, 422; quotes TJ in Federalist, 380
Madison, Rev. James, 388, 411; at Maury's school, 42; observes eclipse,
289
Madison, John, 118
Manufacturing, TJ's attitude to, in Notes, 383-84
Marbois (see Barbe-Marbois, Francois de)
Marshall, John, xiii, 83^, 307, 359
Mason, George, drafts an "Association" agreement, 137; comments on
political situation (1774), 171-72; declines election to Congress (1775),
209; drafts Declaration of Rights, 221, 236-37; liberalism, 240; and
Western land question, 258-59; and revision of laws, 261-62; and Clark's
expedition, 308; opposes inflation, 316; urges TJ to continue in office, 328;
letter from, 365; indifference to union, 406
Mason, Thomson, 121Massachusetts Bay Colony, importance in Revolution, 135
Maury, Rev. James, school in Albemarle, 40-43; in Parson's Cause, 43;
contributions to TJ, 44-5
Maury, James, the younger, 42
Mayo, William, 12
Mazzei, Philip, 287, 289; neighbor of TJ, 164-65; leaves Colle, 294
Mercer, Colonel, stamp collector in Virginia, 94-5
Mercer, John, 123
Mercer, John Francis, in Congress, 409, 410
Meriwether, Nicholas, 28
Methodists, in Virginia, 276
Militia, TJ's attitude to, 344, 347, 348-49
Monroe, James, 291; befriended by TJ, 324-25; on TJ's return to public
service, 394; letter to (1782), 394-95; buys land, 409; keeps house with TJ,
410; comments on his appointment (1784), 419; suggests visit to John
Walker, 451
Montesquieu, Baron de, 178; TJ copies from, 176-77
Monticello, TJ moves to, 126-27; building operations, 143-52, 163, 287-88;
occupied by British, 357, 362; described by Chastellux, 391-92
Moore, Colonel Bernard, 154
Morgan, Haynes, 365
Morgan, Dr. John, 99
Morris, Robert, architectural writer, 147, 148
Morris, Robert, financier, 416-18Music, TJ's first study of, 47-8; in colonial Williamsburg, 78-9; in TJ's
courtship, 158-59; TJ expresses passion for, 289
Muter, George, 348
Natural Bridge, 162, 377, 440 Natural rights (see Rights, Natural) Navy,
Virginia's, nullified by British,
316-17 Negroes, compared with whites, 267-68
(see Slavery, Slaves) Nelson, Thomas, Sr., 126 Nelson, Thomas, Jr., friend
of TJ's youth and young manhood, 59, 82, 126; in Burgesses (1769), 134;
elected to Congress, 209; lodges with TJ, 211; letters from (1776), 216-17;
(1777), 288; political opponent, 302-03; gen-
481
eral of militia, 318; in Arnold's raid, 337, 338; succeeds TJ as governor,
360-61; supposed conservatism, 367
Nelson, William, 82, 142
New England, visited by TJ (1784), 421-22
Newton, Sir Isaac, in TJ's trinity of immortals, 101
New York City, visited by TJ, 100
New York, Colony of, suspension of legislature, 135, 186-87; supposed
defection from Association, 196
Nicholas, George, moves investigation of TJ, 361; account of, 363-64; later
attitude, 364, 365, 366
Nicholas, John, executor of Peter Jefferson, 438
Nicholas, Robert Carter, 92, 138, 195, 200, 363; treasurer of Virginia, 96;
objects to TJ's address, 133; offers legal business to TJ, 122, 159
North, Lord, says colonists ignore Parliament, 139; motion replied to by TJ,
199, 207Notes on Virgima, circumstances of writing, 373-77; description, 377-86;
offered to American Philosophical Society, 388
Ossian, 392
Outacity, Cherokee chief, visits Williamsburg, 60-61
Page, John, 19, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 108, 125, 126; enters William
and Mary, 50; influenced by Small, 54; account of, 58-9; letter to, about
Annapolis trip, 98; urges independence, 217; pleased with Declaration,
230; president Council of State, 239; observes eclipse, 289; political
opponent of TJ, 302-03; on Council, 306; detains Continental arms, 317;
urges TJ to remain in office (1780), 328; on Walker affair, 451
Paine, Thomas, 217
Palace of Governor (Williamsburg), described, 75; occupied by TJ, 301-02
Palladio, Andrea, influences TJ, 146-150
Pantops, 28, 440
Parliament, British, authority denied by TJ (1774), 182-87; ignored in
Declaration of Independence, 224
Pelham, Peter, 79, 309
Pendleton, Edmund, 96, 124, 138, 195,
236, 241, 249; early friend of TJ, 88-9; in Stamp Act controversy, 93; as
lawyer, 120-21; starts TJ on legislative paper-work, 132-33; admired by TJ,
177; point of view (1776), 239-40; op-
f)oses TJ's retirement, 245, 290; on and policy, 253-54; and revision of
laws, 261-62, 270; correspondent (1784), 410-11
Penet, Windel & Co., 318
Pennsylvania, boundary question with Virginia, 242, 355
Philadelphia, visited by TJ (1766), 99; TJ's trip to (1775), 201-02
Phillips, Josiah, case of, 292-93Phillips, Major General William, associates with TJ as prisoner, 294-95;
intercedes for Henry Hamilton, 309, 310; reinforces Arnold, 246; invades
Virginia, 349; death, 351
Poplar Forest, TJ's place, 162, 358, 361, 442
Potomac River, navigation of, discussed by TJ, 378
Presbyterians, in Virginia, 276
Primogeniture, abolition in Virginia, 253-54
Randolph, Benjamin, landlord of TJ in Philadelphia, 203, 211; makes
writing-box, 216
Randolph, Edmund, comments on Summary View, 182; at convention
(1776), 236, 240; on case of Josiah Phillips, 292; correspondent, 411
Randolph family, 12, 428-29
Randolph, Isham (grandfather of TJ), account of, 13-17; descendants, 429
Randolph, Jane, 3, 4, 14, 116, 429; marries Peter Jefferson, 13, 17; account
of, 37-8; death, 216; children, 430
Randolph, John, lawyer, 65, 120-21, 124; in musical group, Williamsburg,
79; trades for violin, 159, 209-10; corresponds with TJ about issues (1775),
210, 212-13
Randolph, Peter, 96; executor of Peter Jefferson, 32, 49, 438; in Stamp Act
controversy, 93
Randolph, Peyton, 78, 89, 181, 196, 203, 208, 209; King's attorney, 65 \ in
Stamp Act controversy, 93; speaker, 96, 133; moderator, 136; admired by
TJ, 177; death, 211; books bought by TJ, 286
INDEX
Randolph, Thomas Mann, 19, 21, 22, 134, 428
Randolph, William, friend of Peter Jefferson, 13, 17, 19, 428, 435, 436"Rebellion to Tyrants," motto used by TJ, 242^3
Religion, attitude of TJ toward, 106-09, 237, 274-77; his bill for religious
freedom, 278-80 (see Church, Anglican)
Revolution, American, precipitates TJ's public career, xi-xii; beginning,
135; m hearts of people, 173; TJ's motives, 201-02; personal attitude
(1775), 212; interpretation of causes, 224-26; personal attitude (1781),
352-53
Richmond, seat of convention (March, 1775), 193; becomes seat of state
government (1780), 302; entered by Arnold, 339-40; saved by Lafayette,
349
Riedesel, Baron and Baroness, neighbors of TJ, 294-97
Rights, Natural, in Howell vs. Nether-land, 122; TJ's early acceptance,
175-76; in Summary View, 184-85, 189; in Declaration of Independence,
226-29; in Declaration of Rights, 236-38; TJ's desire to translate into law,
249-50; religious freedom a natural right, 278
Ritchie, Thomas, quoted, 368
Rittenhouse, David, 405; TJ writes to 0779), 289-90
Rivanna River, TJ's efforts to improve navigation, 115-16
Robinson, John, speaker, in Stamp Act controversy, 93; discredited, 95-6
Rodney, Commodore, 332
Rowe, Rev. Jacob, 52
Rubsamer, Jacob, writes TJ, 296
Rush, Dr. Benjamin, on Congress (1783), 404
Rutledge, Edward, 291
Rutledge, John, 204
Science, TJ introduced to, by Small, 51, 53-4; encouraged in Virginia by
Fauauier, 77, 97; importance of scientific activities, 289-90; natural historyin Notes on Virginia, 375-76; scientific opportunities in America, 388-89
Seal of U.S., recommendations of TJ, Franklin, and Adams, 242-43
Shadwell, birthplace of TJ, 3, 4, 5; account of, 27; deal of Peter Jefferson
for homesite, 17, 436; in his will, 114; burning, 125-26
Sherman, Roger, 219, 421
Shippen, Dr. William, Jr., 99, 211
Short, William, 409
Simcoe, Lieutenant Colonel, puts Steuben to flight, 355-56
Skelton, Bathurst, in college, 59; marries Martha Wayles, 156-57; death,
156
Skelton, John, son of Martha Wayles Skelton, 156-57; death, 158
Skipwith, Henry, 162, 433, 442
Skipwith, Robert, 158, 433
Slavery, TJ's early efforts against, 141; in violation of natural law, 122,
228; comments in Summary View, 187; in Notes on Virginia, 264-68;
provisions in Ordinance (1784), 414, 415-16
Slaves, TJ's, 32, 114, 163, 390-91, 440, 441, 444, 445
Small, William, 77, 78, 81, 90; teacher of TJ in college, 51-3; account of,
53-5; introduces TJ to Wythe, 67; associates with Wythe, Fauquier, and TJ,
73-4; introduces TJ to the Enlightenment, 102, 104; letter to (1775), 197-98
Smallpox, inoculation against, 100, 399
Snowden, Peter Jefferson's place, 5, 29, 437
Southall, Turner, 365
Southwest Mountains, 27Stamp Act, controversy in Virginia, 91-
Sterne, Laurence, early favorite of TJ,
105, 156 Steuben, General von, left by Greene in
Virginia, 333; in Arnold's raid, 337,
339; differences with TJ, 342-43, 346;
plans to join Greene, 347; put to
flight by Simcoe, 355-56 Stevens, General, letter to, 326 Stiles, Ezra,
421-22 Suffrage, at TJ's first election, 129; his
recommendations (1776), 238-39;
(1783), 379-30 Sullivan, General John, writes TJ, 411,
412 Summary View of the Rights of British
America, 181-90
Taliaferro, Richard, 65, 144 Tarleton, Lieutenant Colonel Banastre,
raid, 355-58 Taylor, John of Caroline, 266, 360 n.
483
Theater, attended by TJ in Williamsburg, 64, 125, 156
Thomson, Charles, secretary of Congress, 229; on Notes on Virginia, 375,
388; on scientific opportunities in America, 388-89; and committee of
states, 418
Tocqueville, Alexis de, on laws of inheritance, 254; on slavery, 268
Townshend duties, opposed in Virginia, 135-37
Trade, Board of, in Virginia, 307, 322
Trist, Airs. Elizabeth, TJ lodges with, 400; befriends Patsy, 404, 406Tuckahoe, 4, 12; services of Peter Jefferson there, 19-20; description, 21-2
Tufton, 28, 436-37
Turpin, Thomas, executor of Peter Jefferson, 32, 438; letter of TJ to, 67; TJ
occupies his house as governor, 302
Tyler, John, 98, 365, 411; student friend of TJ, 59, 64; hears Patrick Henry,
92; flees to Staunton, 359; on TJ's retirement (1782), 394; on TJ's foreign
mission, 419-20
Unger, John Lewis de, Hessian admirer of TJ, 295-96
VlNCENNES, 309
Virginia, Province, TJ's relation to its society, xiii-xv; Fry & Jefferson map,
25-6; social life and manners, 78, 86-7; political organization, 88; political
alignments after 1765, 95-6; "burges-sing," 129; House of Burgesses
(1769), 131-38; Assembly prorogued by Dun-more, 169-70; Burgesses
create committee of correspondence (1773), 170-71; fast resolutions
(1774), 172-73; Convention (Aug. 1774), 180, 181; enforcement of
Association, 192-93; Convention (Mar. 1775), 193-96; Assembly (June,
1775), 198-201; Convention (July-Aug. 1775), 208-09
Virginia, Commonwealth, constitution of 1776, 217, 235-40; designs for
seal, 242-43; land question, 251-59; disestablishment of Church, 274-79;
failure of TJ's educational proposals, 283-84; political organization,
238-40, 304-07, 379-82; collapse of government (1781), 352, 354-55;
cession of Northwestern territory to U.S., 377, 412
Walker, John, friend of TJ from boyhood, 42, 57, 59, 153-54; in Burgesses
with TJ, 142, 172, 180; on Albemarle committee, 192; on Council of State,
306; quarrel with TJ, 154-55, 447-48, 450-51; letter to Henry Lee, making
charges against TJ, 449-50
Walker, Mrs. John (Elizabeth Moore), TJ's affair with, 153-55; 447-51
Walker, Dr. Thomas, 115, 252, 365, 377; neighbor and executor of Peter
Jefferson, 28, 30, 32, 154, 438; in House of Burgesses, 129, 154; letter to,
about Notes on Virginia, 376
War, Board of, in Virginia, 307, 321-22Washington, George, 177, 203, 254-55, 306, 400; in House of Burgesses
(1769), 134, 137; political standing (1774), 181; in Virginia convention
(March, 1775), 195; as commander in chief, sets out for New England
(1775), 202; urges better men in Congress, 290; on case of Henry
Hamilton, 310-12; letters to, 321-24; receives report of Leslie's raid,
331-32; consulted about expedition against Detroit, 334-35; and Arnold's
raid, 336-37, 339, 341^2; appealed to by TJ (1781), 353-54; thanks TJ for
support, 354; talked of, as dictator, 361; congratulated by TJ, 365;
described by Chastellux, 392; resigns commission, 406-07; discusses
Society of Cincinnati with TJ, 413-15; compared with TJ, viii
Wayles, John (father-in-law of TJ), 156-57, 432; death and estate, 161-63;
history of inheritance from him, 441-46
Wayles, Martha (wife of TJ), 294, 301; marries Bathurst Skelton, 156;
marries TJ, 153, 159-60; description, 156-59, 397; children, 160, 165, 287,
349, 393, 434; inheritance, 162-63, 441-46; bad health, 214, 241, 245-46;
last illness and death, 393-96; genealogy, 432
Weather, observations on, 77, 229, 288
Weedon, General George, of Virginia militia, 347
Whipple, William, writes TJ about natural history, 411
William and Mary, College of, account of in TJ's student days, 50-53,
59-60; TJ attempts to transform, 284-85; gives D.C.L. degree to TJ, 422
Williamsburg, description in TJ's stu-
NDEX
dent days, 62-4; as school of manners and morals, 86-7; as school of
government, 88; visited by TJ as young lawyer, 124-25; ceases to be
capital, 302
Willis, Frank, law student with TJ, 64, 98
Wilson, James, 183 w., 212
Wythe, George, 77, 78, 88, 90, 97, 123, 182, 243, 244, 245, 281, 285, 308,338; law teacher of TJ, 64-5, 67, 68-9, 73-4; in Stamp Act controversy,
91-2, 93,
94; represents enlightenment, 102; influences TJ's classical reading, 104;
introduces TJ to General Court, 120; eminence as lawyer, 120-31; delegate
to Congress, 209; receives TJ's draft of Virginia constitution, 218, 236; sees
need for reformation, 239; a revisor of the laws, 261-62, 269, 271
Yale College, visited by TJ, 421-22 Yates, Rev. William, President,
College of William and Mary, 52