## Praise for Andrew Carnegie

“David Nasaw’s fascinating new biography…is a marvelous window onto the man and his world…. I expect it will
be the definitive work on Carnegie for the foreseeable future, and it fully deserves to be.”

—John Steele Gordon, The New York Times

“Never has this story been told so thoroughly or so well as David Nasaw tells it in this massive and
monumental biography.”

—Jonathan Yardley, The Washington Post

“Nasaw’s Carnegie is a man of enthusiasms, and the author captures his ebullience in limpid prose, making his
biography a delight to read.”

—Steve Fraser, The Nation

“David Nasaw’s Andrew Carnegie is the first full scale biography of the steelmaker-turned-philanthropist in
thirty years…. [It] belongs in the library of anyone intrigued by the life and times of one of America’s most
memorable business leaders.”

—Chicago Tribune

“The great strength of this immense biography is the way in which David Nasaw causes these
tributaries—capitalism, radicalism, and educational aspiration—to converge like the three rivers (the
Allegheny, the Ohio, and the Monongahela) whose confluence makes the site of Pittsburgh possible.”

—Christopher Hitchens, The Atlantic

“Rich and absorbing.”

—BusinessWeek

“A terrific writer.”

—The Seattle Times

“Nasaw delivers a vivid history of nineteenth-century capitalism.”

—Fortune

“Masterful.”

—James Nuechterlein, Commentary

“Nasaw is an indefatigable researcher.”

—Pittsburgh Post Gazette

“[An] important contribution.”

—Financial Times (London)

“For all his ruling-class narcissism and his stupefying ignorance of his workers’ lives, he comes across in
Nasaw’s pages as a fascinating and ultimately likeable figure or an indefatigable researcher.”

—Jackson Lears, The New Republic

“Mr. Nasaw’s account of Andrew Carnegie’s life and career is the most complete to date.”

—Albert B. Southwick, Worcester Telegram & Gazette

“Nasaw…understands narrative well, making the Carnegie biography a lively reading experience as well as a
rewarding scholarly mission.”

—Steve Weinberg, Houston Chronicle

“A rich reappraisal of the Gilded Age giver of libraries at a time when Bill Gates and Warren Buffett are
gifting fortunes and recalling Carnegie’s dictum, ‘He who dies rich, dies disgraced.’”

—James Pressly, Bloomberg.com

“The new biography by Professor David Nasaw has generated rare critical unanimity in proclaiming it
definitive…. Nasaw has consulted significant new sources and has probably told us as much about Carnegie as
can ever confidently be known or conjectured.”

—The Scotsman

“Make no mistake: David Nasaw…has produced the most thorough, accurate and authoritative biography of Carnegie
to date…. It speaks highly of Nasaw’s prowess as a researcher…that he has uncovered entire episodes previously
unknown to historians.”

—T. J. Stiles, Salon

“The definitive biography.”

—The Christian Science Monitor

“With clear eye and fair mind, David Nasaw has written the definitive modern biography of Andrew Carnegie.”

—Michael Fellman, The Vancouver Sun

“Nasaw’s portrait of Carnegie is one of the most fascinating biographies in many years.”

—BookLoons

## PENGUIN BOOKS

ANDREW CARNEGIE

David Nasaw is the author of the nationally bestselling biography The Chief: The Life of William Randolph
Hearst, winner of the Bancroft Prize, the J. Anthony Lukas Prize, the Ambassador Book Award, and finalist for
the National Book Critics Circle Award for Biography; Going Out: The Rise and Fall of Public Amusements; and
Children of the City: At Work and at Play. He is currently a Distinguished Professor of History at the
Graduate Center of the City University of New York. His work has appeared in The New Yorker, The Nation, Condé
Nast’s Traveler, the London Review of Books, The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, and other
publications. He lives in New York City.

## ANDREW CARNEGIE

## DAVID NASAW

[image]

PENGUIN BOOKS

PENGUIN BOOKS
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A. Penguin Group (Canada), 90
Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2,
Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd) Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria
3124, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community
Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi–110 017, India Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore
0632, New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee
Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa

Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices:
80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England

First published in the United States of America by The Penguin Press, a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
2006
Published in Penguin Books 2007

Copyright © David Nasaw, 2006
All rights reserved

THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS HAS CATALOGED THE HARDCOVER EDITION AS FOLLOWS:
Nasaw, David.
Andrew Carnegie / David Nasaw.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN: 978-1-1012-0179-4
1. Carnegie, Andrew, 1835–1919. 2. Industrialists—United States—Biography.
3. Philanthropists—United States—Biography. I. Title.
CT275.C3N37       2006       2006044840

Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way
of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior
consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar
condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.

The scanning, uploading and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means without the
permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please purchase only authorized electronic
editions, and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materials. Your support of
the author’s rights is appreciated.

## CONTENTS

[INTRODUCTION][1]



[ONE: Dunfermline, 1835–1848][2]

[TWO: To America, 1848–1855][3]

[THREE: Upward Bound, 1853–1859][4]

[FOUR: War and Riches, 1860–1865][5]

[FIVE: Branching Out, 1865–1866][6]

[SIX: A Man of Energy, 1867–1868][7]

[SEVEN: “Mr. Carnegie Is Now 35 Years of Age, and Is Said to Be Worth One Million of Dollars,” 1870–1872][8]

[EIGHT: “All My Eggs in One Basket,” 1872–1875][9]

[NINE: Driving the Bandwagon, 1875–1878][10]

[TEN: Round the World, 1878–1881][11]

[ELEVEN: Making a Name, 1881–1883][12]

[TWELVE: Mr. Spencer and Mr. Arnold, 1882–1884][13]

[THIRTEEN: “The Star-spangled Scotchman,” 1884][14]

[FOURTEEN: Booms and Busts, 1883–1885][15]

[FIFTEEN: The “Millionaire Socialist,” 1885–1886][16]

[SIXTEEN: Things Fall Apart, 1886–1887][17]

[SEVENTEEN: A Wedding and a Honeymoon, 1887][18]

[EIGHTEEN: The Pinkertons and “Braddock’s Battlefield,” 1887–1888][19]

[NINETEEN: Friends in High Places, 1888–1889][20]

[TWENTY: The Gospels of Andrew Carnegie, 1889–1892][21]

[TWENTY-ONE: Surrender at Homestead, 1889–1890][22]

[TWENTY-TWO: “There Will Never Be a Better Time Than Now to Fight It Out,” 1890–1891][23]

[TWENTY-THREE: The Battle for Homestead, 1892][24]

[TWENTY-FOUR: Loch Rannoch, the Summer of 1892][25]

[TWENTY-FIVE: Aftermaths, 1892–1894][26]

[TWENTY-SIX: “Be of Good Cheer—We Will Be Over It Soon,” 1893–1895][27]

[TWENTY-SEVEN: Sixty Years Old, 1895–1896][28]

[TWENTY-EIGHT: “An Impregnable Position,” 1896–1898][29]

[TWENTY-NINE: “We Now Want to Take Root,” 1897–1898][30]

[THIRTY: The Anti-Imperialist, 1898–1899][31]

[THIRTY-ONE: “The Richest Man in the World,” 1899–1901][32]

[THIRTY-TWO: “The Saddest Days of All,” 1901][33]

[THIRTY-THREE: “A Fine Piece of Friendship,” 1902–1905][34]

[THIRTY-FOUR: “Apostle of Peace,” 1903–1904][35]

[THIRTY-FIVE: “Inveterate Optimist,” 1905–1906][36]

[THIRTY-SIX: Peace Conferences, 1907][37]

[THIRTY-SEVEN: Tariffs and Treaties, 1908–1909][38]

[THIRTY-EIGHT: “So Be It,” 1908–1910][39]

[THIRTY-NINE: The Best Laid Schemes, 1909–1911][40]

[FORTY: “Be of Good Cheer,” 1912–1913][41]

[FORTY-ONE: 1914][42]

[FORTY-TWO: Last Days, 1915–1919][43]

[NOTES][44]

[BIBLIOGRAPHY OF WORKS CITED][45]

[ACKNOWLEDGMENTS][46]

[INDEX][47]

[1]: andrewcarnegie_fm02.html#fm01
[2]: andrewcarnegie_ch01.html#ch01
[3]: andrewcarnegie_ch02.html#ch02
[4]: andrewcarnegie_ch03.html#ch03
[5]: andrewcarnegie_ch04.html#ch04
[6]: andrewcarnegie_ch05.html#ch05
[7]: andrewcarnegie_ch06.html#ch06
[8]: andrewcarnegie_ch07.html#ch07
[9]: andrewcarnegie_ch08.html#ch08
[10]: andrewcarnegie_ch09.html#ch09
[11]: andrewcarnegie_ch10.html#ch10
[12]: andrewcarnegie_ch11.html#ch11
[13]: andrewcarnegie_ch12.html#ch12
[14]: andrewcarnegie_ch13.html#ch13
[15]: andrewcarnegie_ch14.html#ch14
[16]: andrewcarnegie_ch15.html#ch15
[17]: andrewcarnegie_ch16.html#ch16
[18]: andrewcarnegie_ch17.html#ch17
[19]: andrewcarnegie_ch18.html#ch18
[20]: andrewcarnegie_ch19.html#ch19
[21]: andrewcarnegie_ch20.html#ch20
[22]: andrewcarnegie_ch21.html#ch21
[23]: andrewcarnegie_ch22.html#ch22
[24]: andrewcarnegie_ch23.html#ch23
[25]: andrewcarnegie_ch24.html#ch24
[26]: andrewcarnegie_ch25.html#ch25
[27]: andrewcarnegie_ch26.html#ch26
[28]: andrewcarnegie_ch27.html#ch27
[29]: andrewcarnegie_ch28.html#ch28
[30]: andrewcarnegie_ch29.html#ch29
[31]: andrewcarnegie_ch30.html#ch30
[32]: andrewcarnegie_ch31.html#ch31
[33]: andrewcarnegie_ch32.html#ch32
[34]: andrewcarnegie_ch33.html#ch33
[35]: andrewcarnegie_ch34.html#ch34
[36]: andrewcarnegie_ch35.html#ch35
[37]: andrewcarnegie_ch36.html#ch36
[38]: andrewcarnegie_ch37.html#ch37
[39]: andrewcarnegie_ch38.html#ch38
[40]: andrewcarnegie_ch39.html#ch39
[41]: andrewcarnegie_ch40.html#ch40
[42]: andrewcarnegie_ch41.html#ch41
[43]: andrewcarnegie_ch42.html#ch42
[44]: andrewcarnegie_bm01.html#bm01
[45]: andrewcarnegie_bm02.html#bm02
[46]: andrewcarnegie_bm03.html#bm03
[47]: andrewcarnegie_bm04.html#bm04

## INTRODUCTION

WE THOUGHT WE KNEW HIM, but we didn’t. And that was how he wished it.

He wore high-heeled boots and a top hat to disguise his lack of size. And he talked and wrote volumes in an
effort to construct a life that stood taller than his own.

His biographers have taken as their framework the account he provided in his memoirs. But the Autobiography of
Andrew Carnegie, written and rewritten over decades, then rearranged and rewritten again by an editor chosen
by his wife, Louise, offers only a partial account of selected incidents. There are errors of omission, errors
of chronology, and attempts, by author or editor, to mislead. My account of Carnegie’s life leaves out several
of the familiar stories told in the Autobiography and retold by his biographers, because I could not
independently confirm their validity.

Carnegie’s first biographer, Burton J. Hendrick, was specially chosen by Louise Carnegie to write her
husband’s life. Hendrick was paid as a Carnegie employee; he received no royalties for his work and agreed
that should his biography not be to Mrs. Carnegie’s liking, it would not be published. Carnegie’s next major
biographer, Joseph Wall, added an enormous amount to the story of Carnegie’s success as a steelmaker, but he
lacked the sources to veer off the path set by the Autobiography and by Hendrick.

In the half century since Wall began his research, new archival sources have been opened and electronic
finding aids have made it possible to locate previously unavailable ones. The raw material out of which this
biography is fashioned was discovered in public and university archives, government documents, and privately
held family papers in England, Scotland, Wales, and the United States. It includes material on the Carnegie
family’s arrival in Dunfermline, unpublished oral histories taken in Scotland by Burton Hendrick, the first
drafts of Carnegie’s memoirs, his Civil War tax returns, unpublished manuscripts and travel diaries, his
multi-year correspondence with his future wife and their prenuptial agreement, and letters and telegrams not
previously available to and from every American president from Benjamin Harrison to Woodrow Wilson, Kaiser
Wilhelm II, William Ewart Gladstone and several other British prime ministers, Herbert Spencer, Matthew
Arnold, Samuel Clemens, two generations of Morgans and Rockefellers, and Henry Clay Frick.

Andrew Carnegie was a critical agent in the triumph of industrial capitalism in the decades surrounding the
turn of the twentieth century. That much is undeniable. But the source materials I have uncovered do not
support the telling of a heroic narrative of an industrialist who brought sanity and rationality to an
immature capitalism plagued by runaway competition, ruthless speculation, and insider corruption. Nor do they
support the recitation of another muckraking exposé of Gilded Age criminality. The history of industrial
consolidation and incorporation is too complex to be encapsulated in Whiggish narratives of progress or
post-Edenic tales of declension, decline, and fall.

Carnegie survived and triumphed in an environment rife with cronyism and corruption. Much of the capital
invested in his iron and steel companies was derived from business activities that might be today, but were
not at the time, regarded as immoral or illegal. He differed from his contemporary Gilded Age industrial
barons not in the means with which he accumulated his fortune, but in the success he achieved and the ends to
which he put it. Long before his reputation as a friend of the workingman was destroyed by events at
Homestead, he had determined to give away his fortune. He did so not out of shame or guilt or religious
motives nor to atone for any sins he might have committed as an employer of men. He was simply, he explained,
returning his fortune to the larger community where it rightfully belonged. He urged his fellow millionaires
to do the same.

Andrew Carnegie’s decision to give away all he earned set him apart from his contemporaries. It also,
paradoxically, encouraged him to be even more ruthless a businessman and capitalist. Recognizing that the more
money he earned, the more he would have to give away, he pushed his partners and his employees relentlessly
forward in the pursuit of larger and larger profits, crushed the workingmen’s unions he had once praised,
increased the steelworkers’ workday from eight to twelve hours, and drove down wages.

Carnegie was born in Dunfermline, Scotland, in 1835, the eldest son of a failed linen weaver and an
entrepreneurially minded mother who kept shop and took in work from local shoemakers to put food on the table.
At age thirteen, after no more than a year or two of formal schooling, young Andrew set sail with mother,
father, and younger brother for America. Poor though the Carnegies were, they were supported by his mother’s
extended family and by the Scottish emigrants who had preceded them to America and Allegheny City, across the
Allegheny River from Pittsburgh. Andra, as he was called, was put to work as a bobbin boy at a cotton mill,
but after less than a year in the mill, found work as a telegraph messenger, taught himself Morse code, and
was hired as private telegraph operator and secretary to Thomas A. Scott, the Pittsburgh division
superintendent of the Pennsylvania Railroad. For the next twelve years or so, he would work for the railroad.
At age thirty, Carnegie resigned his position to go into business for himself with his former bosses, Tom
Scott and J. Edgar Thomson, the president of the Pennsylvania Railroad. Together, they organized a series of
companies—with Scott and Thomson as secret partners—that were awarded insider contracts to supply the
Pennsylvania Railroad with raw materials and build its iron bridges. By his early thirties, Carnegie had, with
help and investment capital from his friends, accumulated his first fortune—in Pennsylvanian oil wells, iron
manufacturing, bridge building, and bond trading.

His business career was, to this point, not unlike that of other ambitious English-speaking immigrants who
made their fortunes by being in the right place at the right time. In the early 1870s, he moved away from the
source of his income, Pittsburgh, to New York City. He would continue to oversee his iron and bridge companies
from his hotel suite in New York—which he shared with his mother. Day-to-day decision making was delegated to
a succession of partners, including his brother Tom, Henry Clay Frick, and Charlie Schwab. He seldom attended
board meetings and visited Pittsburgh only three or four times a year.

For the next thirty years, his workday was confined to a few hours in the morning—and an occasional luncheon
or dinner—but he accomplished as much in these hours as most men do in a week, and was proud of it. Although
he professed to have made the move to New York for business reasons, there were more important considerations
behind his decision to live a day’s journey by train from his manufactories. He was thrilled with his success
as a businessman and capitalist, but far from satisfied. He wanted more from life—and would spend the rest of
his days in pursuit of it.

His ultimate goal was to establish himself as a man of letters, as well known and respected for his writing
and intellect as for his ability to make money. He had as a child and young man read widely and memorized
large portions of Robert Burns’s poetry and Shakespeare’s plays. In New York and London, he continued his
self-education. He befriended some of the English-speaking world’s most renowned men of letters, among them
Herbert Spencer, Matthew Arnold, Richard Watson Gilder, editor of the Century magazine, and Sam Clemens;
published regularly in respected journals of opinion on both sides of the Atlantic; wrote two well-received
travelogues and a best-selling book entitled Triumphant Democracy, and with his “Gospel of Wealth” essays
established himself as the moral philosopher of industrial capitalism. He spent half of each year in Britain,
delegating to himself the role of cultural and political liaison between what he referred to as the two
branches of the English-speaking race. He became the confidant of Republican presidents and secretaries of
state and Liberal prime ministers and cabinet members, and inserted himself into the domestic and foreign
affairs of the United States and Great Britain.

Meanwhile, his fortune grew and grew. Every major business decision he made appeared, in retrospect, to have
been the right one. He was the first Pittsburgh iron manufacturer to move into steel, then the first
steelmaker to diversify production from steel rails to structural shapes. To his partners’ dismay, he plowed
most of the companies’ profits back into the business, integrating horizontally and vertically, modernizing,
expanding, and securing steady cheap supplies of raw materials by buying a majority interest in the H. C.
Frick coke works and leasing Rockefeller’s iron ore mines in the Mesabi Range at a huge discount. By 1901,
when he sold his interest in Carnegie Steel to J. P. Morgan, he was arguably the richest man in the world.

On retirement, he accelerated his giving to communities for library buildings and church organs so that
parishioners could be introduced to classical music. He also set up a number of charitable trusts, each
charged with a specific task: free tuition for Scottish university students; pensions for American college
professors; a scientific research institution in Washington, D.C.; a library, music hall, art gallery, and
natural history museum in Pittsburgh; a Hero Fund for civilians; a “peace endowment.” Only as he approached
his later seventies did he realize that, with his payout from selling Carnegie Steel at 5 percent a year on
more than $200 million, he was running out of time to give away his fortune. Disheartened that he would fail
at the most important task he had taken on—to wisely give back to the community the millions he had
accumulated—he established the Carnegie Corporation to receive and disperse whatever was left behind when he
died.

He had entered retirement intending to devote all his time and efforts to his philanthropy. But his last years
were consumed with another cause: world peace. Arguing against his own self-interest—Carnegie Steel made
millions manufacturing steel armor plate for the U.S. Navy—he campaigned for naval disarmament, then an
international court, a league of peace, and treaties of arbitration between the nations of Europe and the
United States. With considerable rhetorical power, he opposed American intervention in the Philippines and the
British war with the Boer Republics in South Africa. As the European nations, followed closely by the United
States, entered into an escalating naval arms race, he inserted himself into the diplomatic mix as an insider
with access to the White House and Westminster. He would spend the rest of his days as an outspoken “apostle
of peace,” commuting back and forth between his homes in New York and Scotland and the world’s capitals. Only
at age eighty, in the second year of the Great War, did he recognize that his efforts had been in vain. He
spent his last years in silence, isolated from his friends, unable to return to his home in Scotland, his
optimism shattered.

A Scotsman in America, an American in Britain, businessman, capitalist, steelmaker, author, philanthropist,
peace activist, pamphleteer, son, husband, and father, Carnegie wore his many hats well. He was in his long
life seldom at a loss for words, never fearful of taking on a new role or task, and never less than passionate
about whatever he happened to be engaged in at the moment.

The biographer is often asked at the conclusion of his project whether he has grown to like or dislike his
subject. The answer of course is both. But the question is misplaced. This biographer’s greatest fear was not
that he might come to admire or disapprove of his subject, but that he might end up enervated by years of
research into another man’s life and times. That was, fortunately, never the case. The highest praise I can
offer Andrew Carnegie is to profess that, after these many years of research and writing, I find him one of
the most fascinating men I have encountered, a man who was many things in his long life, but never boring.

## ONE

## Dunfermline, 1835–1848

HE WAS BORN in the upstairs room of a tiny gray stone weaver’s cottage in Dunfermline, Scotland, to Margaret
Carnegie, the daughter of Tom Morrison, the town’s outspoken radical, and William Carnegie, a handloom weaver
of fine damasks. He would be called Andrew, following the Scottish custom of naming the firstborn son after
the father’s father. Mag Carnegie, unable to afford a midwife, had called on her pregnant girlhood friend
Ailie Fargee for assistance. A few months later, when Ailie’s time came, Mag was there to minister to the
birth of Ailie’s son, Richard.¹

The stone cottage in which Andra, as the child was known, was born (and which has been preserved as the Andrew
Carnegie Birthplace Museum) was impossibly tiny, with two stories and two rooms. The bottom floor was occupied
almost entirely by Will Carnegie’s loom. The top story served as kitchen, dining room, and living quarters. It
was all but dominated by the family’s bed. Looking at the cottage today, one wonders how two adults and a
child could have lived there.

Carnegie’s birthplace, Dunfermline (the accent is on the second syllable, with a broad, lingering vowel
sound), is situated about fourteen miles north of Edinburgh and forty miles east of Glasgow. It was already,
in 1835, an epicenter of the social upheaval that we refer to today as the Industrial Revolution. “Beloved
Dunfermline” was also, as Carnegie recalled in his Autobiography, a glorious place to grow up in, a town rich
in history, the ancient capital of the Scottish nation. It was to Dunfermline that Malcolm Canmore had
returned in the year 1057 after seventeen years of exile to take back the throne from the usurper Macbeth.
Malcolm built himself a castle on a mound of earth at the foot of a small river that provided the future town
with a reminder of its past and a name that would stay with it forever. “Dunfermline,” a word of Celtic
origin, is a composite term, meaning “castle” (dun) that “commands or watches over” (faire) a “pond” (linne)
or “stream” (loin). In 1070, four years after William the Conqueror, Duke of Normandy, defeated the English
army and made himself king, Malcolm married Margaret, one of the Saxon royal family who sought exile in
Scotland. It was Queen, later Saint, Margaret who was instrumental in establishing an ecclesiastical center
where once only a fort had stood and bringing what was regarded as a modicum of English civilization to the
rough northern land. Malcolm and Margaret ruled Scotland from Dunfermline and were buried there, as in later
years were successors to the Scottish throne.

By 1835, the only remnants of Dunfermline’s past glories were the ruins of Malcolm’s Tower and the Abbey, but
they loomed large over the horizon. In 1818, while clearing away the earth in order to build a new church on
the site of the old, workmen came upon an ancient vault, seven and a half feet in length, within which was a
very large body, about six feet long, encased in lead. After laborious examinations of the site and the vault
and body, it was determined beyond any reasonable doubt that the body was that of Robert the Bruce, the heroic
king who had defeated the English army at Bannockburn in 1314 and restored Scottish sovereignty.

“Fortunate in my ancestors,” Carnegie would later lecture his readers in his Autobiography,

I was supremely so in my birthplace. Where one is born is very important, for different surroundings and
traditions appeal to and stimulate different latent tendencies in the child. Ruskin truly observes that every
bright boy in Edinburgh is influenced by the sight of the Castle. So is the child of Dunfermline, by its noble
Abbey…. The ruins of the great monastery and of the Palace where Kings were born still stand…. The tomb of The
Bruceis in the center of the Abbey, Saint Margaret’s tomb is near, and many of the “royal folk” lie sleeping
close around…. All is still redolent of the mighty past when Dunfermline was both nationally and religiously
the capital of Scotland. The child privileged to develop amid such surroundings absorbs poetry and romance
with the air he breathes, assimilates history and tradition as he gazes around. These become to him his real
world in childhood—the ideal is the ever-present real. The actual has yet to come when, later in life, he is
launched into the workday world of stern reality.²

Carnegie’s reflections are testimony to his realization that the portrait of Dunfermline he offered in his
Autobiography was a partial one, more ideal than real. Dunfermline was a glorious place to grow up, but only
if one was able to close one’s eyes to the misery and dislocation that the Industrial Revolution was going to
visit upon it, to look past the poverty and the fear that enveloped the town’s weavers as their livelihoods
were taken from them.

Dunfermline at Andra’s birth was a rather prosperous town, with a population that had more than doubled since
the turn of the century. Dozens of well-built stone weavers’ cottages like the Carnegies’ were situated on the
streets and alleyways that sloped down from the High Street, where the town’s shops and its three banks stood.
The town council had begun, in recent years, to spruce up the place. Outside stairways that had obstructed
street traffic were ordered removed; new streetlamps installed; public wells more carefully “attended to”; and
the streets paved with newly hewn stones and washed regularly, though not enough to clear away the pools of
rotting “fluid garbage” that lingered after every rain. The major industry was, as it had been for
generations, fine linen weaving.³

The weavers spent the daylight hours at their looms, which, too heavy to go anywhere else, took up the ground
floors of their stone cottages. The Carnegies had been weavers for as long as anyone could remember.
Weaving—of cottons, woolens, silks, and linens—was by far the largest employment in Scotland and Great Britain
in the first decades of the nineteenth century. Having destroyed the East India textile industry by import
restrictions, and monopolized the Latin American trade during the Napoleonic Wars, the British were now
selling their textiles in every major market in the world. During the eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries, landless migrants from the Scottish Lowlands, from the Highlands, and from Ireland streamed into
the towns, villages, and cities of southern Scotland, many of them to take up the weaving trade. The number of
handloom weavers more than tripled between 1780 and 1820.⁴

The elites of the trade were the “fine” or “fancy” weavers of silk and linen. To weave cotton yarn into coarse
cloth suitable for shirts and shawls required a minimum of skill; to weave delicate threads into ornately
decorated tablecloths and napkins took experience, dexterity, and a not inconsiderable degree of hand and arm
strength. The handloom weavers of Dunfermline who worked only with the finest of damask linens were, as might
have been expected, both proud and protective of their craft. Every weaver in town could recite the recent
history of the trade: how James Blake, feigning idiocy, had crawled under a damask loom in Edinburgh to learn
the secrets of its construction, memorized what he saw there, and returned to Dunfermline to build his own;
how John Wilson of Bridge Street had introduced the flying shuttle, which made it possible for one man to work
a loom by himself without need of helpers to position the shuttle; how in 1825 Alexander Robertson and Messrs
R. and J. Kerr had imported the Jacquard machine, invented by Monsieur Jacquard, a weaver of Lyons. Before the
invention of the Jacquard machine, the linen weavers had had to laboriously refit their looms for each new
design. The machines now reduced the preparation time from five or six weeks to a day or less.⁵

The Carnegies arrived in the Dunfermline area in the mid-eighteenth century. Andrew, the eleventh Earl of
Elgin, whose land the Carnegies leased on arriving in the south, believes that they had been forced to flee
their home in the northeast, in the Dundee area, after the unsuccessful 1745 uprising led by the Stuart
pretender, Prince Charles. The English confiscated the estates of rebel landowners, forcing many of their
tenants, like the Carnegies, to seek refuge farther south.

The name Carnegie appears for the first time in Dunfermline registers in 1759 with the baptism of Elizabeth,
the daughter of James Carnegie. The Carnegies were, at the time, located in Pattiesmuir, a tiny village that
was part of Lord Elgin’s Broomhall estates, just outside the royal burgh of Dunfermline. That the Carnegies
were weavers we know from the Broomhall “Particular Household Expenses,” kept by Lady Elgin, who noted
payments of two pounds in May 1768 and fourteen shillings in January 1769 to “Carnegies for working the coarse
web.” A 1771 map of the Elgin lands shows that the Carnegies leased a tiny plot with a garden in the village
and a small field just beyond.⁶

James’s eldest son, Andrew, who all his life would be known as “Daft Andrew,” was born in 1769. Like his
father, he set up his loom in Pattiesmuir, just outside Dunfermline, perhaps to avoid having to join the
burgh’s weavers’ guild, pay its dues, and abide by its regulations. “Daft Andrew,” from whom his grandson of
the same name claimed to have inherited the “sunny disposition” that rose-colored his own past, was, according
to a local historian writing in 1916, “a ‘brainy’ man who read and thought for himself” and gathered about him
the radical-minded weavers of the town. They called the public house they met in their “college,” and “Daft
Andrew,” who may have spent more time there than anyone else, the “professor.” Whether because he was fonder
of drink than of his loom or because he spent more time at the “college of Pattiesmuir” than at his cottage
workshop, “Daft Andrew” fell heavily into debt to his landlords. An entry in the Estate Record Book of Thomas,
seventh Earl of Elgin, who was himself deeply in debt after his costly transplant of the Parthenon marbles
from the Acropolis to London, notes that Andrew Carnegie’s “arrears of house rent” of £34.10s. had been
written off as “doubtful and desperate debts” because Carnegie was “very poor and unable to pay anything.”⁷

Andrew’s son William, the third generation of Lowland weavers, was born in Pattiesmuir in 1804, but, on coming
of age, left the family holdings and relocated to Dunfermline proper, where in the 1820s there was plenty of
work, even for those who did not belong to the guild. By 1834, William was doing so well at his loom that he
was able to marry Margaret Morrison of Dunfermline. Mag was taller than her husband, with “a fine dignified
carriage; dark in complexion, with black eyes and ‘wee hands and feet,’” one Dunfermline neighbor remembered.
William was a little, fair-haired man, handsome in his way, but not terribly imposing. Their first child,
Andra, who was born a year after their marriage, would take after the Carnegies in looks—he too was small and
fair-haired—but had the Morrisons’ fiery temperament.⁸

The standard rise-and-fall narrative of the Dunfermline weavers attributes their downfall to the coming of
power looms and manufactories; but because of the delicacy of their fabric and designs, the linen weavers were
protected from industrialization far longer than those who worked with wool or cotton. Through the 1820s and
1830s, they profited from an American export market that remained strong because tariffs on linen were lower
(America had no linen weavers to protect) than those on other textiles. In 1833, the Dunfermline weavers
reaped the whirlwind when the Americans removed all tariffs on “bleached and unbleached linens, table linen,
linen napkins, and linen cambrics,” precisely those products that were exported from Dunfermline. With the
tariff removed, the price of fancy linens declined and demand soared. Fine damask table covers, cloths, and
napkins—imported from Germany, Ireland, and Scotland—became a mark of distinction and refinement in urban
American middle-class homes from Charleston to Providence. The total value of linen goods imported into the
United States rose from $2.5 million in 1830 to $6.1 million in 1835, the year of Andrew’s birth.⁹

By 1836, when Andra was a year old, more than half of the fine linens produced in Dunfermline were being
shipped to America. Two grand estuaries, the Clyde and the Forth, connected by canals and newly improved
roads, linked Dunfermline to the port of Glasgow, which was closer to the New World than competing European
ports. Will Carnegie was able to expand his workshop, add a few new looms, and move his wife, young Andra, his
workshop, and his associates into more spacious quarters in a larger cottage on Edgar Street in Reid’s Park.¹⁰

The Morrisons, Andra’s relatives on his mother’s side, were like the Carnegies artisans and political
radicals, but that was as far as the similarities went. In 1927, after Carnegie’s death, the authorized
biographer selected by Mrs. Louise Carnegie, Burton Hendrick, interviewed townsfolk and relatives who had
either known or were the children of parents who had known the Carnegies and Morrisons. Much of what he
discovered was kept out of his biography, so as not to embarrass the family. The marriage of the Morrison and
Carnegie clans was not, it appeared, one made in heaven. The Morrisons looked down upon the Carnegies as too
poor, uneducated, and ill-mannered a family for their daughter to marry into; the Carnegies, for their part,
according to Andra’s cousin Ann Alexander, thought the Morrisons “a ‘queer lot’…who never went to church and
did not believe in God.” Worse yet, Mag’s brother Tom not only bragged of his disbelief but mocked the
solemnity of the Sabbath by tending his garden on Sundays.¹¹

Thomas Morrison the elder, the head of the family and Andra’s maternal grandfather, a cobbler by trade and an
agitator by calling, was not only the leading political orator, writer, organizer, and activist in
Dunfermline, but a trusted associate of William Cobbett, the widely known English radical journalist, who
published Morrison’s articles in his Political Register. Morrison was an uncompromising advocate of universal
suffrage, an outspoken foe of aristocratic privilege, a supporter of a ten-hour law for factory workers, an
enemy of the Established Church, and a proponent of land nationalization and the division of the large
aristocratic estates among those who worked them. Morrison rode through the environs of Dunfermline preaching
his gospel in open-air meetings to all who would listen. He also “scribbled” columns in the local newspapers,
particularly the Glasgow Free Press, and in 1833 he started up his own Dunfermline radical newspaper, The
Precursor, “devoted to the interests of the Tradesmen and Mechanics in particular,” which regrettably lasted
but three months and three issues.

The residents of Dunfermline, as well as those of the adjoining shires, were represented in the 1830s in the
House of Commons by a Whig aristocrat, Lord Dalmeny, whose only qualification for his position, Thomas
Morrison believed, was his aristocratic birth. The Reform Bill of 1832 had expanded the franchise to include
the urban middle classes, but not the workingmen of Dunfermline. Throughout Britain, the size of the
electorate rose from about 6 percent to 12 percent. Scotland, which had been miserably underrepresented in the
Commons, got eight additional seats, a step in the right direction. The reforms did not, of course, go nearly
far enough. The tiny size of the electorate and the fact that members of Parliament were unpaid made it
difficult to turn out men like Dalmeny and replace them with representatives in tune with the needs of the
urban working classes.

The reforms of 1832 energized radicals like Tom Morrison, who believed them insufficient, but a beginning
toward a representative government. In December 1834, either during or just after Lord Dalmeny’s election,
Morrison advised him in a widely circulated open letter, to “remain at home.” Dalmeny, Morrison insisted, had
no business attempting to represent the people of Dunfermline: first, because he was a lord—and the interests
of the people and the aristocracy were “different, nay opposite”; second, because he was too young and
inexperienced; and third, perhaps most important of all, because “Nature” had not bestowed on him the talents
to be a legislator.

Now, my Lord, if hereditary legislation is to be continued, and if you want to learn the art, I will tell you
how to acquire it, that is, if you have the capacity. First, you must read and study, reason and reflect. Then
you must mix in society, with the people of all grades, and in every condition of life…. Make yourself
acquainted with the producing part of the community, with those who till the land, build the houses, make the
clothes—who in short, support you in luxury and themselves in life: learn their wishes, their wants, and
various conditions…Should your Lordship think, as you probably will, that I have not written in a style
sufficiently respectful, I assure you I do not wish to give unnecessary pain; but I have a duty to perform to
my townsmen and country men, which must not be compromised. You may hear from me again.¹²

Dalmeny did hear from him again. In fact, Thomas Morrison continued to send him unsolicited “advice” until the
day Morrison died. His son Tom, Andra’s uncle, known as Bailie (i.e., alderman) after his election to the
Dunfermline municipal council, was every bit the political agitator his father had been—and more so. With his
gnarled black walking stick, a bushy black beard, and long frock coat, Bailie Morrison commanded attention at
every public gathering even before he opened his mouth to hurl his snarling, piercing “Hear, Hear” at the
speaker on the podium. The result of his heckling was inevitably that all eyes turned to him and he was
escorted to the platform, walking stick in hand, to awaken the crowd with his radical preachings against the
Established Church, the intellectually and morally stunted aristocracy, and the corruption of a political
system that allowed a tiny minority to elect Lord Dalmeny to represent the working people of Dunfermline.

Young Andra knew and admired his grandfather and Uncle Bailie Morrison from a distance. They were far too busy
to spend much time with the boy. With his father at work at the loom and his mother assisting him, keeping
house and, in hard times, earning extra money by binding shoes and running her own “sweetie” shop, Andra was
left to his own devices from the moment he was old enough to open the door of the family cottage. Much of his
free time was spent with his uncle George Lauder, who had married Mag Morrison’s older sister, Seaton, and his
son, George Jr., known to the family as Dod. Lauder, who owned a small grocery, had Sundays and evenings free.
He took his son and nephew on long walks around the Abbey, told them stories from Scottish history, recited
lines from Robert Burns, and scared poor Andra half to death with his ghost tales.¹³

Will Carnegie at age thirty-one, when Andra was born, was doing rather well for himself—as were the other
linen weavers of Dunfermline. The American export market was absorbing all the fine tablecloths and napkins
they could produce and the manufacturer-merchants who controlled the transatlantic trade had no option but to
rely on them, as the linen they wove was too delicate and their Jacquard designs too elaborate to put onto
power looms. With the prosperity of the mid-1830s had come an influx of new weavers to Dunfermline, including
a large number of men from the cotton trade, but as long as the American market remained strong, there was
enough work to go around.

And then, with no warning, calamity struck. The Panic of 1837 in the United States drained American coffers of
gold, the medium of international exchange. Credit evaporated, banks failed, wages fell, and unemployment
soared. As in any economic downturn, it was the luxuries—like linen tablecloths and napkins imported from
Scotland—that were sacrificed first. To sustain their rates of profit in the wake of a diminishing export
market, the manufacturer-merchants who put out the work to the handloom weavers and sold their finished
products reduced piece rates. The weavers throughout the district went on strike, but only in Dunfermline was
there open violence. The objects of the strikers’ wrath were the journeymen weavers, who continued to take in
work at reduced rates.¹⁴

By September 1837, the local papers were reporting that over a thousand Dunfermline handloom weavers were out
of work—or out on strike, an unemployment rate of close to 40 percent. To make matters worse, the town was
plagued by a series of epidemics—typhus, measles, and influenza—which were no doubt exacerbated by
malnutrition. Ebenezer Henderson, a chronicler of life in Dunfermline, noted that in 1837 alone, there had
been “493 interments in the Abbey Churchyard,” an increase of 182 over the previous year.¹⁵

Because Scotland was exempt from the provisions of the British Poor Laws, there were no funds available to
provide assistance to the destitute. In Glasgow and Paisley, the spinners’ and weavers’ associations
petitioned Parliament for relief. Parliament declined to take any action, but appointed a Royal Commission to
investigate the conditions of the weavers. The cotton spinners struck their mills, swearing not to return
until paid a living wage. The government’s response was to arrest the strike leaders. They were found guilty
of “illegal conspiracy to keep up wages” and instigating “disturbances,” and were sentenced to seven years’
banishment to an overseas penal colony.¹⁶

Was it any wonder that a year later, the spinners and weavers of Glasgow and Paisley, along with those in
Dunfermline, enthusiastically joined the campaign for a People’s Charter? The political reforms called for by
the People’s Charter—universal male suffrage, secret ballots, annual parliaments, equal electoral districts,
no property qualifications for candidates, and the payment of members of Parliament—would not automatically
resolve the crises faced by Scotland’s weavers and spinners, but they were a necessary first step. The plan
devised by the Birmingham radicals who initiated the Chartist campaign was to send delegates through the
British Isles to solicit support for the charter and signatures on a massive petition to be submitted to
Parliament. In southern Scotland, the delegates were greeted by mass demonstrations everywhere they traveled
and thousands of signatures were gathered. A committee was established in Dunfermline, with Will Carnegie and
Thomas Morrison among its founding members. On July 7, 1838, Will Carnegie published a letter in the Edinburgh
Monthly Democrat and Total Abstinence Advocate, proudly announcing that the “Working Men’s Association of
Dunfermline,”[*][1] the local Chartist organization, had collected 6,106 signatures on the petition they were
dispatching to Birmingham. “The work goes on gloriously here. Some of our friends have gone to the surrounding
towns and villages, and I am happy to state they were most enthusiastically received, and their labors crowned
with the most cheering success…. Indeed, we flatter ourselves, were all the country as the ‘Western district
of fife,’ the advocates of misrule and corruption would soon have to give place to a better order of things.”
Will Carnegie signed the letter on behalf of the Working Men’s Association, prefixing his signature with a
line from Robert Burns: “‘It’s coming’ yet for a’ that,’ etc.”¹⁷

In late 1838, a modest upturn in trade and a compromise between the manufacturers and weavers on piece rates
brought a degree of normalcy back to Dunfermline. The promise of future profits prompted renewed interest and
new investment in power looms. According to Ebenezer Henderson, the major event of 1838 was the arrival of a
“Mr. R. Robertson, manufacturer,” and the construction of the “Baldridge Works…for the weaving of table linen,
etc., by steam power.” Though Robertson’s manufactory did not succeed, there was no guarantee that the
handloom linen weavers would be as fortunate the next time. The forward march of the power looms appeared
almost inexorable. In 1813, there had been no more than 1,500 of them in all of Scotland; by 1829, there were
10,000; by 1845, nearly 22,300.¹⁸

The heady optimism of 1838—when thousands gathered in Glasgow and elsewhere to cheer on the coming of the
People’s Charter—gave way to a gritty, determined realism. The charter would not be easily won or soon won,
but the fight was too important to give up. By the spring of 1839, there were close to 130 Chartist
associations in Scotland, all of them gathering signatures for the petition. In June 1839, the National
Petition for a People’s Charter was submitted to Parliament and promptly rejected by an overwhelming vote.
Chartist leaders in England and Scotland, including those in Dunfermline, regrouped and dispatched
agitator-orators to tour again, eliciting support for what they hoped would be an even larger petition drive
in the near future. New Chartist newspapers, friendly societies, and churches were established, new
conventions planned.

The supporters of the charter recognized full well that the political reforms they demanded were not going to
usher in the workers’ millennium. But they had enough faith in representative government to believe that, once
given the vote, the working males of Great Britain would set in motion a process of change that would
eliminate the corruption, the privileges, and the downright stupidity that characterized the unreformed
parliamentary government. The charter was not only, as Friedrich Engels put it in 1844, a “means to further
ends. ‘Political power our means, social happiness our end,’ is now the clearly formulated war-cry of the
Chartists.” It was also the vehicle with which the working class would secure the vote for itself. And the
vote, as Edward Thompson reminds us, was for the Chartists “a symbol whose importance it is difficult for us”
who have grown disillusioned with our two-party systems to understand. “It implied, first égalité: equality of
citizenship, personal dignity, worth…. The claim for the vote implied also further claims: a new way of
reaching out by the working people for social control over their conditions of life and labour.”¹⁹

Young Andra, at five and six years of age, was a precocious witness to the events transpiring in the adult
world. One imagines a small, blond-haired child with a huge forehead, always underfoot, always questioning.
“These were times of intense political excitement,” he recalled of his childhood in his Autobiography, “and
there were frequently seen throughout the entire town, for a short time after the midday meal, small groups of
men with their aprons girt about them discussing affairs of state…. I was often attracted, small as I was, to
these circles and was an earnest listener to the conversation, which was wholly one-sided. The generally
accepted conclusion was that there must be a change. Clubs were formed among the townsfolk, and the London
newspapers were subscribed for. The leading editorials were read every evening to the people, strangely
enough, from one of the pulpits of the town.” Because the Scottish Chartists were “moral force” men, opposed
to violent protest or protest that might grow violent, there was no reason to bar Andra or any other children
from the open-air meetings that were the major form of Chartist education and agitation. “These political
meetings were of frequent occurrence, and, as might be expected, I was as deeply interested as any of the
family and attended many. One of my uncles or my father was generally to be heard.”²⁰

Though there is considerable evidence of his uncles’ involvement in the upheavals of the 1840s, there is
little to support Carnegie’s contention that his father was also a Chartist leader. Will Carnegie, unlike the
Morrisons, was a quiet, reserved, soft-spoken man, more a “trailer” than a leader, or so Carnegie would much
later in life confide to his friend Hew Morrison (not a relation).²¹

In early 1840, in the midst of the campaign for the People’s Charter, Anne Carnegie was born. Unlike her
robust, bubbly brother, Anne was a sickly child who required a great deal of care. She would not live to see
her second birthday.

There is curiously no mention of his sister in the Autobiography or in any of Carnegie’s writings. She is also
missing from the biographies written during Carnegie’s lifetime and from Burton J. Hendrick’s two-volume
authorized biography, published in 1932. In telling the story of his childhood, Andra could find no room for
Anne, as to write of her death would have obligated him to write of the heartache that death must have caused
him and his mother, Margaret. His mother was his heroine, a larger-than-life figure he hoped his readers would
come to admire as much as he did. It was Mag who held the family together through the hard times, Mag who put
food on the table, Mag who made up for her husband’s incapacity as breadwinner and head of household, Mag who
in the end made the decision to relocate to the New World. Carnegie dared not imagine a situation, like the
death of a child, that might have been too much even for his mother. And so, he banished it from
consciousness. Anne Carnegie’s descent into oblivion is, in the end, rather brutal testimony to her brother’s
capacity to brush aside the tragic aspects of his early life in Dunfermline.

The fancy linen weavers’ greatest fears were for the future and for their children. Dunfermline was and had
always been a one-industry town. The power looms had already conquered cotton production. Linen was surely
next. What would happen when there was no more work to give out to the handloom weavers? How would the next
generation of townsfolk support themselves? There were coal mines on the outskirts, but these were no place
for the children of weavers to make a living. The other trades were open only to the sons of artisans already
practicing them.

The Scots had always been a highly mobile people, and now—from 1830 onward—they stepped up the pace. The
migration from Scotland exceeded that from England and Wales. More than two million Scots would depart the
British Isles between 1830 and 1914. Most traveled from Glasgow, by steamship, across the Atlantic to Canada
and the United States. The majority were landless, with nothing but their labor to sell, but because Scotland
had in the early nineteenth century become the home of myriad small manufacturing concerns—textiles and
metalworking, in particular—they had acquired artisanal skills that were transferable else-where.²²

One of Andra’s uncles and his twin aunts had, with their families, joined the stream of Scottish emigrants to
America in the early 1840s. Mag Carnegie had hoped to follow them to America, but was dissuaded from doing so
by her sister Anne, who wrote in October 1840, soon after arriving in Allegheny City, Pennsylvania, that
“things being in such an unsettled condition in this country at present, it would be the height of folly to
advise…you…to venture out this season at any rate, as it is very difficult for one to get employment of any
kind, and more particularly weaving which is scarcely carried on here…The thought therefore that William may
be idle etc. renders us all very uneasy but if affairs were once settled again, I would not hesitate to
recommend you to come.”

Unlike Dunfermline, where one grew up in a trade and continued to work at it come what may, Allegheny City was
wide open. When times were good—as sister Annie hoped they would soon be again—there was plenty of work for
newcomers, whether or not they had undergone apprenticeships or had any skills at all. “It is easy to get into
situations here of different sorts, although you may know nothing at all of the work to be done, the people
here stick at nothing,—just set to, and drive on the best way you can; many of them will be at two or three
different occupations in a very short time. Thomas [her husband] for instance knew as little of his present
trade as you do now, when he went to the factory, & he gets along wonderfully.” Still Anne felt obligated, in
a letter that carefully alternated good news with bad, to inform her sister that “the worst thing [about
Thomas’s new position] is, that it is very dirty work and he gets no cash—just orders on stores for all his
wages, which is a very unpleasant way of going to work indeed, but it is carried on to an amazing extent in
this place…but this state of affairs cannot continue long—as in fact change seems to be a striking
characteristic of everything here.”²³

Though Mag agreed with her sister that with the United States still in the snares of the 1837 Panic, it was no
time to emigrate, she was becoming increasingly desperate about the future. While her husband had been able to
put food on the table during good times, he was buffeted more than most by the cyclical downturns that ripped
through town with increasing frequency. The hidden truth uncovered by Burton Hendrick during his 1927 research
trip to Scotland but artfully disguised in his biography was that Will Carnegie was, as ninety-one-year-old
William Macgregor put it, “a decent chap…but no hard worker…. He was regular in his habits, agude churchman,
and as moral a gentleman as one could wish—but he didna love to work. Would idle away his time even when he
had a web. Was reading and such, much given to foolishness.” Everyone Hendrick interviewed on that trip had
much the same thing to say about Will Carnegie. Mrs. Clanachan, whose parents lived in the same house as the
Carnegies, reported that Mag Carnegie had had to take up binding shoes for her brother Tom because “Willie
Carnegie was not contributing greatly to the family support…. He simply did not like to work,—much rather read
the newspaper. He was nae bad a mon,” but not very diligent a weaver. The members of the Morrison family were
even more scathing in their commentaries on Mag’s husband, whom they identified as “shiftless,” “aimless,” “no
earth-shaker,” “a weakling,” a man who “lacked industry, thrift and go-aheadness—also intelligence.”²⁴

By the 1840s, Mag had taken over the role as chief family breadwinner. She put bread on the table, first, by
taking in work from her brother Tom, the cobbler, then by setting up her own “sweetie” shop in the front room
of the family’s cottage. The specialty of Mag’s shop was something called potted meat, which a neighbor later
described as “a confection largely composed of the miscellaneous contents of a pig’s head…made into little
balls.” Mag also sold cabbages, leeks, and carrots she procured from local farmers.²⁵

Andra, now ten, made himself as useful as he could, both to his mother and to his uncle George Lauder. He ran
errands, kept accounts, at times may have stood behind the counter. What is most interesting about his
childhood work is that it was done for his mother and his uncle, not his father. Andra was, it was clear, the
first in a long line of Carnegies who was not going to be raised to the loom.²⁶

Margaret Carnegie thought again about leaving Scotland in 1842, but was dissuaded as she had been two years
before by a letter from her sister. America was, Aunt Aitkin wrote from Allegheny City, still in the throes of
the banking crisis that had led to a dearth of hard currency. “You can scarcely form any idea of the state of
money matters in this country for some time past; indeed I may say ever since we came, things have been
getting worse and worse in as much, that at present, you cannot get a dollar changed unless by taking more
than the half in merchandise…. It seems as if the country was entirely drained of gold silver and copper…. I
would not advise any person to come out at present who can get a lively hood at home, as trade is very dull
here, indeed many who are both able & willing to work find it impossible to get employment.” Now might not be
the time to emigrate, she warned, but that did not mean that the Carnegies would be better off staying
indefinitely in Dunfermline. “Still, with all this, America is not to be compared with the old country; as
there are very few but can get enough to eat and to spare. As a day’s work can procure nearly as much as serve
a family for a week, especially if they would be content to live as they do at home,—which is far from being
the case, for the people here go for good living.”²⁷

 

AT THE AGE OF EIGHT, Andra had begun attending school. Although he implies in his Autobiography that it had
been his decision to put off school until then, eight, in fact, was the age at which most Scottish boys
entered the classroom. There were numerous schools in Dunfermline in the early 1840s, thirty-three of them to
be exact, almost half endowed or supported by the kirk (church) or the municipality. Andra was sent to one of
the “adventure” schools, so called because they were started up and supported “entirely on the teachers’ own
adventure.”²⁸

Every school in the town charged tuition. Only paupers were admitted gratis, but the stigma attached to
charity was such that few parents or children accepted it. The best schools—those with the most qualified
rectors and masters, relatively commodious accommodations for the scholars, and the largest teaching
staffs—were the Burgh or Grammar School and the Commercial School, but they charged higher tuition than the
Carnegies could afford. Andra was enrolled instead in the Rolland School on Priory Lane, where the fee was two
shillings a quarter, paid in weekly installments, less than half that charged at the better schools.

In his Autobiography, Carnegie lavishes only superlatives on the Rolland School and its principal and teacher,
Mr. Martin. The more we know about this school—and its dour headmaster, Robert Martin—the more striking such a
glowing tribute becomes. According to the Reverend Peter Chalmers, author of Historical and Statistical
Account of Dunfermline, published in 1844, the year Andra entered the Rolland School, there were “between 180
and 190 children taught, almost all of the working and poorer classes.” The school had been established by a
local philanthropist “for the education of the poor of the parish,” but because the money was not invested
wisely—or perhaps at all—the endowment was quickly depleted. With no funding from the bequest, the
municipality, or the kirk, Martin could not afford an assistant and taught all the students by himself in one
classroom, employing the Lancastrian or factory school method of rote learning.

The Lancastrian system, invented and advertised by Mr. Joseph Lancaster, an English Quaker, had been designed
to bring the blessings of civilization to the children of the poor by importing into the classroom the
efficiency of the factory. Poor children, he believed, required, above all else, training in discipline,
decorum, and decency. They also needed to learn their letters, their sums, and their catechism; any attempt to
awaken other faculties would be gratuitous or worse, a needless distraction.

The Lancastrian school young Andra attended was, like all the others, designed for maximum efficiency. It was
housed in a one-room schoolhouse, with a tiny fireplace near the front door that barely removed the chill.
Martin’s desk was on an elevated podium. On it sat his “lum,” or satin high hat, and his “tawse,” a leather
strap he employed regularly on those he found sleeping or slovenly or just stupid. The classroom was arrayed
in “forms,” rows of stiff-backed benches on which the scholars sat, ranged in order of age and accomplishment.
Each form was ruled by an older student who acted as form monitor or dictator. Martin, whom his daughter later
described as “tall, though stoop-shouldered,” provided the monitors with words or sums which they dictated to
their forms, each member of which was expected to copy the dictation on his or her slate and/or recite it in
unison to the “dictator.” While the instruction proceeded on the floor below, Martin watched from his perch,
on the ready to hurl his tawse at a recalcitrant scholar, who was bidden to retrieve it, return it to the
podium, and receive a lash across his hands.²⁹

The sole activities in class were memorization and recitation. Fortunately, young Andra excelled in both, and
never had to be punished. Andra stood out from his classmates not only for his prodigious memory skills but
for his exemption from catechism lessons. While every other student had to recite daily from the 107 questions
and answers in the Shorter Catechism, his father and his uncle George Lauder, neither of whom were members of
the Established or the Protesting Presbyterian Church, arranged for their boys to be excused.

 

EVERY MORNING before leaving for school, Andra was delegated to fetch water for the household from the town
reservoir on Moodie Street. This was no simple task in Dunfermline, where the “old wives” of the town had
instituted their own queuing system for filling their cans and pails in the morning. Every evening, they would
reserve their places in line by putting their cans in a row in front of the well. Young Andra refused to abide
by the system. Instead of waiting in line behind the ladies, he pushed his way to the front so as not to be
late for school. “I would not be put down even by these venerable old dames. I earned the reputation of being
‘an awfu’ laddie.’ In this way I probably developed the strain of argumentativeness, or perhaps combativeness,
which has always remained with me.” Carnegie’s admission to having been “an awfu’ laddie” was confirmed by a
distant relative who recalled, in her 1927 interview with Burton Hendrick, that young Andra had indeed been
“somewhat impudent as a boy…. He would follow older people and mimicked them and even made ungentlemanly
remarks.”³⁰

Andra might not have gotten along with the “old dames” at the well or with the boys who teased him for being
Martin’s pet at school, but he was for the most part, as William Macgregor remembered, “a very nice boy—white
haired—and…liked by the other boys…. But he was very keen; Even then we knew there waur somethin’ in him.”³¹

 

THE SCOTLAND THAT Andra Carnegie grew up in was, as he himself tells us in his Autobiography, “in a state of
violent disturbance in matters theological as well as political.” Organized religion played a much larger role
in everyday life in nineteenth-century Scotland—and the United States—than it does today. The Morrisons and
Carnegies were among the distinct minority in Dunfermline that avoided attending or supporting any church
whatsoever. Mag Carnegie inherited her opposition to the Established Presbyterian Church from her father, who
had criticized it—and its teachings—in print only a few years before Andra was born. In an article ostensibly
about education, written as a letter to William Cobbett and published in his Political Register, Thomas
Morrison, Sr., bitterly registered his objections to “flogging out of very young children” answers to the 107
questions in the Shorter Catechism that each Scottish Presbyterian child was supposed to learn. “‘Tidings of
Damnation’; ‘The wrath and curse of God’; all the ‘miseries of this life’; death itself; and the pains ‘of
hell for ever’!! Such are the subjects upon which infantile imagination is exercised. Oh! I remember as I do
the events of yesterday, the sleepless nights, the horrific dreams of an awful devil and tremendous hell
awakened by the task of memorizing catechism answers.”³²

What was unique about the Morrisons was not that they were opponents of the Established Presbyterian Church,
but that they stayed equally distant from its rival, the Scottish Free Church. They were as close to
practicing atheists as anyone in mid-nineteenth-century Scotland. Though by disposition Will Carnegie was more
inclined to submit to the discipline of an organized church, he too, after marrying into the Morrison family,
became an opponent of the Calvinist rigidities to which the Scottish church was returning in the 1840s: he
left the Presbyterians while Andra was a boy.

Mag and her brother Tom, like their father, had nothing to do with any church, established or free. Her
sisters, however, gravitated from the Presbyterians into Dunfermline’s—and later Allegheny City’s—tiny
Swedenborgian community and brought Will Carnegie along with them into the Church of the New Jerusalem. The
Swedenborgians were everything the Scottish Presbyterians were not: tolerant, unitarian, and committed to
establishing communication with worlds hereafter. “Dear William,” wrote Mag’s sister Anne Aitkin from
Allegheny City in October 1844 to her brother-in-law in Dunfermline, after he had converted to the
Swedenborgians, “How are you getting on now? What church do you attend, I hope you still continue to read and
receive the heavenly Doctrines revealed by our illuminate scribe [Emanuel Swedenborg]…. Does Margaret take any
interest in religion? And how does the new Church society get along in Dunfermline? Are you a member? Our
small society is still moving along with her face eastward, but as yet our advancement is slow, owing to the
density of resisting mediums, which retards her progress, but her course is still onward.”³³

Will Carnegie found little solace for his real-world problems in the Swedenborgian church. In 1842, another
nail had been hammered into the linen weavers’ coffin when the U.S. Congress, reacting belatedly to the
economic downturn that had begun five years earlier, raised the rates on tariffs and removed linen and many
other products from the “free list.” Inevitably, as prices on imported linens rose, demand fell, and with it
both piece rates and the amount of work available. The younger weavers migrated to Paisley and to Glasgow
where there was work available in the factories; the older ones economized as best they could and waited for
better times to return.³⁴

By 1843, when Andra was seven and his new brother Tom one year old, Parliament responded to the weavers’ and
spinners’ requests for assistance by establishing a Royal Commission to investigate the conditions of the poor
in Scotland. Assistant commissioners were dispatched to every corner of the nation, questionnaires in hand.
They arrived in Dunfermline in February 1844 and interviewed a leading manufacturer, the Reverend Peter
Chalmers, the “surgeon to the poor,” the convenor of the “poorhouse committee,” and a few others. Conditions
in Dunfermline, they were told, had deteriorated so rapidly that the local authorities had raised a voluntary
subscription to erect a poorhouse on the town green to shelter paupers, orphans, and lunatics. The consensus
of those interviewed by the commissioners was that the poorhouse had vastly improved conditions in town. No
one of course asked the poor what they thought, but the “surgeon to the poor” reported that he was quite
“satisfied with the mode in which” the paupers were cared for at the poorhouse. “He has found no inconvenience
from having some insane persons in the house. The orphans in the house are sufficiently accommodated with beds
in an apartment by themselves, separate from the adults.” There were, he admitted, a great many paupers in
town who had chosen not to enter the poorhouse or had been prohibited from doing so because there were limited
beds available. But the surgeon was satisfied that those paupers who remained on the outside were sufficiently
sheltered from the “effects of the weather,” and did not suffer from wind or rain “coming into their homes.”
Regrettably, their cottages were often “deficient in point of furniture and of fuel,” their bedding was
“wretched,” and “there is a want of clothing amongst them,” but such poverty was almost always due to their
“intemperate habits.” As for the vagrants who pockmarked the streets of other towns, Dunfermline had none. “It
is the custom,” reported Erskine Beveridge, one of the town leaders, “to give vagrants a night’s lodging and a
ticket for a certain allowance of bread, and to pass them on next day.” Thus were the streets cleared of human
refuse not otherwise confined to the poorhouse.³⁵

The weavers were not eligible even for the meager relief—a bed and a few meals—offered those sheltered by the
poorhouse. Relief for the able-bodied unemployed, town and church authorities agreed, was a deterrent to their
ever finding work. The problem with the weavers who remained in town, unemployed, rather than looking
elsewhere for work, was that they were unwilling to accept the rates the manufacturers were constrained to pay
them. Both the Reverend Chalmers and James Hunt, Esquire, of Pittencrieff, reported that one of the town’s
leading manufacturers had “pledged himself to employ every weaver in the place at present out of work till the
end of April or May next, at a reduction of twenty-five per cent on the rate of wages at present paid.” But
the weavers had turned down the offer, fearing that it was a stalking horse for the manufacturers, who planned
to reduce wages 25 percent across the board with or without the workmen’s agreement.³⁶

The handloom weavers of Scotland, once the elite of artisans, had fallen so far in status—and
compensation—that they were now, for purposes of the commissioners’ survey of “weekly wages,” included with
the “lowest class of labourer” instead of with other artisans. In West Fife, which included Dunfermline and
the towns and villages surrounding it, the average weekly wage for the weavers had fallen to 6 shillings,
compared to 13.5 for masons and 12.6 for wrights, and this was before the 25 percent wage reduction that the
manufacturers were calling for in early 1844.³⁷

It was the beginning of the end for the Carnegies. Over and over again, the same ghastly events were being
played out. The market for fine damask linen goods would tighten; the manufacturers would reduce rates; the
weavers would go on strike; the leading manufacturers would meet with the weavers and establish “rates,” only
to have the agreements fall apart when renegade manufacturers refused to abide by those rates and put out work
to journeymen who agreed to work for less than their peers. There was little work at any wage for linen
weavers during 1844; 1845 was worse yet. “We cannot detail the shame and disasters of this year,” wrote Daniel
Thomson in his 1903 history of the Weavers’ Incorporation of Dunfermline; 1845 was “a hideous nightmare.” In
the summer of 1846, flooding submerged hundreds of shops and looms. Then came the disastrous winter of
1847–48, “the worst in living memory.”³⁸

In later years, Carnegie would claim that it was the arrival of the power loom that had brought disaster to
the family; but the bitter truth is that Will Carnegie and the handloom weavers of Dunfermline were ruined
long before. By the mid-1840s, they were entirely beholden to the manufacturer-merchants who supplied them
with orders and raw materials, and when they were finished at their looms, took their cloth away, had it dyed,
finished, transported to Glasgow, and sold in America. As trade declined and orders fell, the value of the
looms upon which the weavers worked and the skills with which they wove were worth less and less. By 1846,
there were only about 60,000 handloom weavers remaining in the British Isles, compared to 200,000–225,000 ten
years earlier. In Scotland, the numbers fell from almost 85,000 in 1840 to less than 25,000 ten years later.³⁹

“I began to learn what poverty meant,” Carnegie later recalled of these years. “Dreadful days came when my
father took the last of his [finished woven] webs to the great manufacturer, and I saw my mother anxiously
awaiting his return to know whether a new web was to be obtained or that a period of idleness was upon us. It
was burnt into my heart then that my father, though neither ‘abject, mean, nor vile,’ as Burns has it, had
nevertheless to

‘Beg a brother of the earth

To give him leave to toil’”

In an Autobiography that is resolutely upbeat, almost perversely so, the two paragraphs in which young Andra
describes his father’s defeat stand out. As if he were constitutionally unable to continue in this vein, he
pauses in mid-paragraph and then deftly changes the subject from his tragic father to his heroic mother: “We
were not, however, reduced to anything like poverty compared with many of our neighbors. I do not know to what
lengths of privation my mother would not have gone that she might see her two boys wearing large white
collars, and trimly dressed.”⁴⁰

If the present was dark, the future looked even worse. In his entry for the year 1847, Ebenezer Henderson
reported that a Mr. Scott had established “The Dunfermline Steam-Power Weaving Factory” in an abandoned
building on Pitmuir Street. Though Scott’s venture would ultimately prove “unsuccessful,” the opening of the
steam factory caused such a stir in town that Henderson saw fit to highlight it as the event of the year.⁴¹

This was the “turning point” in Will Carnegie’s career as a weaver, his son recalled in an article he wrote in
1899. “One evening I heard my father tell my mother that steam looms were coming into the trade and bothering
him. This steam machinery, he said, was best handled in big factories, which made it bad for the independent
master weavers…. Not very long afterwards—it was in 1847—he came in one day from delivering some finished
damask, looked at me quizzically, and said: ‘Andy, I have no more work.’”⁴²

Even Mag found it difficult to put bread on the table through the depression of 1847–48. In starving times,
with the linen weavers out of work, there was little pocket money to spare for sweets and “‘peerie,’ a kind of
treacle beer, of non-alcoholic character,” her best-selling items. Her husband was a broken man, too old to
take up a new trade, unable to earn anything at the old one. All Will Carnegie had ever known was weaving—and
he had been moderately successful at it. But what would he do now to support his family? Always a quiet,
almost withdrawn and retiring little man, he retreated into a stunned silence. Mag’s fear was not so much for
Will, who had given up, but for her two boys, whose lives and livelihood stood before them. What would they do
in a one-industry town that had lost its industry? The only solution was for her to follow the route of her
brother and twin sisters and “pack the whole crowd off to Ameriky.” She expressed her determination in a
well-known Scotch saying: “‘Either make a spoon or spoil a horn’”—that is, she would risk the whole family
fortunes on a single throw. She would break the Carnegies or make them.⁴³

The problem was finding the funds to finance their trip to America. Will had sold his looms, which had fetched
little. The Carnegies owned nothing else of value: no furniture, no family keepsakes, no property. Mag’s
brother Bailie Morrison, the cobbler and radical, might have been able to pay for the trip, but he was against
their leaving. Uncle George Lauder, whom his relatives would later claim helped out, had nothing to spare. The
only one with money to lend—and enough faith in Mag to do so—was her childhood friend Ailie Fargee (Ella
Ferguson), with whom she had grown up, courted, and, as young marrieds, shared a two-family cottage. The women
were so close, they had even presided at one another’s deliveries. Like Mag, Ailie was married to a weaver,
but one who, even in the most dire times, was able to find work. Also like Mag, Ailie earned money on her own,
by selling bread, but with her husband gainfully employed, she had been able to put aside her earnings. She
now offered to loan Mag twenty pounds, which made it possible for her to plan her escape.⁴⁴

[1]: footnote1.html

## TWO

## To America, 1848–1855

AT AGE TWELVE, there is nothing quite as exciting as a long journey—especially when one doesn’t know how long
it will be. Aside from a brief trip to Edinburgh to see the Queen, Andra had never ventured outside the town
limits. This only lent more drama to the journey. Though travel was, in the mid-nineteenth century, a
decidedly uncomfortable and, for the most part, unpleasant activity, especially for those who had to book the
cheapest accommodations available, for Andra Carnegie, it was great adventure. He was a remarkably good
traveler, immune to travel sickness. This quality would stand him well later in life, when he became a regular
transatlantic passenger—for business and pleasure.

The Carnegies’ trip from Dunfermline to Allegheny City had been well plotted and followed the path taken by
other Lowland emigrants, Mag’s brother and twin sisters among them. Unlike the hundreds of thousands of Irish
men, women, and children who crossed the ocean to escape the famine, or the German republicans and radicals
who were forced into exile after the political defeats of 1848, the Carnegies did not have to travel far to
their port city or wait long for their ship. They set off from Dunfermline in July 1848, traveling south along
the railway tracks built by the fifth Lord Elgin to move coal and linens to Charlestown Harbor on the Firth of
Forth. Though the first leg of the trip was by “rail,” the passenger omnibus the Carnegies traveled on was
pulled by horses, not a locomotive. Andra would no doubt have chosen to sit on top, holding on to the railing,
but he was not given that choice. He was bundled inside the coach with the rest of the family. From
Charlestown Harbor, the family was shuttled into a small boat and rowed across the Firth of Forth to the
steamer that would take them to the port of Glasgow.

The steamer trip down the Clyde to Broomielaw, Glasgow’s port, took all day. The next morning, the family set
sail on the Wiscasset, which Carnegie describes in his Autobiography as an “800-ton sailing ship.” He
exaggerates. The Wiscasset was in fact a 380-ton, eighteen-year-old Maine whaler, which only the year before
had been transporting whale oil and whalebone for a Sag Harbor whaling firm.¹

The traffic in human cargo, much of it from Ireland, via Liverpool, had by the late 1840s expanded to the
point where sailing ships of every variety, even retired whalers like the Wiscasset, were being refitted to
serve the emigrant trade. Few of these ships had been built to carry passengers. The Wiscasset had been leased
or bought by Taylor & Merrill of 77 South Street in lower Manhattan, who had started their own transatlantic
line in 1842 and evidently added the Wiscasset in 1848. Although most of the Taylor & Merrill ships sailed
from Liverpool, the Wiscasset set sail from Glasgow in early July (not May 17, as Carnegie wrote in his
Autobiography and his biographers have repeated) and was forty-two days at sea (not fifty as Carnegie
recounted). One hundred forty-four passengers, including the Carnegies, traveled in steerage; nine in the
cabin; and unidentified “merchandise” in the hold.²

Fortunately for historians, Congress in 1818 had demanded that all ships landing in the United States deliver
a manifest of all passengers taken on board with names, ages, occupations, and the ports they sailed from.
Most of the adult men who traveled on the Wiscasset were listed as skilled artisans: weavers, clerks,
dressmakers, masons, shoemakers, printers, and engineers. The majority were accompanied by their wives and
children. Because Scottish immigrants traveled without any official documents, they were free to change their
age in any direction they chose. Will, who was forty-four gave his age as forty (younger men were more likely
to get jobs); Mag, who was thirty-eight, claimed to be thirty-four. Andra, who was four months shy of his
thirteenth birthday but no taller than a ten-year-old, was nonetheless listed as fifteen. Only Tom’s correct
age was given: he was four.³

Andra tells us in his Autobiography that he had a fine time at sea and it is likely that he did. All his life,
people would remark on his remarkably sunny disposition, his broad smile, and nonstop, good-natured chatter.
Life was an open-ended adventure for the boy, as it would be for the man. After getting over the initial shock
of leaving his hometown, he quickly acclimated himself to his new role as world traveler. Andra may have
enjoyed the passage to America, but it is difficult to believe that anyone else in the family did; surely not
his mother, who had to devote most of her waking hours to feeding, clothing, and keeping her family free from
disease. Beginning in 1842 British ships had been required to carry provisions for their passengers (earlier
passengers had provided their own food), but the ships’ stores carried only bread and biscuit, which quickly
got stale or water-logged; rotted potatoes; some sugar and molasses; perhaps a bit of beef or pork. Fresh
water was stored in wooden casks that seldom kept it very fresh, and doled out in drips and drops. During
daylight hours, when the weather was good, passengers were allowed to wander the decks. Most of the time, they
were confined below in cramped quarters, with negligible ventilation and no privacy. Though reformers tried to
segregate men and women, they failed. The emigrants, most of whom traveled in families, preferred to stay
together and sleep alongside one another on wooden shelves built into the hold. The worst part of the
trip—aside perhaps from the foul air, dreadful food, and fetid water—must have been the tedium. For those who
remained healthy, there was nothing to do and little to see except the endless expanse of ocean below and sky
above.

The Carnegies’ passage was relatively uneventful and mercifully short—there seems to have been no ship fever,
cholera, or typhus, no fires on board, no squalls to send the ship off course and delay their arrival. But
forty-two days and nights on board a converted whaler—with one garrulous twelve-year-old and one toddler—could
not have been a very pleasant experience for anyone save that twelve-year-old. Young Andra had already
developed a talent for befriending and attaching himself to adults in positions of power. It stood him in
great stead on this journey. He made himself useful to the sailors, became their mascot and helper, and “in
consequence…was invited by the sailors to participate on Sundays, in the one delicacy of the sailors’ mess,
plum duff [a sort of pudding].”⁴

The four Carnegies arrived in New York Harbor in the midst of one of the largest immigrations this—or any
other country—has ever seen. The Irish Potato Famine had become progressively more serious through the late
1840s. In 1848, upwards of 200,000 men, women, and children crossed the Irish Sea to Liverpool, a port made
prosperous by the slave trade, where they boarded ships for America and Canada. The largest number of them
were bound for New York City. On Monday, August 14, the same day that the Wiscasset with its passengers from
Glasgow entered the port of New York, so did three ships from Liverpool: the Boston, with 216 passengers; the
Ocean Queen, with 316; the Mersey, with 18; and the William Carson, from Dublin with 139 on board.⁵

The Wiscasset, like every other ship entering the port, picked up a pilot boat at Sandy Hook and then as it
entered the Narrows was boarded by New York health officials, who speedily inspected the passengers, sending
those obviously and seriously ill to the Marine Hospital at Tompkinsville on Staten Island. In 1848, there was
still no central point of disembarkation for the immigrants, no Castle Garden or Ellis Island. Some ships
discharged their passengers instead at East River piers; others along the Hudson River; a few in New Jersey.
Wherever they landed, they were greeted by an army of fast-talking ne’er-do-wells poised to rob them of any
currency that might remain on their persons. Peddlers, hucksters, newsies, and hawkers offered them food and
information in whatever native language they happened to speak, while nattily dressed “runners” festooned with
smiles grabbed at their luggage and directed them to boardinghouses or tried to sell them passage—at a
bargain—to their final destinations.

The Carnegies were, at this point in their travels, more fortunate than most. Like the majority of Scottish
emigrants, Will and Mag Carnegie were literate, had marketable skills, spoke, read, and wrote English, and had
contacts with landsmen and family who were already established in America. Mag had arranged for the family to
camp overnight with a childhood friend, Euphemia Douglas, who had, like her, married a weaver, John Sloane.
The Sloane boys, John and Willie, would later follow their father into the carpet trade, but on the retail
end, as the proprietors of W. & J. Sloane Company.⁶

The Carnegies were not, as most of the new immigrants were, ignorant peasants adrift in a strange, new world.
They knew where they were going, if not quite how to get there. Their destination was Allegheny City, where
Mag’s sisters and their families lived, and where the Carnegies would be supported until Will found work.
Allegheny City lay west of New York City. The most direct route would have been south, by coastal steamer or
sailing packet, to Philadelphia and then about 400 miles west to Pittsburgh, across the Allegheny River from
Allegheny City, but that would have involved crossing the Allegheny Mountains by horse-drawn wagon. The
Carnegies were advised to take a more roundabout but cheaper water route, north on the Hudson to Albany, west
along the Erie Canal to Buffalo, southwest across Lake Erie to Cleveland, then south and east by canal boat
and railroad to Allegheny City.

The first leg of their trip, up the Hudson to Albany, was the shortest, less than twelve hours. The Hudson
River, as Domingo Faustino Sarmiento, an Argentine who traveled to and through America in 1847, had written
the year before, had already become “the center of life in the United States poetically, historically, and
commercially…. Its waters are always so literally covered by boats that there are traffic jams, as in the
streets of the great cities. The steamboats cross each other’s paths like shooting stars, and tugboats tow a
veritable carnival of barges whose keels sent out a tide before them…. The passenger steamboats on American
rivers are like two-story floating houses, with flat roofs and covered porches.” During his trip north,
Sarmiento had been captivated by the landscapes: the “perpendicular wall of rock cliffs” at the Palisades,
then the “villages, cities, orchards, hills, and forests” as the steamer proceeded up the river, past
“occasional ruins” and the “living monument at West Point.” The Hudson, he declared—and he was not the only
one to do so—“competes with the Rhine in beauty and has no rival, except in China, for the volume of its
traffic.”⁷

Arriving in Albany, the Carnegies had several choices. They could travel by railroad the entire 360 miles to
Buffalo for about three cents a mile. When the roadway was clear, the weather good, and the engines running
well, the trip took from fifteen to twenty-four hours. The alternative that the Carnegies chose was the canal
boat, which cost much less but took far longer, a full four or five days. Dragged along the Erie Canal by
horses for much of the route, the canal boats drifted through forests and swamps, farmlands and wilderness, up
and down locks, all at the very leisurely—sometimes maddeningly monotonous—pace of three to four miles an
hour. There were stops along the way so that passengers could buy staples and fresh produce to take on board
for their meals. Below decks, where the passengers spent all of their nights and a good part of every day, lay
three cramped, connected compartments, the middle one stowed with freight, the rear fitted with kitchens to
prepare food and tables to eat it on, the front serving as sitting room by day and dormitory at night. The
most distressing aspect of travel on the canal, for many European travelers, was the promiscuous mixing of
passengers below decks. James Lumsden, a Scotsman from Glasgow who had traveled this route in 1843, had been
quite distressed to discover that he would have to share quarters with an assemblage of rough-and-ready,
unwashed, and unkempt Americans. “Such a motley crew has seldom been seen. In taking notice of this mode of
conveyance, it is merely to guard my countrymen from traveling much by canal in the States.”⁸

At Buffalo, the Carnegies disembarked from the canal boat to board yet another steamer (their third), this one
bound for Cleveland along the shores of Lake Erie. From Cleveland, it was back into a succession of canal and
riverboats which carried them south to Akron, then southeast to Beaver, Pennsylvania, twenty miles from
Allegheny City, where they discovered that the steamboat they had expected to board for the last leg of their
trip—on the Ohio River to Allegheny City—was nowhere to be seen. They had no choice but to wait out the night
on the wharfboat that ferried passengers to the steamer.

It was mid-September now—they had left Dunfermline in July—and the four Carnegies were temporarily marooned on
the swampy edge of the Ohio River. “This was our first introduction to the mosquito in all its ferocity. My
mother suffered so severely that in the morning she could hardly see. We were all frightful sights, but I do
not remember that even the stinging misery of that night kept me from sleeping soundly. I could always sleep.”
The next morning, Will, Margaret, Andy, and Tom boarded the Ohio River steamer for the final leg of their
marathon journey.⁹

 

ALLEGHENY CITY was at the time a separate city from Pittsburgh. Anthony Trollope, who visited it in 1861–62,
considered this to be yet another sign of American obtuseness: “Pittsburgh and Allegheny…regard themselves as
places apart; but they are in effect one and the same city. They live under the same blanket of soot, which is
woven by the joint efforts of the two places.” Like Charles Dickens and, it appears, every other foreign
visitor, Trollope could not resist comparing Pittsburgh to a city back home. These comparisons were never
flattering—to either city. “Pittsburgh is the Merthyr-Tydvil [a nightmare of an industrial town near Cardiff
in South Wales] of Pennsylvania,” Trollope reported, “or perhaps I should better describe it as an
amalgamation of Swansea, Merthyr-Tydvil, and South Shields. It is without exception the blackest place which I
ever saw. The three English towns which I have named are very dirty, but all their combined soot and grease
and dinginess do not equal that of Pittsburgh.” Alexander Mackey, who had visited in 1846–47, just before the
arrival of the Carnegies, noted that Pittsburgh’s residents referred to their city as the “Sheffield of the
West” to call attention to the quality and variety of its manufactures. Mackey thought the comparison apt, but
for a different reason: “In one thing, [Pittsburgh] certainly resembles Sheffield—in the dingy and sickly
character of the vegetation in its immediate vicinity; the fresh green leaf and the delicate flower being
begrimed, ere they have fully unfolded themselves, by the smoke and soot with which the whole atmosphere is
impregnated.”¹⁰

Like its sister cities across the Atlantic, Pittsburgh was first and foremost a manufacturing town. By the
1840s, Pittsburgh’s glass factories and iron foundries were supplying settlers on the western frontier with
bottles, pots and pans, kettles, stoves, grates, tools, and utensils; its nail factories were turning out
hundreds of tons of cut and wrought-iron nails; its rolling mills were converting pig iron into iron bars,
which were then rolled and molded into a variety of shapes. All of this manufacturing left its mark—in the air
and on the ground. The machine shops, foundries, mills, boiler yards, and factories spewed tons of ash, soot,
and smoke into the air, almost all of which fell to earth on the cities below, leaving a film of dust in the
lungs of the inhabitants, on the roofs of their homes, in the streets, on the rivers and canals.¹¹

After a joyous family reunion, probably at the wharves where their steamer docked, the four Carnegies followed
their relatives to what would become their new home at 336 Rebecca Street.[*][1] Mag’s twin sisters Annie
(Aunt Aitkin) and Kitty and their husbands had prospered in the decade they had lived in the New World.
Annie’s husband, who had died a few years before the Carnegies arrived, had left her with a share of the
Rebecca Street property, which she owned with Kitty and Kitty’s husband, Thomas Hogan. Thomas was, by 1848,
employed as a clerk in a crockery shop and, by the time of the 1850 census, would be worth at least $1,000.
The Hogans lived with their four children, aged one to fourteen, in the house at the front of the lot at 336
Rebecca. In the rear, off an alley, was a smaller cottage, the ground floor of which was occupied by Thomas
Hogan’s older brother, Andrew, a weaver. There were two small rooms upstairs.¹²

The Carnegies/Morrisons/Hogans/Aitkins were one big extended family, with branches in Allegheny City and
Dunfermline. The four Carnegies, the latest addition to the chain migration, were invited to move into the
rooms on the second floor of the cottage in the back of the lot, rent-free, until they were able to pay their
way.

Allegheny City was not, in 1848, the most pleasant place on earth to pitch one’s tent. In addition to the soot
and grime on the ground and the black smoke in the sky, the city suffered from almost annual flooding. “We
have had a flood this year,” Andra reported almost matter-of-factly to his Dunfermline cousins in the spring
of 1852. “Every season when the snow melts on the mountains the Rivers raise very high but they have not been
so high for 20 years before. It rained for 3 weeks almost constantly and both rivers rose at once. It was up
to the ceiling in our house and for 2 days we had to live upstairs and sail about in rafts and skiffs. It was
a great time. The lower part of Allegheny was all flooded. It caused great destruction of property.”¹³

Had the streets been paved, such floods would not have caused as much distress as they did. But Allegheny City
was growing too fast for its infrastructure to keep pace. During the 1840s alone, its population doubled, from
10,000 to 21,262. (Pittsburgh’s grew at roughly the same pace.) There was no municipal water system in
Allegheny City until 1848, no gas lines and consequently no street lighting until 1853, no underground sewers,
no sanitation system. Dogs, rats, and hogs roamed the streets, even after the early 1850s when, according to a
local historian, Leland Baldwin, “the attacks of savage porkers upon children…finally stirred the authorities
to take some measures to enforce the long-standing law against hogs running free. A pound was set up and a
reward of one dollar was paid for each hog brought in, much to the delight of the street urchins, who found it
an entrancing mode of earning pocket money.”¹⁴

A good part of the year, especially in the spring flood season, the streets overflowed with storm water,
wastes, and sewage, which seeped into the yards and front rooms. Disease coursed through the city, striking
down the youngest and the oldest. There were cholera epidemics in 1849, 1850, 1854, and 1855.¹⁵

The Carnegies had not expected to find paradise in Allegheny City. For all its Old World charms, Dunfermline
too had had its epidemics, its scavenging rodents, muddy streets, and clean water shortages. The reason why
the Hogans and the Aitkins and the Carnegies and thousands like them had come to the United States in general,
and the Pittsburgh area in particular, had less to do with health, hygiene, or the physical environment than
with an abundance of well-paid jobs. In this respect, Pittsburgh and Allegheny City were everything that
Dunfermline was not: their markets for manufactured goods were expanding rapidly, their economies were
diversified, and there were no craft restrictions on the employment of skilled artisans.

Divided from the eastern seaboard by the Allegheny Mountains and linked to the west by the Ohio River,
Pittsburgh and Allegheny City prospered as the nation’s population moved west. The “bottoms,” which had been
formed along the banks of the rivers by centuries of flooding and erosion, were perfect locations for large
manufactories. Better yet, goods manufactured on either bank of the Allegheny and Monongahela Rivers could be
transported cheaply and quickly via canal and river to Cincinnati, Louisville, St. Louis, New Orleans, and to
hundreds of small towns and settlements in the West at much less than it cost eastern manufacturers to ship
their products around or across the Allegheny Mountains. As a local real estate firm proclaimed in 1845, the
geographic advantages of Pittsburgh made it a “perfect place for manufacturing.”¹⁶

These were not the only comparative advantages bestowed by geography on greater Pittsburgh’s manufacturers.
Western Pennsylvania and the Ohio River valley were rich with grain, livestock, and produce. More important
for its burgeoning manufacturers, there was abundant and easily accessible timber in the hills, one of the
world’s largest soft coal seams in the ground below, and iron ore close by.

By the 1840s, Allegheny City had begun to exploit its natural advantages. The city’s largest employers were
its five cotton mills, which enjoyed their best year ever in 1847. Although cotton was one of the few raw
materials not found in the region, steamboats could transport it north, upstream, as cheaply as finished goods
could be moved south and west, with the current. By 1850, Allegheny City’s cotton mills were consuming 15,000
bales of cotton a year, which they converted into yarns, sheeting, and batting worth almost $1.5 million.¹⁷

The Carnegies relocated to Allegheny City because Will Carnegie could not support his family in Dunfermline.
His wife, Mag, hoped he would have better luck in the New World. He did not. Either because he was
“shiftless,” “aimless,” and a “weakling,” or, more likely, because, at age forty-four, he was not prepared to
start over again, he delayed looking for wage work as long as he could. Beguiled, perhaps, by his good luck at
finding living quarters on the second floor of a weaver’s cottage, he bided his time until the weaver who
lived there moved out. He then rented his loom and “began making tablecloths,” much as he had in Dunfermline.
He met with the same lack of success. Unable to find any dealer willing to sell his products, he had to resort
to peddling his wares door to door, still without much success.¹⁸

Mag Carnegie had no choice now but to continue in the role of chief family breadwinner. Thousands of miles
across the Atlantic, in a fairy-tale coincidence, she discovered that one of her neighbors, Harry Phipps, was
a master shoemaker from Shropshire, with binding to give out. For her labors, which she could do at home while
watching over her two sons, she received four dollars a week.

Mag’s four dollars a week was all that the family earned. Will continued to weave tablecloths he could not
sell. The family survived only through the kindness of Aunt Aitkin, who allowed them to continue to live
rent-free in the cottage off the alleyway.

Andra turned thirteen in November and, though small for his age (as he would be at every age), Mag reluctantly
conceded that he had to be sent out to work. She delayed as long as possible, no doubt because the prospects
for an undersized, unskilled thirteen-year-old who spoke with a heavy Scottish accent were not promising.

Still, the family was desperate. A temporary solution was found when Andra and his father were offered
positions at the Anchor Cotton Mills, owned by Mr. Blackstock, a Scotsman. Blackstock and his fellow cotton
mill owners were, at the time, in dire need of new hands. The previous July, a new state law had taken effect,
mandating a ten-hour day, sixty-hour week, and prohibiting the employment of children under twelve. Though the
mill owners agreed not to hire any mill girls under age twelve, they refused to abide by the ten-hour
provision and demanded that all factory hands who wished to keep their jobs sign special contracts, allowed
under the new law, agreeing to a twelve-hour day. When the vast majority of the workers refused, the owners
shut down operation. On July 31, the first of the cotton mills was reopened—but only to those who signed the
special contracts giving up their rights to a ten-hour day. At 5:00 A.M., when the gates swung open, a crowd
of mostly young girls assembled outside the mill to hoot, howl, and pelt the returning “scabs” with “stones,
eggs, potatoes, and mud.” The scene got uglier when the owner ordered a foreman to shoot a stream of hot steam
into the yard where the protesters were gathered. A few of the girls were scalded and the crowd, enraged,
stormed the mill, breaking windows and vandalizing machinery. The response of the Allegheny City Select and
Common Councils was to allocate $1,000 for the arrest and conviction of the rioters. Ten days later, the
owners of three mills, including Blackstock’s, opened their gates, but again only to those who agreed to work
a twelve-hour day. Through the fall and into the winter, while sixteen protesters, five of whom were girls,
were brought to trial for violating antiriot statutes, the mill owners hired scabs to replace those who
refused to sign twelve-hour contracts.¹⁹

Short of laborers, Mr. Blackstock offered Will and Andra jobs at his Anchor Cotton Mills. Needless to say,
they had to sign special contracts agreeing to work a twelve-hour day. To get to the mills by five, father and
son rose in the middle of the night and had breakfast “by candle light.” The Anchor Mills were more than a
mile away—a long walk in the bitterly cold Pittsburgh winter. As a bobbin boy, Andra spent his twelve-hour
workday, with a short break for breakfast and forty minutes for dinner, running up and down the aisles
exchanging fresh bobbins for used ones. “The hours hung heavily upon me and in the work itself I took no
pleasure.”²⁰

A short time after they began work at the mills, Will quit to return to his loom on the ground floor of the
Carnegie cottage on Rebecca Street.[*][2] With her husband having failed again as a breadwinner, Mag had to
find additional work. On Saturdays, she took off time from binding shoes and running the household to help out
her widowed sister, who had opened a small grocery store.

The only ray of hope for the Carnegies was their oldest son, whose earning potential as a teenager was already
superior to his mother’s and his father’s. There was something about the lad that inspired older Scottish men
to entrust him with responsibilities he was not quite ready for. The Carnegies had relocated to an American
manufacturing city filled with enterprising, upward-rising Scotsmen, ready and able to help out young
landsmen. Andra’s stint as a bobbin boy for Mr. Blackstock had barely begun when another Scottish expatriate
manufacturer, John Hay, offered him a position for two dollars a week, almost double his wages. Hay owned a
workshop at the corner of Lacock Street and Race Alley in which he and his four “hands” turned out the bobbins
that, with the recent boom in cotton manufacturing, were in greater demand than ever.²¹

Andra’s new job was to fire the boiler in the basement with wooden chips and tend the engine that turned the
nine lathes in the workshop. When Hay, however, discovered that Andra had a fine “hand” and was good with
figures, he moved him out of the basement and entrusted him with the bill-keeping. Regrettably, Hay’s workshop
was too small to employ a full-time bookkeeper, so Andra had to fill in most of his workday with work less
frightening but every bit as distasteful as tending the boiler: bathing every newly turned bobbin in vats of
crude Pennsylvania petroleum. “Not all the resolution I could muster, or all the indignation I felt at my own
weakness, prevented my stomach from behaving in a most perverse way. I never succeeded in overcoming the
nausea produced by the smell of the oil.”²²

Andra’s experience as a bobbin boy, boiler attendant, and soaker of bobbins in vats of oil was sufficient to
convince him that to prosper at business he would have to move off the factory floor into the backroom
offices. He set his sights on becoming a full-time bookkeeper. Those plans were put on hold when, after less
than a year with John Hay, he was presented with another opportunity by yet another Scotsman. His uncle Hogan
regularly played draughts (or checkers as it was known in the United States) with David Brooks, the manager of
the Pittsburgh office of the Atlantic & Ohio Telegraph Company, also known as the O’Rielly Telegraph Company,
after its founder, Henry O’Rielly.[*][3] When, one evening over the draughts board, Brooks asked “if he knew
where a good boy could be found to act as messenger,” his uncle mentioned Andra’s name and volunteered to
inquire whether his parents would let him take the job. It paid $2.50 a week, 25 percent more than he was
getting from Mr. Hay. Andra “was wild with delight” at the thought of getting away from his vats of oil and
his mother agreed that he should take the job. Only Will Carnegie was opposed. The new position—as messenger
boy—would “prove too much for me, he said; I was too young and too small. For the two dollars and a half per
week offered it was evident that a much larger boy was expected. Late at night I might be required to run out
into the country with a telegram, and there would be dangers to encounter. Upon the whole my father said that
it was best that I should remain where I was.”²³

In the end, mother and son prevailed. Will agreed to let Andy interview for the position, but, still worried
about the undersized thirteen-year-old, accompanied him across the St. Clair Street Bridge, a wooden structure
that would soon be replaced by John Roebling’s Sixth Street Bridge, into Pittsburgh. The O’Rielly telegraph
office was at 100 Fourth Avenue, where PPG Place (Pittsburgh Plate Glass) stands today. A century and a half
ago, this location, adjacent to Market Square, was at the geographic and business center of Pittsburgh, the
perfect location to establish a telegraph office.

Like all thirteen-year-olds, especially newly arrived immigrants, Andy, as he would now be known, was
mortified by the presence of his father, who could be identified from a block away as a man of the Old World.
On arriving in America, the boy’s accent had, like his father’s, been broad enough to mark him immediately as
a “Scotchie.” But he worked hard to make it go away. After less than four years in America, he recalled in a
letter to his uncle Lauder how John Sloane had, on his visit to Allegheny City, laughed aloud because Andy
could “not say sow crae as broad as he says it. I tried it over and over but could not do it.” Andy hastened
to reassure his uncle that while his accent was disappearing, he was no less a Scotsman. “Although I cannot
say sow crae as broad as I once could, I can read about Wallace, Bruce and Burns with as much enthusiasm as
ever, and feel proud of being a son of Old Caledonia and I like to tell people when they ask ‘Are you native
born?’ [They would not have asked had his accent remained.] ‘No, sir, I am a Scotchman,’ and I feel as proud I
am sure as ever Romans did when it was their boast to say, ‘I am a Roman citizen.’”²⁴

For his interview for the telegraph messenger position, Andy wanted to appear as American as possible. David
Brooks who managed the Pittsburgh office was a Scotsman, and his immediate superior, James Reid, the company’s
general superintendent, was not only Scots but from Dunfermline; but Andy was convinced that he “could make a
smarter showing if alone with Mr. Brooks than if my good old Scotch father were present, perhaps to smile at
my airs.” He not only left his father out on the street to wait for him, but he must have intimated to Reid
that his father had died. Reid would later refer, in his 1879 history of the telegraph industry, to having
hired the “little lad named Andrew Carnegie, who, with his widowed mother, had lately arrived from Scotland,
his native land.”²⁵

Dressed in his one white linen shirt and his “blue round-about,” a short, tightly fitted blue jacket, Andy
Carnegie made enough of an impression to counter his lack of size and experience with the Pittsburgh streets.
He was offered the position and volunteered to begin at once. He had, with the help of his landsmen, landed in
the right place at the right time. Pittsburgh, the gateway to the West, was destined to be a central hub in
the network of telegraph poles that were beginning to connect the nation. The first telegraph line had been
completed five years earlier, in 1844, when Samuel F. B. Morse, with $30,000 in federal funding, connected
Washington to Baltimore. Morse and his partners had expected to get funding to build additional lines from the
federal government, but their experience securing their first $30,000 had been so debilitating that they gave
up entirely on the public sector and turned to private capital to fund their new telegraph lines. Henry
O’Rielly secured the franchise and agreed to raise the capital to string telegraph poles from east to west.
His plan was to extend one line from Buffalo to Chicago, the other across the Alleghenies from Philadelphia
through Pittsburgh, to St. Louis, and then north to Chicago, and south to New Orleans.

Although customers were scarce and the first telegraph lines were continually breaking (or being broken by
bands of boys who took great joy in throwing stones at the glass insulators that glistened in the sunlight),
O’Rielly and the handful of entrepreneurs who believed in the future of telegraphy raised sufficient capital
to extend their lines mile by mile. By late 1846, they had also connected Boston to Washington, via New York
City and Philadelphia; New York City to Buffalo, through Albany; and in late December, Philadelphia to
Pittsburgh, via Lancaster and Harrisburg. By August 1847, O’Rielly had linked Pittsburgh and Cleveland,
through Canton and Akron, and Pittsburgh and Cincinnati via Columbus and Dayton. By the end of the year, his
oak posts and insulated copper wires reached all the way to St. Louis. As Colonel John P. Glass, one of the
managers of the Pittsburgh office, wrote in triumph, the St. Louis connection resulted in an immediate
increase of 15–20 percent in the number of messages sent and received in Pittsburgh. “The western offices
having to communicate with the East through us, this will be the Great Distributing Post Office of the Western
lines.”²⁶

Andy Carnegie was assigned to deliver telegrams with news from the “Eastern line”: shipping reports from
Europe transported across the Atlantic by steamer; stock prices from New York City; commercial news from
Philadelphia and Baltimore; political news from Washington and the state capital in Harrisburg. Here was the
perfect position for an ambitious, affable young man. Every day brought him face-to-face with Pittsburgh’s top
businessmen and politicians. With no telephones and intracity transportation rudimentary, the boys on foot
provided the only link between Pittsburgh and the eastern seaboard and between local businessmen and their
families and offices. The boy who delivered his messages without delay and offered to deliver return messages
on his way back to the office was noticed and remembered.

It was not easy being a messenger boy in Pittsburgh or in any city whose streets did not cross at right angles
in a New York City–style grid. Andy’s greatest fear was that he would not be able to find the offices he was
supposed to deliver messages to. “So I started in and learned all the addresses by heart, up one side of Wood
Street and down the other. Then I learned the other business streets in the same way.” After memorizing the
street map, he learned the names—and faces—of the city’s businessmen so that, should he manage to meet one in
the street, he could say hello and, in those rare but magical moments when he had a telegram, deliver it on
the spot.²⁷

Andy Carnegie wasted no time making his mark. On November 2, 1849, three weeks shy of his fourteenth birthday,
his name appeared in the newspaper for the first time, on page three of the Pittsburgh Daily Gazette: “A
Prize—A messenger boy of the name of Andrew Carnegie employed by the O’Reilly [sic] Telegraph Company,
yesterday found a draft for the amount of five hundred dollars. Like an honest little fellow, he promptly made
known the fact, and deposited the paper in good hands where it waits identification.”

The “honest little fellow,” in truth, had not had much of a chance to be dishonest. A draft for five hundred
dollars was worth nothing until converted into currency and it would have been difficult for Andy—or anyone in
his family—to get this done. While Andy Carnegie might not have deserved praise for his honesty, he should
certainly be saluted for his skills as a self-promoter. Sheer luck might have put the draft into his hand in
the first place, but it took pluck and the right contacts to get the story into the paper. For the next few
weeks at least, Andy would be known everywhere, at home and on the streets of the Pittsburgh business
district, as that “honest little fellow” who had returned the five-hundred-dollar draft. The boy had a talent
for publicity, one that would stand him in good stead all his life.

The turnover in the telegraph office was considerable and Andy quickly became one of the senior boys. His
partner delivering telegrams from the “Eastern line” was David McCargo, also the son of a Scottish immigrant,
who would become and remain one of his dear friends. Soon after Davy’s arrival, Robert Pitcairn, who, like
Andy, was “not only Scotch, but Scotch-born” got a job at O’Rielly’s. The boys were among the fortunate few.
Instead of being sequestered from dawn to dusk in airless factories and dust-filled mills, messengers spent
their days out-of-doors; while their peers lived under the harsh supervision of often brutal foremen,
messengers were left on their own to deliver their messages. “A messenger boy in those days,” Carnegie
recalled in his Autobiography, “had many pleasures. There were wholesale fruit stores, where a pocketful of
apples was sometimes to be had for the prompt deliver of a message; bakers’ and confectioners’ shops, where
sweet cakes were sometimes given to him.” And there was the Pittsburgh theater, which in return for free
telegraphic service, admitted the operators—and sometimes the messengers—for free. Andy quickly learned the
tricks of the trade, such as withholding messages for the theater until curtain time, in the hope that the
theater manager would invite the messenger to “slip upstairs to the second tier” to see that evening’s
performance, perhaps Fanny Kemble performing Shakespeare or the singer Jenny Lind, who Carnegie thought “the
strangest woman I ever heard.”²⁸

The O’Rielly office occupied two floors. The operators worked on the second floor; the public did its business
on the first. Because Andy was eager to please—and got along well with adults—he was occasionally asked by
Colonel Glass, the downstairs manager, to watch the office. Again, as in Mr. Martin’s school in Dunfermline,
Andy was singled out for special treatment and, in doing so, incurred the dislike of his companions. “At that
time I was not popular with the other boys, who resented my exemption from part of my legitimate work.” At
fourteen, Andy Carnegie, it appeared, was also something of a prig, which set him apart from his comrades. He
did not enjoy roughhousing or sexually charged banter or dirty stories of any kind. One of the boys he worked
alongside, Tom David, declared years later that he had always thought Andy was “religiously inclined.” Why
else, David reasoned, would he recoil so from “salacious stories”? Though already the family breadwinner, Andy
remained very much a mama’s boy, afraid of misbehaving lest his mother think less of him. His Sunday school
classmate William Macgregor had noticed this years before in Dunfermline, when he observed that Andra “never
kicked up rumpuses,” like the other boys, perhaps because he was too “much under the control of his mother.”²⁹

Andy Carnegie, David also recalled, was already hell-bent on improving himself. Every Monday morning, he would
stop by Tom’s table to tell him about the debate by mail he was carrying on with his Scottish cousin about
slavery. “The whole trend of your mind,” Tom remembered in a later letter to Carnegie, “seemed to be towards
big things—Indeed I recall that your efforts to do the pranks of the average boy struck me at the time as
being almost grotesque. You would not follow the fashions in dress, because, I supposed you believed it to be
evidence of a little mind.”³⁰

Andy had given up his plans to become a bookkeeper. His new business goal was to graduate from telegraph
messenger to operator. “The click of the telegraph instruments fascinated me,” he wrote in an 1899 article. “I
tried to understand it, by listening, by going to the office early and playing with the key. Mr. Reid finally
agreed to help me to learn.”

One morning, before the office had officially opened for business, while Andy was sweeping up, he “heard the
Pittsburgh call given with vigor.” Instead of ignoring it—and waiting for the regular operators to take the
message—he answered the call and “let the slip run.” In those days, the messages were imprinted—in Morse
code—with dots and dashes on slips of paper. As each message was received, the operator called it out to a
“copyist,” who translated it into English, then summoned a boy to deliver it. Andy, informed that the call was
a “death message” from Philadelphia, took it down himself, translated it, and delivered it. He then returned
to the office, where he “waited anxiously for Mr. Brooks to come in.” Rather than scolding him for meddling,
as Carnegie had feared, Brooks complimented him—with the warning to be careful in the future not to make any
mistakes in transcribing messages.³¹

Andy began filling in when the operator on duty was absent. Possessed of what he later referred to as “a
sensitive ear for sound,” he taught himself to take messages by ear, instead of waiting to transcribe the
printed slips as was the common practice. “This,” he recalled in an 1896 article for Youth’s Companion,
“brought me into notice.” In June 1851, no more than about eighteen months after he had taken the messenger
job, he was sent to Greensburg, Pennsylvania, halfway between Pittsburgh and Johnstown, to replace the regular
operator who had to be absent for two weeks. Aside from nearly getting himself electrocuted by venturing “too
near the key” during a lightning storm, Andy performed admirably at Greensburg and returned to Pittsburgh
“surrounded with something like a halo, so far as the other boys were concerned.” As he proudly wrote his
cousin Dod (George Lauder, Jr.’s, nickname) in Dunfermline, “I have got past delivering messages now and have
got to operating. I am to have four dollars a week and a good prospect of soon getting more.” He was still
about five months shy of his sixteenth birthday.³²

 

IN 1851, in celebration perhaps of his newfound status in the world or perhaps on the occasion of his
birthday, Andy and his little brother Tom posed for formal portraits in the studio of R. M. Cargo on Federal
Street. Andy’s arm is loosely extended around the shoulder of his brother who, as befits a seven-or eight-year
old, looks at the camera with a quizzical smirk in one photo, a frown in the other. Andy is dressed formally
in a long double-breasted black frock coat (which he had probably borrowed for the photograph), a white shirt,
collar, and bow tie, all a few sizes too large for him. In an attempt to look worldly-wise, he stares straight
at the camera with a gaze that appears almost mournful. His head is abnormally large and heart-shaped, with
small, narrow eyes, a puggish nose, tightly closed mouth, and a high broad forehead, topped by neatly brushed
blond hair, parted on the left, with a slight pompadour effect.

Although he displays little joy or warmth in the photograph, Andy was mighty pleased with himself and his new
position. “I still continue to like my business and intend to continue at it,” he wrote his uncle in May 1852.
“I have very easy times and I may say I have no master, for the operators in the office are very nice men and
never say a cross word, at least very seldom.” While he confessed that he sometimes thought he “would like to
be back in Dunfermline,” he was “sure” that it was “far better for me that I came here. If I had been in
Dunfermline working at the loom it is very likely I would have been a poor weaver all my days, but here I can
surely do something better than that, if I don’t it will be my own fault, for anyone can get along in this
Country. I intend going to night school this fall to learn something more and after that I will try and teach
myself some other branches.”³³

To be a man of the world, he had to read more. This much he knew. But where was he going to come by reading
material? The “wants of the family,” he recalled in his Autobiography, left him with no “money to spend on
books.” And as his uncle Aitkin had complained in one of his first letters after arriving in Allegheny City in
1840, while almost everything a man could hope to buy was cheaper in the States, reading matter was not.
“Would you believe that I was charged a sixpence and on one occasion a 1/-[one pound] a week for the reading
of a pretty large volume—and that to be a regular subscriber of an ordinary library I would require to pay 75
cents (halfpence) per month $6 dollars per year…. There is no possibility of getting papers or periodicals to
read here for a small sum—most of the people being in the habit of purchasing them for their own use. This has
been to me a great deprivation. I really find that books here are as dear as in the old country everything
considered.”

Uncle Aitkin hoped to remedy this flaw in American cultural life—and make a profit at it—by starting up his
own lending library. “I am now convinced that for any one to keep a library and to give works out at a cheaper
rate would pay very well & I think I will be engaged in this business in a short time,—after I make a little
money by lecturing etc.” Regrettably—for Uncle Aitkin and for Allegheny City’s starved readers—he never got
around to setting up his business.³⁴

A decade later, Colonel James Anderson, a successful Allegheny City manufacturer, established the city’s first
quasi-public library. Unlike Uncle Aitkin, his purposes were philanthropic, not commercial. Every Saturday
afternoon, he invited the city’s apprentices and working boys to visit his private library and, if they chose,
borrow a book for the week. The response was so overwhelming that Anderson felt obliged both to expand his
holdings and to offer his library to the city, stipulating only that the Allegheny City Select and Common
Councils find rooms to house the collection and hire a part-time librarian to maintain it. The councils agreed
in principle, but not in practice, and the new institution “languished and was finally closed,” only to be
rescued—temporarily—by the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA). It was then incorporated by a group of
local businessmen who tried to make it self-sufficient by charging users an annual two-dollar fee. In the
spirit of Anderson’s original bequest, working boys needed to present only their guardians’ or parents’
“surety” to be allowed to borrow books for free. For a few short years, the library was housed on Federal and
Diamond Streets in Allegheny City and opened Tuesday through Saturday evenings. But when it again ran short of
funds, sometime in 1853, neither the city councils nor the YMCA nor the businessmen who had incorporated it
were willing to bail it out. In an attempt to keep the institution alive, it was moved to the home of
librarian Robert Donaldson at 611 Diamond Street. To increase revenues, the two-dollar annual fee was
reinstated for working boys like Andy Carnegie who were not formally bound by letters of apprenticeship.³⁵

Out of self-interest, combined with a sense of moral outrage, Andy protested the fee in a May 9, 1853, letter
to the editor of the Pittsburgh Dispatch, which he pointedly signed: “a working boy though not bound.” Firmly,
but without any hint of youthful aggression, he prefaced his protest by praising the Dispatch’s editor and, by
implication, its readers. “Believing that you take a deep interest in whatever tends to elevate, instruct and
improve the youth of this country I am induced to call your attention to the following.” He then proceeded,
with a literary flourish, to ridicule the library’s intention to charge a fee. The library had, he informed
the Dispatch’s readers, “been in successful operation for over a year scattering precious seeds among us…. But
its means of doing good have recently been greatly circumscribed by new directors who refuse to allow any boy
who is not learning a trade & bound for a stated time to become a member. I rather think that the new
directors have misunderstood the generous donor’s intentions. It can hardly be thought he meant to exclude
boys employed in stores merely because they are not bound.”

The letter prompted an immediate response by the librarian who, signing his letter “X.Y.Z.,” corrected
“working boy” by noting, rather contemptuously, that had he “applied to the right place, which is the Library,
he would have obtained correct information”—namely, that the library had been founded in 1849, not 1848 as
Andy had claimed in his letter, and that the founder, Colonel Anderson, did not “bequeath” any money but had
instead “made a present of about 2000 vols. to the city of Allegheny.” The directors, X.Y.Z. claimed, had in
the past admitted “working boys” who were not apprentices, but could no longer afford to do so.

Andy was not deterred by minor corrections. In a second letter to the editor, “working boy” acknowledged his
“mistakes” but reiterated his claim that the “managers” of the Anderson Library, in restricting boys not
bound, had “certainly misunderstood the generous donor’s intentions.” Unwilling to continue a never-ending
literary duel, the librarians had no choice but to capitulate. Three days after Andy’s second letter, a notice
appeared on the editorial page of the Dispatch: “A ‘Working Boy’ will confer a favor by calling at our
office.” Andy was invited back to the library and permitted to borrow one book a week, as he had been doing,
without having to pay a fee.³⁶

The story of Andy Carnegie defeating the villainous adults played well in his Autobiography and the
biographies that drew from it, but there is another side to the tale which we should not neglect. The Anderson
Library was not a free public library, funded by the city, but a subscription library, which relied in great
part on the support of its patrons.[*][4] Although “working boys” should, as he had argued, have been allowed
to borrow books without paying the two-dollar subscription fee, Andy Carnegie, six months from his eighteenth
birthday, was hardly a “working boy.” He held a man’s job and received a man’s pay of twenty-five dollars a
month. Was it unreasonable for the librarians to ask him to contribute a two-dollar annual subscription fee to
keep the library from having to close its doors for the third time in its young history?

Andy thought so. With a talent for cloaking self-interest in larger humanitarian concerns, he made a premature
case for free public libraries. As a descendant of generations of self-taught Carnegie and Morrison males,
Andy took his own self-education seriously. He wanted to read widely because that was what a man and citizen
did, whether artisan or mechanic, clerk or merchant, Scottish or American. Book learning was a means toward,
and a sign of, moral distinction. His early tastes had been shaped by his uncle Lauder, who raised him on the
Scottish poets, Robert Burns, Robert Tannahill, James Hogg, Robert Fergusson, and Allan Ramsay, and on the
novels and histories of Sir Walter Scott. In Allegheny City, he became a devotee of well-written, national
histories, the longer the better: William H. Prescott’s A History of the Conquest of Mexico; Thomas Macaulay’s
four-volume History of England; and his special favorite, George Bancroft’s ten-volume A History of the United
States. He devoured the artfully crafted, though somewhat pedantic, literary essays of Charles Lamb and Thomas
Macaulay and buried himself in scientific studies like Mary Somerville’s On the Connection of the Physical
Sciences.³⁷

Much of his reading in Allegheny City was devoted to learning about his new country. From the moment the
Wiscasset docked in New York Harbor, Andy had become an American patriot. To buttress his arguments for
American supremacy, he scoured the Pittsburgh papers, the New York Daily Tribune (which he read in the
telegraph office), and history books borrowed from the Anderson Library.

Scottish radicals like the Morrisons made use of the American example to criticize Her Majesty’s government,
but, as Andy discovered via the mail he received from his uncle Lauder and his cousin Dod in Dunfermline, it
was one thing to criticize the lack of democracy in Britain from within Scotland, quite another to do it from
foreign shores. “Naig” (as his cousin had called him from boyhood, and as he signed his letters to
Dumfermline) harped constantly in his letters on American superiority in politics, technology, marine
navigation, railroad building, even in temperance legislation, which began to grate on his Scottish relatives.
After reading one too many paragraphs celebrating democracy in the New World, Dod retaliated with his own
brand of rhetorical fury.[*][5] How could Andy possibly speak with such passion and eloquence of American
institutions and American liberties in the face of “the Monster Iniquity,” slavery? Rather than God’s gift to
freedom-loving people, the United States, because of slavery, should be despised, not celebrated, as “the most
tyrannical [country] in the world.” Dod challenged his cousin to a transoceanic written debate comparing the
British and American forms of government.

“Dod’s letter put me in an awful way,” Andy wrote his uncle Lauder, perhaps because there was little he could
say in reply. “I could hardly forbear from writing him the same hour his came to hand but I concluded (after I
had filled three or four sheets in reply) to read some authorities upon the subject before ‘proceeding to
business.’ I have the characteristics of ‘our folks’ rather ‘strongly developed’…and am of course therefore a
great, or rather small, dabbler in politics, and the proposition pleases me first rate. It will no doubt be
beneficial to both of us to examine into the systems of Government by which we are ruled and it will prompt us
to read and reflect on what perhaps we would never had done without that stimulant. I have therefore accepted
Dod’s challenge.”³⁸

The letters that followed, written when Andy was the age of today’s high school seniors, read like the work of
an accomplished scholar, albeit with a dash of boyish enthusiasm. Though he had left school at twelve, he had
grown up in a family of radical political pamphleteers and speechmakers and learned, perhaps from their
example, how to construct complex arguments and marshal evidence to support them. His analyses were powerful,
his documentation thorough, his prose style distinctive and persuasive.³⁹

Andy made his case for the superiority of American institutions in an almost breathless, celebratory prose
that borrowed a great deal—in style and content—from George Bancroft’s ode to Jacksonian democracy. Because,
in the United States, “government is founded upon justice and our creed is that the will of the people is the
source, their happiness, the end of all legitimate government,” there was no need to employ the “wretched
props” and “contrivances” Her Majesty’s government required. “Our army consists of a few thousand men employed
in protecting our frontiers from Indian depredations. Our police force is insignificant. Allegheny City for
instance with a population of 22,000 has but four.” Following the formula he would later employ in Triumphant
Democracy, he assembled a wealth of statistical evidence to prove that democracy worked. “We have now in the
National Treasury nearly $22,000,000”; annual government receipts exceeded expenditures; populations were
increasing everywhere; American commerce was already “second in the world and is rapidly taking the first
position.” From Pittsburgh alone, fifty-two steamers a year were being launched, some over 1,000 tons. “We
publish 2800 papers and magazines, 350 of which are dailies, number of copies printed annually estimated at
422,600,000…. Our railroads extend 13,000 miles…. Our telegraphs embrace 21,000 miles…. We have about
$550,000,000 invested in manufactures. Every business yields a fair remuneration. Pauperism is almost
unknown.” In reply to the argument that government by itself had “little to do with this state of affairs,”
Andy called his cousin’s attention to Canada: “Where are her railroads, telegraphs and canals? We have given
to the world a Washington, a Franklin, a Fulton, a Morse. What has Canada ever produced?”⁴⁰

In September 1854, Andy returned to battle, this time to compare the manner in which Great Britain and America
selected their “sovereigns.” Sounding much like his great-uncle had in attacking Lord Dalmeny, he skewered the
British system in which “we see a person called Sovereign, exalted to the head of Government, not for any
great service done to the state, not for any extraordinary virtue possessed, not because of any superhuman
endowment, not for any towering ability or sir, not because the mighty voice of a free people calls him…but
all for the mere accident of birth—an idea utterly at war with freedoms sentiment that all men are created
equal.”⁴¹

While his relatives in Scotland had fought—and failed—to get their charter or their reform bills written into
law, “we” in America, Andy reminded them, “have the charter which you have been fighting for for years as the
panacea for all Britain’s woes, the bulwark of the people.” In America, political reform, once achieved, had
been translated directly into economic opportunity, as the Chartists back home had hoped it would. That is why
so many English, Scots, Irish, and Welsh workingmen, “tax ridden and oppressed in their own country,” had
chosen “to seek a home in the new.” Here they found “no Royal Family (increasing with fearful rapidity) to
squander their hard made earnings, no aristocracy to support, no established church with its enormous
sinecures…no primogeniture and entail to curse the land and stop improvements in the soil,” no backbreaking
taxes, no “merciless [hereditary] landlords.”⁴²

The cousins’ debate ranged wide and far over several years. In February 1854, Naig was called upon to explain
why America had not “come forward as France and England have” to defend Turkey and the “sacred right of
nations” against the Russian usurper in the Crimean War. Carnegie’s response bristled with sarcasm. “Oh! Dod!
Dod! That’s capital. Great Britain come forward? Why she has brought upon herself the contempt of honest men
throughout the world for her course on this very question.” Castigating the British for intervening in the
Russian-Turkish conflict, Andy proclaimed that America’s position in world affairs was guided by George
Washington’s admonition, “‘Friendship with all, entangling alliances with none.’” Because America’s “great
mission” was to serve forever as a “pioneer of liberty,” it dared not compromise its purity of purpose or its
security by military adventurism, no matter how enlightened the cause might appear. “Our path, Dod, is plain,
we will let Europe manage its own affairs while we take care of the American continent. Let those ruling by
divine right fight and quarrel about successions and protectorates while we clear the forests and build school
houses, preparing homes for the hard working bees forced to leave the old hive.”⁴³

If, on questions of politics, Andy was dead certain in his beliefs, in theology—a matter as critically debated
among his circle of friends and relatives—he was still finding his way. His father, soon after arriving in
Allegheny City, followed his sister-in-law into the tiny Swedenborgian church, known formally as the New
Jerusalem Society of the City of Pittsburgh and Its Vicinity. Bobby Pitcairn, Andy’s friend and fellow
telegraph messenger, was a member of the congregation, as was Bobby’s father. By May 1852, Andy was as well.
(His mother and brother would remain apostate on matters Swedenborgian.) “Our Meeting House,” he wrote his
uncle Lauder, “is the story above our Office. I have just come down into the Office from Sunday School. We
have a nice school. I take great interest in it and am a young Swedenborgian. Do you still read the Works?”⁴⁴

Andy may have ended up “a young Swedenborgian” because, once landed in Allegheny City, he had to be something,
and it was easier to follow his father and aunt into the society than to look elsewhere. It is difficult to
underestimate the place of religion—and churchgoing—in mid-nineteenth-century America. Every foreign
visitor—no matter where he or she had come from—felt obligated to remark on the American propensity for
establishing churches and visiting them on Sundays. “There is no country in the world,” Alexis de Tocqueville
observed during his travels in the 1830s, “where the Christian religion retains a greater influence over the
souls of men than in America.” Thirty years later, Anthony Trollope described the same phenomenon, albeit with
a touch of irony. “A man here is expected to belong to some church, and is not, I think, well looked on if he
profess that he belongs to none. He may be a Swedenborgian, a Quaker, a Muggletonian:—anything will do. But it
is expected of him that he shall place himself under some flag, and do his share in supporting the flag to
which he belongs.”⁴⁵

Swedenborgianism, an older European-based variant of spiritualism, had been embraced not only by Andy’s father
and aunts but by New England intellectuals like Henry James, Sr., and the Transcendentalists. It remained
nonetheless a marginal sect in the United States and in Scotland. The “texts” on which it was founded had been
written a century before by Emanuel Swedenborg, a Swedish nobleman, scientist, and inventor, who, in many,
many published volumes, recorded visions revealed to him in which “heaven was opened,” and he was visited by
Jesus Christ during Easter weekend in 1745 while Swedenborg was having dinner in a London inn. After telling
Swedenborg that he was eating too much, Jesus returned later that night to reveal the spiritual meaning of the
scriptures. The Lord Jesus was not the only source of revelation for Swedenborg. He also talked—rather often,
it appeared—to a variety of spirits and to the heavenly angels—in their own language, which, he reported, was
unlike any earthly language, as it relied predominantly on the vowels “u” and “o,” lacked hard consonants, and
was spoken “like a gentle stream, soft and virtually unbroken.”⁴⁶

Andy paid little heed to the more bizarre elements of the Swedenborgian creed. He may have temporarily
embraced the sect because it was, in many ways, the antithesis of the Scottish Presbyterianism that his
relatives—and he—found so abhorrent. It was a gentle religion, with no infant damnation, no authoritarian
ministers, and lots of wonderful music. Andy found in the society a tolerance, gentleness, and openness to
discussion, which he cherished. He came into contact there with men like David McCandless, a fellow Scotsman,
successful merchant, and years later, one of his business partners in the steel business.

The Swedenborgians nourished Andy’s intellectual appetites and literary aspirations. Among his papers in the
Library of Congress is a handwritten essay in pencil, entitled “Home,” dated July 2, 1854, and another, also
in pencil, marked “Dewdrops,” the name of the society’s magazine. In the latter, Andy argued, quite
persuasively, that in the campaign against war, “one of the most important points to be gained is to render
war and its instruments abhorrent to the young.” Apparently, a Swedenborgian publication had paid tribute to a
military hero or battle, and Andy took exception to this, as he would for the rest of his life. “If each one
was educated to look upon those machines made expressly for the destruction of their fellow men—with the same
horror that they behold the scaffold and the Guillotine—if they could be seen only in the museums as relics of
a barbarous age instead of their likeness being paraded in our religious newspapers, how long would such
scenes as that recently enacted…take place to shake our belief in man’s possessing anything in common with his
God.” The sentences go on too long, the constructions are a bit unwieldy, but the energy and power of the
prose is impressive, especially for an unschooled eighteen-year-old.⁴⁷

Never one content to remain merely a member of the congregation, Andy was elected “librarian” of the society
in November 1855, and reelected in 1856 and 1857. He was also an enthusiastic member of the choir, though he
had difficulty holding a tune and a less than stellar singing voice. “The leader, Mr. Koethen, I have reason
to believe, often pardoned the discords I produced in the choir because of my enthusiasm in the cause.”⁴⁸

Andy remained a member of the society for several years, leaving it only when he moved to Altoona in 1858. It
served as a safe social haven, from which he could venture forth to explore theological questions with his
friends from Allegheny City. “The mysteries of life and death, the here and the hereafter,” he tells us, were
matters of pressing interest among the young men of his “inner circle.” Though he and the friends of this
“inner circle”—a group of like-minded immigrant boys about his age and, like him, smart, ambitious, and
inexhaustible—all worked five days a week and a half day on Saturday, they had organized themselves into a
quasi-formal debating society that met in Henry Phipps’s cobbler’s shop. Phipps’s older son, John, was a
charter member of the group; his younger boy, Harry, hung around at the edges. The senior member, Thomas
Miller, got to sit on the leather seat of old man Phipps’s cobbling bench. The boys organized debates on
religion and politics, teased one another about their “best girls,” went skating on the Allegheny River, and
visited Colonel Anderson’s library.⁴⁹

One of the chief topics for discussion was how to reconcile received religion with democracy. Charles G.
Finney, a central figure in the Second Great Awakening that had blazed through western New York in the late
1820s and 1830s, had argued passionately and articulately against accepting doctrine solely “on the ground of
authority. If I tried to accept those doctrines as mere dogmas, I could not do it. I could not be honest in
doing it; I could not respect myself in doing it.” The young men of Andy’s inner circle believed, with Finney,
that reason, not authority, had to be their guide in matters of the spirit and the soul. “This ‘doing of a
thing’ because our grandfathers did it I can assure you is not an ‘American Institution,’” Andy wrote Dod in
August 1853. “We have little veneration for those rules and principles rendered sacred by the seal of the
‘Ancients’ whether in Church or State.”⁵⁰

As Andy left behind the family cottage at Allegheny City for Pittsburgh and the O’Rielly telegraph office
every morning, Will Carnegie remained alone on Rebecca Street, working at his loom in the ground-floor
workshop. In a letter to his cousin Dod in Dunfermline in June 1851, Naig reported cheerfully on his father’s
work: “Father has been working a linen web for a lady these two weeks past and has got along first rate with
it, he is also working some linen cloths for himself. He thinks he can make more on them than on cotton ones.
He is the same as when he left, not a bit of difference in him.”⁵¹

It was easier to weave the cloths than to find buyers for them. In the spring of 1852, when Andy was sixteen
and on temporary assignment to the telegraph office in Steubenville, Ohio, seventy miles downstream from
Pittsburgh, he learned that his father would be stopping over on his way “to Wheeling and Cincinnati to sell
the table cloths he had woven. I waited for the boat which did not arrive till late in the evening,” he wrote
in his Autobiography, “and went down to meet him. I remember how deeply affected I was on finding that instead
of taking a cabin passage, he had resolved not to pay the price, but to go down the river as a deck passenger,
I was indignant that one of so fine a nature should be compelled to travel thus.” Greeting his father, Andy
joked that before long Will and Margaret Carnegie would be riding in their own carriage, paid for, he implied,
by their successful son. At this, his father, “usually shy, reserved, and keenly sensitive,” lost his
self-control, a rare occurrence, and “murmured slowly” that he was proud of his son. “The voice trembled and
he seemed ashamed of himself for saying so much. The tear had to be wiped from his eye, I fondly noticed, as
he bade me good-night and told me to run back to my office…. My father was one of the most lovable of men,
beloved of his companions, deeply religious…not much of a man of the world, but a man all over for heaven.”⁵²

William Carnegie spent the last three years of his life working at his loom in an increasingly desultory
fashion, reading the newspapers, and, like his son, taking increasing pride in American democracy and
know-how. “Father said this morning,” Andy wrote Uncle Lauder in the spring of 1852, “to be sure and tell you
that the greatest Reform of the age has just taken place here.” He was referring to the Homestead Act, which
passed the House of Representatives that year, but would not become the law of the land for another ten years.
“He does not take very much interest in politics here [compared to British politics],” Andy confessed to his
uncle, “but that Land Reform has really excited him, he is in great glee about it.” A year later, in another
letter to Uncle Lauder, Andrew wrote that “Father is in good health and has about $70 of cloth which he
intends to sell as soon as the good weather sets in. His letter is not yet commenced but he promises fair yet
to write soon—in the meantime he sends you all his very best respects. He is highly delighted with the Caloric
Ship [the latest example of American know-how] just now and looks forward to the time when Steam will be among
the things that were—You will see that it has stood the test nobly it went to Norfolk by sea from New York and
encountered a hard storm. The machinery worked regularly all the time—It will soon visit your shores, another
monument of American genius.”⁵³

In October 1855, Will Carnegie died. We don’t know the cause of death. He was fifty-one years of age; his
eldest son almost twenty.

In his Autobiography, Carnegie reports Will Carnegie’s death as having occurred three and a half years
earlier, just after their distressing encounter at Steubenville. Why, we are left to wonder, did the son
prematurely kill off his father? Had he simply misremembered the date of his death? Or, as is more likely, had
he already, at age sixteen, given up any hope that his father might play a meaningful role in his life?

It was perhaps easier, in the end, to rhetorically kill his father than to try to come to terms with his life.
Will Carnegie haunts the pages of the Autobiography, but as a spectral, almost disembodied figure, not as a
caring, active father. Carnegie rarely, if ever, referred to him in other writings or in conversation, not
because he was ashamed of his father, but because he never quite figured out what to make of the man. Carnegie
was close to his uncle, with whom he would carry on a lifelong conversation about history and literature and
politics. He adored his mother and would share living quarters with her as long as she lived. But his father
was never an important part of his life.⁵⁴

[1]: footnote2.html
[2]: footnote3.html
[3]: footnote4.html
[4]: footnote5.html
[5]: footnote6.html

## THREE

## Upward Bound, 1853–1859

TIME WAS MONEY. The sooner American bankers, merchants, manufacturers, and government officials got
information—on crops, commodity prices, currencies, etc.—the sooner they could act on it, and with fewer
risks. Along the eastern seaboard, turnpikes, canals, steamers, and railroads had reduced the time it took to
get the news from Washington to Boston from eighteen days in 1790 to less than three in 1841. The telegraph
had then made news transmission instantaneous.

There was unfortunately no way to lay railroad tracks or string telegraph poles across the Atlantic. The
Cunard steamships had reduced travel time from six weeks to two. Enterprising news merchants met the vessels
in Halifax, Nova Scotia, offloaded the European newspapers, and shipped them via express steamer and pony
express to Boston. One ingenious businessman who was later hired by the Associated Press sped the process
along by transcribing the news onto thin strips of tissue paper and flying it to Boston via African carrier
pigeon. In November 1849, about six months after Andy began delivering messages at O’Rielly’s, the carrier
pigeons were retired as the final telegraph poles were strung, connecting Halifax to Boston via Calais, New
Brunswick, and Portland, Maine.¹

In Pittsburgh, the editors of the six daily papers formed a pool to receive and distribute transmissions from
Halifax. “The taking of successive ‘steamer news’” for the pool quickly became “one of the most notable”
duties entrusted to telegraph operators—and one of the most difficult. Each message had to traverse several
different telegraph lines on the long route to Pittsburgh. An electrical storm anywhere along the line
could—and usually did—result in partial transmissions. When stymied by a partial transmission, most operators
asked their counterparts at the other end of the line to start again; Andy guessed at the missing letters or
words and, to his delight, discovered that he was almost always right. He became so adept at transcribing the
messages from Halifax that the “steamer news” was soon assigned to him. There were several perks associated,
including the dollar-a-week bonus the reporters paid him to make copies of every dispatch from Halifax. “I was
working for myself now, on an independent contract, doing something beyond my task. That [dollar] a week I
considered my own. It did not go to the family support. It was my first capital.”²

The little white-haired boy with the faintest of Scottish accents had rather quickly become the
most-sought-after operator in the company. Among those who asked for him when he had a message to receive or
deliver was Thomas A. Scott of the Pennsylvania Railroad. The railroad had been organized in 1846 by
Philadelphia businessmen, concerned that unless they inserted their city into the east-west railroad grid, it
would be eclipsed by Baltimore to the south, as it had by New York City to the north. In the fall of 1850, the
first stretch of track was completed along the 137-mile corridor from Harrisburg to the foothills of the
Alleghenies. Because the Pennsylvania had not yet bridged the mountains with tracks, it connected at
Hollidaysburg with the state-operated Allegheny Portage Railroad, which transported passengers across the
mountains in “land carriages” hauled up five ascending inclined planes by locomotives, horses, and stationary
engines, and then let down another five carefully tethered to those same stationary engines.

J. Edgar Thomson, the Pennsylvania’s chief engineer and soon to be its president, hired Tom Scott to manage
the station in Hollidaysburg. Scott, a handsome, genial young man, born in Pennsylvania of Scots-Irish
parents, had worked as a toll collector and chief clerk for the state’s rail-road/canal system and as a
shipping agent for a freighting and commission firm. He knew the transportation business well and was, like
the man who hired him, a hard worker, a native-born Pennsylvanian, and self-educated. Scott’s ascent through
the ranks of the Pennsylvania Railroad hierarchy was as rapid as Andy’s had been at O’Rielly Telegraph. Within
a year of his appointment as station manager at Hollidaysburg, he was dispatched to Pittsburgh in anticipation
of the completion of the western division of the railroad. In December 1852, when the Pennsylvania tracks
reached Pittsburgh, Scott was named the western division’s first superintendent. He was twenty-nine years old.

As division superintendent, Scott was in charge of everything that moved between Altoona and Pittsburgh.
Because Thomson had not yet raised enough capital to build a second track, Scott had to juggle eastbound and
westbound trains along a single track. When the weather was good and the trains ran on time, there was little
danger of accident or delay; but when snow covered the tracks or rain flooded them or engines broke down or
there were difficulties loading freight or passengers, delay was inevitable and collisions all too likely. The
standard procedure on one-track railways, which Scott followed along his western division, was to designate
one train as “superior” and give it the right-of-way. If, for one reason or another, the “superior” was
delayed, every other train on the line was ordered to pull onto the nearest siding and wait until it passed.
If, after an hour of sitting on the siding, the superior train did not show up, the waiting train was allowed
to proceed slowly to the next siding, with a flagman walking in front. Though these procedures made accidents
less likely, they led to pyramiding delays for every train in the system.³

In Great Britain, railroads relied on the telegraph to locate the whereabouts of delayed trains; in America,
most railroad executives distrusted the technology and the operators. Scott and Thomson were different. In the
spring of 1853, they began putting up telegraph poles along the tracks from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh. Until
their own line was in operation, Scott arranged with the O’Rielly office to use its lines and hired Andy
Carnegie as his personal operator, for the grand sum of thirty-five dollars a month.⁴

“The Teleg. Co.,” Andy wrote Uncle Lauder after accepting his new job, “would have increased my salary to $400
per year if I had remained there but we all thought that the new situation held out better prospects for the
future.” As long as he stayed at O’Rielly’s, he would be “an employee, and the highest station I could
reasonably expect to attain to was Manager of an office with seven or eight hundred a year.” That was not
enough.⁵

For an immigrant lad of seventeen, Andy Carnegie made an astute business decision by shifting his allegiance
from O’Rielly’s to the Pennsylvania Railroad. The telegraph business in western Pennsylvania was highly
unstable, beset by technical problems, undercapitalization, and intense competition. The Pennsylvania
Railroad, on the other hand, was entering a period of steady and unparalleled expansion. Gross receipts would
increase from under $2 million in 1852, the year Andy began work for the railroad, to $5,285,300 in 1858;
profits from $617,025.87 to $2,163,445.64.⁶

“I am liking [my new position] far better than the old one,” Andy confided to his uncle a month after he had
begun work at the railroad. “Instead of having to stay every night till 10 or 11 o’clock I am done every night
at six—which is a great advantage…. [Mr. Scott] is having an office fixed up for his own use and I am to be
along with him in it and help him. I have met with very few men that I like so well in this country—and I am
sure we will agree very well.”⁷

Andy acted not only as Scott’s telegraph operator but as his secretary and chief assistant. Their office was
located at the Outer Depot, a twenty-acre complex north of the downtown commercial area. Andy and Tom Scott
worked out of a small room nestled within the larger complex of offices and rooms set aside for conductors,
brakemen, and firemen. Instead of isolating himself from his new companions, as his mother might have
preferred, Andy, seventeen and full grown but as curious and garrulous as ever, may have joined them in some
of their after-hours pursuits. As he confessed in coded language in his Autobiography, “I ate, necessarily, of
the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil for the first time.”⁸

Andy’s early career on the railroad replicated his first days as a telegraph operator. He ingratiated himself
with supervisors, learned as much about the industry as possible, and did more than was expected of him.

Executives of large railroads that spanned thousands of miles of track and operated hundreds of individual
stations had no choice but to decentralize authority. Division superintendents like Tom Scott were princes of
their realms, with “general charge of all employees” within their regions and responsibility for assuring
“that they perform the duties assigned them.” Train crews, station managers, and the skilled and unskilled
laborers who worked on the tracks and in the yards could be reprimanded, disciplined, fined, suspended, or
fired by Scott, with no recourse or appeal to higher authority.⁹

Written rules decreed how freight was to be loaded, passengers boarded, coaches scrubbed, brakes operated,
engines fired, fares collected, and delays and accidents reported. “Propriety and manners were also a subject
of regulations,” according to Walter Licht, author of Working for the Railroad. Conductors, ticket agents, and
station managers had to dress appropriately, speak clearly, and refrain from the use of alcohol or tobacco. To
make sure that discipline was maintained in the absence of supervisors, workers were encouraged to spy on one
another and warned that they would be disciplined if they did not report “misconduct or negligence.”¹⁰

This system of management worked only to the extent that all power remained lodged in the company, with no
unions interceding on behalf of aggrieved workers. The Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, the first
effective trade union organization among railroad workers, would not come into being until the mid-1860s. As
late as 1873, Herbert Gutman has written, “most railroad workers were without unions of any kind.” Any hint of
agitation, attempt at organization, or protest was met with swift disciplinary action.¹¹

Carnegie, son of a weaver and nephew of activists, was quickly socialized into the authoritarian ways of
railway management. Although he made a great deal of his Chartist ancestors in his Autobiography and in later
writings and speeches, he had, in crossing the Atlantic, effectively severed his ties with them and their
movement. Chartist agitators, political protest, and activist union leaders had a different and more necessary
role to play in undemocratic Britain than they did in republican America. Andy Carnegie, as he approached the
age of twenty, though very much a Chartist and a radical in Scottish affairs, was every bit the company man in
Pittsburgh. He tied himself to Tom Scott’s coattails and never let go. Whatever Scott wanted, Andy took care
of it.

The Pittsburgh business community had never entirely accepted the Pennsylvania Railroad or trusted the
Philadelphia bankers and merchants who dominated its board of directors. One of Scott’s chief tasks was
serving as plenipotentiary to Pittsburgh and removing obstacles placed in the railroad’s path in the attempt
to enlarge its terminal facilities. To help out his boss, Andy wrote an anonymous article for the Pittsburgh
Journal, praising the new railroad and criticizing the business community and the people of Pittsburgh for not
being more supportive. “The pen,” he noted in his Autobiography, “was getting to be a weapon with me.”¹²

Though he had no experience working on a train or in a station like the railroad’s other managers, Andy’s
dedication to boss and company was formally rewarded when Scott requested and was given permission to leave
his assistant in charge of the division while he traveled away from the office “for a week or two.” Andy’s two
weeks as prince regent were uneventful until a ballast train suffered a minor accident. Though ballast trains
carried only stones, Andy was infuriated by what he considered “the inexcusable negligence” of the crew. “That
this accident should occur was gall and wormwood to me.” Without asking permission from anyone in
Philadelphia, Andy “held a court martial, examined those concerned, dismissed peremptorily the chief offender,
and suspended two others for their share in the catastrophe.” When Scott returned, he proposed to investigate
the accident on his own. Andy explained “that all had been settled” and the guilty punished. Though he had by
this time decided he had been too peremptory and “severe” in his punishment, he did not want Scott to
intervene and was grateful when he refused to hear the men’s appeals. In the end, Andy’s punishments stood.
One man lost his job and two others were suspended without pay.¹³

Andy Carnegie was, we can see, learning a great deal from superiors like Tom Scott about managing an
organization. But the most critical lesson he took away from his tenure at the Pennsylvania Railroad had to do
not with running a corporation but with exploiting his position to enhance his personal finances.

By 1855 or so, Andy and his mother had paid off the family’s debts to Ailie Fargee and become the owners of
the Rebecca Street lot and the two houses on it. The property, as Andy proudly wrote his uncle, was worth
close to $700 when he bought it from Aunt and Uncle Hogan, but because repairs were needed after a recent
flood, he got it for only $550, payable over two years.¹⁴

The Carnegies were by no means prosperous. Mag was still binding shoes, and her income, combined with Andy’s
forty-dollar salary at the railroad, was enough to pay off what they owed on the house and to keep Tom out of
the workforce and in public school. And then, in October 1855, as Carnegie wrote in his Autobiography,
“Fortunatus knocked at our door, Mr. Scott asked me if I had five hundred dollars. If so, he wished to make an
investment for me.” Scott offered Andy the opportunity to buy ten shares of Adams Express, a privately traded
company, which, like its chief competitors, Wells Fargo and American Express, expedited the movement of
documents, securities, and parcels from city to city. Six months earlier, in March 1855, the Pennsylvania
Railroad had given Adams Express an exclusive contract to use its rails to transport its packages between
Philadelphia and Pittsburgh.¹⁵

The timing of Scott’s offer suggests that the shares he offered Andy had been made available to railroad
officers as part of a quid pro quo for the contract Adams Express had just received. As Scott’s telegraph
operator, Andy was privy to every communication that his boss sent or received. It would have made sense for
Scott to include him in on the spoils.

Because Andy didn’t have the cash to buy the stock himself, Scott loaned him the $500 he needed. When, six
months later, Scott’s note came due, Andy borrowed the money to pay back his boss, and then arranged, through
his mother, to mortgage off their newly acquired property in Allegheny City to cover the costs of the second
loan. In the end, with the help of his mother, he acquired the stock and the guaranteed ten-dollar monthly
dividend check that came with it.¹⁶

Andy’s reaction to getting his first dividend check, as recorded in his Autobiography and elsewhere, was
euphoric, as it should have been: he was getting a guaranteed 24 percent interest on his investment. “I shall
remember that check as long as I live…It gave me the first penny of revenue from capital—something that I had
not worked for with the sweat of my brow. ‘Eureka!’ I cried. ‘Here’s the goose that lays the golden eggs.’”
Before cashing the check, he showed it to his friends at their Sunday afternoon gathering. “The effect
produced…was overwhelming. None of them had imagined such an investment possibility.” They were all amazed, he
would later write in an article in Youth’s Companion, by the magical properties of investment capital. “How
money could make money, how, without any attention from me, this mysterious golden visitor should come, led to
much speculation upon the part of the young fellows, and I was for the first time hailed as a ‘capitalist.’”¹⁷

Carnegie’s excitement is quite revealing. It is difficult to imagine his Scottish uncles receiving such a
check without hesitating a moment to inquire whether they were, in taking money they had not worked for, doing
the right thing. Where, they might have asked, did such money come from? Were dividends like the rents that
landlords collected—without working—because they owned the land on which others toiled? Andy asked no such
questions. He accepted the codes of capitalist behavior without a moment’s pause. Upon arriving on American
shores, he had abandoned the moral economy of his Scottish forefathers for the political economy of his new
employers. He was a citizen of a brave new world now. The Adams Express dividend checks were only the
beginning.

While working for Tom Scott, Andy Carnegie continued with his self-education. He had neither the money nor the
time to attend school. Instead, he read as much as he could, wrote letters, position papers, and articles for
the Swedenborgian journals, and sought out situations in which he could sharpen his writing and debating
skills. It was an article of faith for him and his friends that learning to read, write, and argue would make
them better citizens, men, and earners.

After several years of debates among themselves on matters theological and political, the Allegheny City boys
moved out of old man Phipps’s cobbler shop and into the more rarefied districts of the “Webster Literary
Society” in Pittsburgh, which in 1856 was housed in the “third story room of the Vigilant engine house on
Third Street at a rental of Three dollars a month.”¹⁸

Following the example of Daniel Webster, whose name they had taken for their club, the young men debated
issues of constitutional history and political theory. Their debates were much more formal than the Allegheny
City boys had been used to, with adversaries referring to one another as “sir” and “honorable friend,” and
proceeding in a decorous parliamentary style. Andy took radical positions on several political questions,
arguing for the affirmative in “Should the judiciary be elected by the people?” Among his papers at the
Library of Congress is a lengthy manuscript on this subject, written on long blue, lined paper in black pen,
and then copied again, in very neat handwriting, with several lines carefully crossed out.¹⁹

Carnegie was a great storyteller. One of his best stories, which he told in Triumphant Democracy, published in
1886, concerned his second investment: in the stock of the Woodruff Sleeping Car Company. In 1858 or 1859,
while traveling on a Pennsylvania Railroad train, Andy was approached by T.T. Woodruff, “a tall, spare,
farmer-looking kind of man [who] drew from a green bag…a small model of a sleeping berth for railway cars.” On
returning to Pittsburgh, Andy showed the model to Tom Scott. Scott and his boss, J. Edgar Thomson, were so
impressed by Woodruff ’s invention that they offered him a contract to place at least two of his sleeping cars
on the Pennsylvania Railroad line as soon as he could build them. In recognition of his role, Andy was offered
an interest in the Woodruff Sleeping Car Company. He borrowed money from a local banker to pay for it and was
richly rewarded with monthly dividends that were large enough to pay back his loan—and leave him something
beside.²⁰

It is a charming story, the kind nineteenth-century autobiographies and biographies specialized in, about a
“good” boy who, through a combination of luck and pluck, succeeds in making his fortune. Other young men might
have dismissed the “farmer-looking” stranger in the train, but Andy did not because he was respectful of his
elders and astute enough to recognize the commercial potential of Woodruff ’s invention. The only problem with
the story is that it wasn’t true. The first person to dispute it was T. T. Woodruff himself, who, in a letter
to Carnegie after the publication of Triumphant Democracy, contradicted every element. Carnegie wrote back,
explaining that he had never intended to write a full history of the sleeping car company, but only mentioned
it in passing.²¹

The truth was that Woodruff, as he reminded Carnegie, was in 1858 a successful inventor who had already
secured contracts for his sleeping car with several railroads, including the Pennsylvania. Andy Carnegie’s
role in the deal was considerably less grand than he had represented it. He had never been a principal in the
negotiations, but functioned instead as a sort of “bagman.” “One of the conditions of the said agreement was
that a certain specified interest [in the Woodruff Sleeping Car Company] should be held by another person, and
represented (as the talk ran) by a boy then in the superintendent’s office at Altoona.” In other words, before
Thomson and Scott signed an agreement with Woodruff, they wanted a kickback in the form of partial ownership
of the company. To disguise their stake, they requested that their stock be put in Andy Carnegie’s name. For
his troubles, Andy was given a few shares for himself.²²

Capitalizing on insider information to invest in companies that were about to be enriched by lucrative
contracts was standard operating procedure for railroad executives. Indeed, J. Edgar Thomson, according to his
biographer James Ward, only invested in projects he had inside information about: “Usually he knew at least
one person in the business who would feed him the needed intelligence…. Even when he entered a risky
speculation, it was only after much aforethought and with reliable inside information.”²³

Until the Crédit Mobilier scandal of 1873, there was no clear consensus that it was morally wrong or illegal
for railroad presidents and superintendents to invest in the companies that did their construction work or
that bought and sold real estate adjacent to new railroad lines. Only after the findings of a committee of the
House of Representatives that the owners of the Union Pacific Railroad had pocketed between $33 and $50
million from Crédit Mobilier, which they owned and to which they had contracted construction work for their
railroad at highly inflated prices, did such private deals receive much public scrutiny.²⁴

By the time Carnegie wrote about his deal with Woodruff, what had once been commonplace had come to be
regarded as scandalous, if not criminal. It is no wonder that he felt compelled to invent a story to account
for how he made his first “considerable sum.”

Andy Carnegie was growing up fast. In January 1858,[*][1] Tom Scott was promoted to general superintendent and
took his young-looking, diminutive twenty-two-year-old assistant with him to Altoona. Although relocating
meant leaving behind family and friends, Carnegie didn’t hesitate to follow his boss and mentor. “This
breaking up of associations in Pittsburgh was a sore trial, but nothing could be allowed to interfere for a
moment with my business career.”²⁵

Altoona a decade before had not even existed; but by the time Scott and Carnegie arrived, it had ballooned
into a small industrial village of nearly 3,500, almost all of them railroad employees. Located in a valley in
the geographical center of the state, the town was dominated by the railroad’s huge roundhouses, engine shops,
repair shops, a smithy, and the foundry where new locomotives were built. There were a few general stores,
some churches, a school, several lodging houses, and one good hotel—Logan House—where Andrew stayed with
Scott, until Scott, a widower, was able to send for his children and his niece Rebecca Stewart to look after
his family.

Marooned more than 100 miles from home, without family or friends, Andrew found himself spending a great deal
of time at the Scotts’ residence with Rebecca Stewart. “Life at Altoona,” he tells us, “was made more
agreeable for me through Mr. Scott’s niece.” Introducing Miss Stewart to the readers of his Autobiography,
Carnegie informs us that she “played the part of elder sister…to perfection,” but it is difficult not to read
more into their relationship. “We were much together, often driving in the afternoons through the woods.” Was
he romantically interested in his boss’s niece? Perhaps, but he may have been too shy to declare himself to a
woman who was a few years older and much wiser in the ways of the world than he was.²⁶

“Beck” Stewart would be the first of several older women who took Andy Carnegie into their homes and taught
him the manners he sorely lacked. Dinner at the Scott household, with silver cream pitchers and other domestic
luxuries, was quite different than it had been at the Carnegie home in Allegheny City.²⁷

Out of guilt or need or some combination of each, Andy sent for his mother and brother Tom about the time that
Rebecca Stewart arrived in Altoona. The family’s Allegheny City property was sold in March 1858 and the
proceeds used to buy a large house in Altoona, sufficiently far from the smoke and grit of the railway yards
in the valley. To mark his own rise in the business world, Andy hired a servant for the household. His mother
refused at first to let a stranger into their home, preferring to take care of her two boys by herself, but
she soon relented. For the rest of her and her son’s life, their households would be filled with servants.²⁸

Andy was delighted to be able to take care of his mother. Nothing was too good for the woman who had kept the
family together through the bad times in Dunfermline and Allegheny City. She had, almost literally, been the
financial support of her boys since they were born. Now, after twenty years as a breadwinner, she could enjoy
a life of leisure.

Carnegie worked for six and a half years alongside Tom Scott, first in Pittsburgh, then in Altoona. It was the
perfect apprenticeship for a young businessman. American railroads, the Pennsylvania perhaps foremost among
them, were the first complex business enterprises to employ the principles of accounting to keep track of
their far-flung operations. The Pennsylvania, according to Alfred Chandler, was maintaining 144 different sets
of accounting records by 1857. Almost manically detailed data were compiled, month by month, station by
station, division by division on every category of expenditure, from “advertising” to “wood, labor preparing.”
Division superintendents kept separate records on each locomotive engine, with information on its builders,
the date it went into service, its size, weight (loaded and unloaded), miles run with different types of
equipment, total cost, cost per 100 miles for repairs, fuel, and fluid, oil, waste, and tallow. They recorded
how many passengers entered and left each station each month, where they were bound, and whether they were
traveling locally or transferring to another railway. They noted, again station by station, and month by
month, the gross tonnage and the revenues generated from over one hundred specific articles of freight from
“agricultural implements” to “wool and woolen yarn.”²⁹

Later in life, Scott would be better known for his political skills, but he was, like his mentor Thomson, a
master of cost accounting. Together, the two men steadily cut unit costs and increased revenues by investing
in capital improvements—new and larger locomotives, better braking systems, improved tracks, new bridges.
Instead of running several smaller trains along the same route, they ran fewer but longer trains with larger
locomotives and freight cars. To minimize delays—a major factor in escalating costs—they erected their own
telegraph lines, built a second track and extended sidings alongside the first one, and kept roadways,
tunnels, bridges, and crossings in good repair.

Carnegie watched, listened, learned. Nothing was lost on the young man. With an exceptional memory and a head
for figures, he made the most of his apprenticeship and within a brief time was acting more as Scott’s deputy
than his assistant. Tom Scott had proven to be so good at his job that when Pennsylvania Railroad vice
president William Foster died unexpectedly of an infected carbuncle, Scott was named his successor.

Carnegie was distraught at the notion that he would be left behind in Altoona to work for Scott’s replacement.
But in the reorganization that followed, he was promoted: to superintendent of the Pittsburgh division. He was
only twenty-four years old, but he knew the railway business as well as anyone else and was trusted by Scott
and Thomson to do their bidding and keep their secrets. Not least among his attributes was his total
confidence in his ability to get his job done: “I was at an age when I thought I could manage anything.”³⁰

[1]: footnote7.html

## FOUR

## War and Riches, 1860–1865

THE 1860 Directory of Pittsburgh and Allegheny Cities lists Andrew Carnegie as “Superintendent of the Western
Division of the Pennsylvania Railroad,” with an office at the Outer Depot and a residence at 10 Hancock,
Pittsburgh. Now twenty-five and head of the Carnegie household, he was still probably no more than five feet
tall, smaller than his younger brother and mother, though with a barrel chest and a huge head that slightly
compensated for his tiny size.

Upon leaving Altoona, the Carnegies had decided not to return to Allegheny City, but to settle across the
Allegheny River in a rather upscale Pittsburgh neighborhood. They didn’t last there very long. Hancock, soon
to be named Eighth Street, appeared genteel enough and housed a great many religious institutions and schools,
including the Female College, the Hebrew Church, and the Christ Methodist Church, but it was too close to the
mills to afford much protection from a dense covering of smog in the air and soot on the ground. “The smoke
permeated and penetrated everything. If you placed your hand on the balustrade of the stair it came away
black; if you washed face and hands they were as dirty as ever in an hour. The soot gathered in the hair and
irritated the skin…life was more or less miserable.”¹

Since there was no way to remove the soot and grime, Carnegie, on the recommendation of David Stewart, a
freight manager at the Pennsylvania Railroad and the brother of Rebecca Stewart, removed his family instead to
the section of Homewood known today as Point Breeze, a wooded suburb about eight miles from downtown. The air
was relatively clean, the sky almost smokeless, there was abundant greenery and undeveloped acreage, and the
Carnegie property was a short carriage ride from the East Liberty railway station. Andy and Tom, who was now
his older brother’s secretary and telegrapher, could take the 6:03 morning train from East Liberty, which
arrived in Pittsburgh at 6:30 A.M., and return home on the 6:25 P.M. or the nine o’clock train. There was an
11:00 P.M. milk train for occasions when the boys went to the theater—as often as not with their mother.²

After a lifetime spent in the grime of Dunfermline and Allegheny City, the family had fallen in love with the
countryside in their year and a half in Altoona. Homewood was almost as pastoral. With its hills and meadows
and high sky, the landscape was more like Scotland than anything the Carnegies had encountered in the New
World. Their house was situated within the exclusive suburban community that had been carved out of the estate
of Judge William Wilkins, one of the region’s wealthiest and most powerful individuals. “With this change to
the country,” Carnegie recalled, still with a bit of wonder at his rapid social ascension, “came a whole host
of new acquaintances. Many of the wealthy families of the district had their residences in this delightful
suburb. It was, so to speak, the aristocratic quarter.” Among the Carnegies’ new neighbors were Judge Wilkins
and his wife, who was the daughter of George W. Dallas, a former vice president of the United States; Leila
Addison, an “Edinburgh lady” who had been educated abroad; and William Coleman, a rich, successful, and
well-respected local businessman.³

Carnegie, who had until now spent most of his hours outside the workplace in the company of Scottish
workingmen and their families, had entered a social setting for which he was quite unprepared. He sought out,
as he had earlier in Altoona in the person of Rebecca Stewart, older women to serve as his tutors, the most
important of whom was Leila Addison, who, he thought, took him on as a project because he was Scottish. Miss
Addison, who was also Scottish, corrected his speech, his manners, his behavior, and his dress: “Great heavy
boots, loose collar, and general roughness of attire were then peculiar to the West and in our circle
considered manly. Anything that could be labeled foppish was looked upon with contempt.” He learned from Miss
Addison and Mrs. Wilkins that, no matter how important manly dress might be at the workplace—especially for a
tiny man who still looked like a boy—the opposite was the case in the drawing room. There, it was a sin
against society to dress carelessly or make any gross display of manly roughness.⁴

 

AS WESTERN DIVISION SUPERINTENDENT, Andy was on duty twenty-four hours a day. Responsible for all traffic
between the Alleghenies and Pittsburgh, he had a telegraph connection extended from the East Liberty station
to his home so that he could stay in constant touch with his office. He drove the men who worked for him
relentlessly, day and night, to clear tracks of wrecks, to repair broken rails, to keep the road in proper
repair. If he could survive with little or no sleep over long stretches, so should they. “I was probably the
most inconsiderate superintendent that ever was entrusted with the management of a great property, for, never
knowing fatigue myself…I overworked the men and was not careful enough in considering the limits of human
endurance.” There is the slightest hint of regret coupled with resignation here. Carnegie did not enjoy
directly supervising his workingmen. He was, he recognized, too impatient, too lacking in sympathy to
establish any sort of rapport with the men who worked for him. This was not a moral failing but an operational
one. To work men to the ultimate, one had to understand their limits. Carnegie didn’t—and hence got less out
of them than he should have. Though he would subsequently employ hundreds of thousands of workingmen, he would
never again put himself in the position where he was responsible for supervising any of them.⁵

The day after Carnegie’s appointment took effect, on December 1, 1859, some 200 miles from Pittsburgh, John
Brown was hanged for murder, conspiracy to incite slave rebellion, and treason against the State of Virginia.
Brown had failed in his attempt to incite a slave rebellion, but his eloquence in defending his actions had
won him—and the cause of abolition—sufficient sympathy in the North to thoroughly frighten southern
slave-holders and politicians and persuade them that there was little possibility of compromise over the
future of slavery. Within the year, Abraham Lincoln would be elected president and South Carolina would begin
the exodus of southern states from the Union.

The South’s secession set Carnegie “all aflame for the flag.” He had always been “a strong anti-slavery
partisan.” When his cousin Dod in Dunfermline criticized the Kansas–Nebraska Act of 1854 for repealing the
Missouri Compromise and laying the way open for the organization of Kansas as a slave state, Carnegie
responded that no one could “hate the measure more than I do.” He predicted that the northerners who had voted
for the measure would be consigned to “infamy” by the “just indignation of an insulted and betrayed people.”⁶

The founding of the Republican Party offered him a way to transmute his antipathy for slavery into support for
the politicians who had pledged to oppose its spread. He organized a club among the employees at the Outer
Depot to subscribe to the New York Weekly Tribune, edited by Horace Greeley, the nation’s most outspoken
Republican, and wrote short notes to the paper, one of which was published. By late 1855, he had become, he
wrote Dod, “an enthusiastic & ultra abolitionist,” who regarded slavery as “the greatest evil in the world”
and promised to use “whatever influence I may acquire…to overthrow it…. In short I am a Republican& believe in
our Noble declaration ‘that all Men are born free & equal.’”⁷

In March 1861, Abraham Lincoln was inaugurated in Washington, D.C. Five weeks later, at four-thirty in the
morning of April 12, Fort Sumter and its American flag in Charleston Harbor were fired on by Confederate
troops. The undermanned federal garrison surrendered the following day. “No sooner had the news of the
surrender at Fort Sumter been confirmed,” wrote Erasmus Wilson in his 1898 Standard History of Pittsburg,
“than the whole community was up in arms. Preparations were made on the 15th to enroll and equip a large
volunteer force in the cities and suburbs in response to the call for 75,000 men by the President. No such
popular uprising had ever been seen here before.” At an open meeting at the City Hall, Judge Wilkins, a
lifelong Democrat, called on the 4,000 to 5,000 people assembled to bury all distinctions of party “in an
ocean of patriotism” and unite behind the president. A Committee of Public Safety, headed by Wilkins, was
organized to oversee the defense of the city, “keep a sharp lookout for traitors,” and supervise the
recruitment of the volunteers Lincoln had requested.⁸

On April 17, two days after Lincoln issued the call for 75,000 volunteers, his secretary of war, Simon Cameron
of Pennsylvania, asked his friend and fellow railroad executive J. Edgar Thomson to arrange transportation for
them to Washington. Thomson dispatched Tom Scott to Harrisburg “to assist in the movement of troops from all
parts of the State to the camps at the Capital of Pennsylvania, which troops were there to be organized and
equipped, and forwarded thence to the National Capital.”⁹

The major weapons arsenal in Pennsylvania and, indeed, in the entire mid-Atlantic region, was the Allegheny
Arsenal, located in Pittsburgh on Penn Avenue, less than a mile and a half from the Outer Depot where Carnegie
had his office. Carnegie was enlisted by Thomson and Scott to supervise the transportation to Harrisburg of
arms and armaments from the arsenal and volunteers from Camp Wilkins, the temporary encampment for volunteers.
From April 19 on, he was in regular telegraphic communication with Scott in Harrisburg. Rather than attempting
to communicate directly with the arsenal on what might be less than secure telegraph lines, Scott and military
commanders in Harrisburg used Carnegie’s office in the Outer Depot. On April 20, Scott telegraphed Carnegie
with an order from a Major Porter in Harrisburg to “forward the ammunition by fast train tonight.” Carnegie
delivered the message himself to the arsenal commander, then telegraphed back to Scott that the materiel had
been “loaded onto wagons and driven to the rail yards…. Will all be ready to go…without fail.” In the same
telegram, Carnegie informed Scott that Governor William Dennison, Jr., of Ohio had telegraphed to arrange
transportation to Harrisburg for Ohio troops that had arrived in Pittsburgh the day before. “Eleven hundred of
them have just gone to the City Hall intending to remain the night. I have sent down and will see how soon we
can get them off perhaps not till morning.”¹⁰

Transporting soldiers and armaments along the Pennsylvania Railroad tracks the 170 miles to Harrisburg was the
easy part; moving them the next 70 miles to Baltimore and then the final 40 miles to Washington was much more
difficult. Only one railroad—the Washington Branch of the Baltimore & Ohio (B&O)—linked Baltimore and
Washington, and by a single track. Should that single track be blockaded or ripped up or the bridges into
Baltimore destroyed, the nation’s capital would become isolated from the North. And that is what happened on
April 19.

About 1,800 volunteers of the Sixth Massachusetts Regiment had arrived in Baltimore, bound for Washington. The
citizens of Baltimore, the fourth largest city in the nation in 1860, were divided between support for the
secessionists, neutrality, and adherence to the Union. The mayor was a lukewarm unionist; the police chief a
secessionist; the business community split between those whose trade was with the North and those whose
commercial ties were to the South. The city was, as Allan Nevins puts it, “a powder tub ready for a match”
when the Massachusetts volunteers arrived at the President Street station en route to Washington.¹¹

Baltimore had no central railway station. Each railroad operated its own terminal. The Philadelphia,
Wilmington & Baltimore line which connected the city to the North had its depot on President Street; the
Washington Branch of the B&O had its across town on Camden Street. There were no train tracks linking the two
stations. The Massachusetts volunteers, upon arriving at the President Street depot, had to evacuate their
railroad cars and march in formation across town to Camden Street to board the trains that would take them
into Washington. They had proceeded only a short distance when they were, as their colonel reported to
Washington, “furiously attacked by a shower of missiles, which came faster as they advanced.” The soldiers,
still in formation, accelerated their pace, which only angered the mob. Shots were fired at the soldiers—and
returned.¹²

The president of the B&O, though a strong unionist himself, reluctantly informed Secretary of War Cameron’s
representatives that, given the situation in Baltimore, he could not transport any more northern soldiers
through the city. The Baltimore police commissioners were even more concerned with the threat of disorder on
the streets. Convening on the evening of the riot, they concluded, without dissent, that they would permit no
more soldiers to march through their city. The railroad bridges that connected Baltimore to the North were
burned, the telegraph lines cut.¹³

It is difficult to imagine the shock that the events in Baltimore sent through the North. Until Baltimore was
pacified, Washington would remain isolated from the rest of the North—and from the troops and ammunition
required to protect it from invasion. Almost every telegram from Carnegie to Scott asked for news of
Baltimore. But there was no good news.¹⁴

Secretary of War Cameron and J. Edgar Thomson had no choice now but to find another route to the nation’s
capital for the eight hundred Massachusetts volunteers under General Benjamin F. Butler marooned in
Philadelphia and the thousands more assembling there and in Harrisburg. Cameron favored sending troops to
Baltimore to forcibly open the city; but Lincoln would not allow this, as he did not want to antagonize
Maryland’s citizens to the point where they would join the Confederacy. Thomson came up with a better
solution: Baltimore could be bypassed entirely if troops were transported south from Philadelphia to
Perryville at the mouth of the Susquehanna River and then ferried—on Pennsylvania Railroad–owned or leased
steamers—through Chesapeake Bay to Annapolis, Maryland, where there were railway connections to Washington.

The most dangerous segment of the route around Baltimore was the final one, the stretch of tracks from
Annapolis to Washington, which had to be protected from Confederate sabotage. In his Autobiography, Carnegie
dons the hero’s mantle and tells us that it was he—and the “corps of assistants” he brought with him from
Pittsburgh—who secured this stretch of track. In the course of doing so, he was slightly injured, receiving “a
gash in my cheek which bled profusely. In this condition I entered the city of Washington with the first
troops, so that with the exception of one or two soldiers, wounded a few days previously in passing through
the streets of Baltimore, I can justly claim that I ‘shed my blood for my country’ among the first of its
defenders. I gloried in being useful to the land that had done so much for me.”¹⁵

There is no irony intended here. He intended to equate his gash—acquired when a telegraph wire snapped up to
smite him—with the wounds suffered by the Union soldiers in arms. As a little man and a foreigner, Carnegie
needed to establish his credentials as man and patriot—and what better way to do so than by inventing a story
of Civil War heroism?

Carnegie’s story, though accepted at face value by his biographers,[*][1] doesn’t bear scrutiny. He might
indeed have suffered a gash in the cheek, but not at the time and under the circumstances he so vividly
describes in his Autobiography. Carnegie was, in fact, still in Pittsburgh on April 25, when General Butler, a
Massachusetts lawyer and politician with no military experience but enough self-confidence to bluff his way
through, reopened the tracks from Annapolis to Washington and sent his Massachusetts Sixth and a regiment from
New York on their way to the capital. Butler had among his troops a number of railroad men. His soldiers, not
Carnegie’s crew, repaired the track from Annapolis to Washington and were the first to enter the beleaguered
city.

Once the route from Philadelphia to Washington via Annapolis was opened, the troops from Harrisburg could be
safely transported south. Scott, his presence no longer required in Harrisburg, left for Washington on April
25. Later that week, Carnegie left Pittsburgh for Annapolis. Though his eventual destination was Washington,
where he had been asked to serve as Scott’s assistant, he spent the first few weeks of May in Annapolis,
making sure that the road to Washington stayed open. Toward the middle of the month, he moved on to
Washington.¹⁶

He and Scott were still employees of the Pennsylvania Railroad and received their salaries—and
instructions—from J. Edgar Thomson in Philadelphia. From his perch in the War Department, Scott, first as a
colonel of the District of Columbia militia and then as assistant secretary of war, served his two masters
well. He made sure that troops, arms, armaments, coal, grain, and livestock were transported over the
Pennsylvania system and that the railroad was well paid for the service.¹⁷

The arrival of the Massachusetts and New York volunteers in Washington on April 25 put an end to Lincoln’s
immediate fears of invasion. By May, there were troops of varied uniforms quartered throughout the city, in
every government building, at the Georgetown Seminary, and in tents on Franklin Square and Meridian Hill. The
task entrusted to Scott and his assistant Carnegie was to move them south through the city and across the
Potomac into Virginia, where the rebels lay waiting.¹⁸

Before the war, Congress, determined to prevent Washington from becoming just another marketplace, had
forbidden the laying of tracks through the city and over the Long Bridge that spanned the Potomac. In
peacetime, this meant only an inconvenience to passengers who took horse-drawn omnibuses from the B&O station
in the city to the Long Bridge and then crossed it either by foot, wagon, or ferry. In wartime, a better way
had to be found to move troops, horses, armaments, and supplies across the Potomac into Virginia.

Andy Carnegie and the Pennsylvania Railroad men he had brought with him laid tracks across the city and over
the Long Bridge. By late May, the path through Washington and over the Potomac had been prepared for the
troops and the tons of equipment they required for their march south. Carnegie crossed the Potomac with the
army and set up headquarters in Alexandria, where he was put in charge of rebuilding, reinforcing, and
extending the telegraph and rail lines from Washington to Alexandria and from Alexandria southwest along the
route the northern troops would travel.

On July 16, the Union troops began their march on Manassas Junction—and its critically important rail
crossing, which lay just across Bull Run, a slow-moving stream clotted with trees. While the troops slogged
their way on foot with fifty-pound packs, Secretary of War Cameron, whose visit to the battlefield, Carnegie
thought, “would have an excellent effect upon the troops and the country,” took the train to Fairfax and then
rode the rest of the way on horses Carnegie transported (also by train) from the Treasury Building stables in
Washington.¹⁹

On the morning of July 22, Union troops forded Bull Run Creek, and finding little resistance, pushed back the
Confederate lines, cheered on by reporters, congressmen, and assorted civilian sightseers with picnic baskets
who had taken the day trip from Washington to watch the battle through binoculars. From Pittsburgh, Tom
Carnegie telegrammed his brother asking for “reliable information” about the battle: “Great excitement here
this morning. All anxious to hear the news.”²⁰

The early news was good. But in mid-afternoon, backed by fresh reinforcements, the rebels broke through the
Union lines. Instead of retreating in orderly fashion, the raw, inexperienced, ill-trained ninety-day northern
recruits tumbled over one another—and the civilians who urged them back to battle—dashed madly across the Bull
Run, discarding their packs and weapons along the way, and then raced north and east to the railroad tracks
that led into Alexandria and, they hoped, safety.

Trying to put the best possible spin on the disaster, Carnegie telegraphed a dispatch to the Pittsburgh
Chronicle that was published the same day, under the heading, “From the Seat of War.” Union troops had been
“forced to retire,” he admitted, but all was not lost. They were re-forming their lines “at Alexandria, and
will attack the enemy again shortly.”²¹

Carnegie convinced himself—as he hoped to convince others, including his friend W. H. Holmes in
Pittsburgh—that the defeat at Bull Run had been a “blessing in disguise. We shall now begin in earnest.
Knowing our foes, the necessary means will be applied to ensure their overthrow.” He was “delighted,” he told
Holmes, that he was in the thick of things. “How gratifying to lie down at night & think By George you are of
some use in sustaining a great cause.”²²

To Tom, Andy explained by telegram that the Union troops had been defeated only after they had become “utterly
exhausted and a fresh army attacked.” Washington was “perfectly safe—fortifications fully manned with fresh
troops. Rebels have made no demonstrations looking to an advance. Their loss fully equals ours.”²³

His major tasks—laying track through Washington, opening the Long Bridge and the ferry services across the
Potomac, and setting up rail and telegraph lines in northern Virginia—having been completed, Carnegie returned
to Pittsburgh and the Pennsylvania Railroad in late August, after four months in Washington. He was a
Republican loyalist, an opponent of slavery, a foe of secession, and committed to fighting the war to
conclusion. But he was not willing to absent himself indefinitely from job, family, and his developing
business interests, which were, by the summer of 1861, already quite extensive. There was no need for him to
remain in Washington. The war department had begun to replace civilians with military men in the management of
communications and transportation for the Union armies. Unlike several of his colleagues at the Pennsylvania
Railroad, including Tom Scott and Bobby Pitcairn, Carnegie would play no further part in the Civil War. He was
not a professional soldier, had no military training, and no desire to remain in government service. He could
best serve his nation—and himself—by keeping the trains running smoothly in and through Pittsburgh. Besides,
he had several investments of his own that needed looking to.

He now held stock in two express companies, as well as Western Union, two horsecar companies, at least two
coal companies, an oil company, the Freedom Iron Company near Lewistown, Pennsylvania, and the Woodruff
Sleeping Car Company. These investments were paying handsome dividends, dividends which Carnegie was anxious
to reinvest in new projects. Unwilling to wait until the war was won, Carnegie dedicated himself to extending
his own economic empire.²⁴

Though he still looked like a youth of sixteen, he had learned to dress, walk, and talk the part of the
businessman. To cover up that boyish face, he had grown a beard—or tried to. An 1861 photograph taken in
Philadelphia shows him with a rather wispy affair crawling around the outskirts of his face, barely touching
his chin; his lip is bare. Skimpy as it was, the beard served its purpose. Staring straight at the camera,
wearing a long frock coat, vest, and tie, his head slightly tilted forward, his gaze as solemn as a preacher’s
at a funeral, Andrew Carnegie was a portrait of self-assurance and competence.

In the past he had looked to his partners, Scott and Thomson, to include him in their investments. But from
this point on, he intended to scout out his own opportunities. There was risk involved in proceeding on his
own, but that could be minimized, if not eliminated entirely, by following the rules of the game he had
learned from his mentors: Only invest in companies you have investigated yourself; only invest in companies
about which you have insider knowledge; only invest in companies that sell goods or services for which demand
is growing; never invest as an individual, but always with a group of trusted associates who together will own
a controlling or dominant interest in the company.

Carnegie had all his life found a way to attach himself to older people who could be of use to him—and he to
them. On arriving in Homewood, he had worked his charm on his wealthy neighbors, including William Coleman,
whose daughter Lucy would later marry Tom Carnegie. Coleman had already made two fortunes—in iron
manufacturing and coal mining—and was on his way to a third in oil drilling. For a businessman like Coleman,
Carnegie was a valuable friend. He was division superintendent of the Pennsylvania Railroad, had money to
invest and, more important, access to other sources of capital. It was surely not a secret to Coleman that
Carnegie was part of an informal investment pool with Scott, Thomson, and several prominent businessmen in
Philadelphia.

In 1861, Coleman purchased a parcel of land on Oil Creek in Venango County, not far from where Edwin Drake had
drilled the first American oil well two years earlier. Drake’s success in getting the oil out of the ground
had set in motion a frenzy of real estate speculation up and down what had become known as Oil Creek, a
tributary of the Allegheny River that extended northward about fifteen miles from Franklin, Pennsylvania, to
Titusville.²⁵

That there was oil in the ground was no secret; it was everywhere in the region, contaminating water wells and
seeping out from underground sources to deposit a thin, viscous, bluish coating on the creek. Unfortunately,
except for local tribes of Native Americans, who used the oil as a medicine and to waterproof canoes, and a
few imaginative patent medicine dealers, no one had found any real use for the substance. Only in the late
1850s did a number of enterprising businessmen, with the help of chemists, discover that it was possible to
distill Pennsylvania crude rock oil into a cleanly burning illuminant. Pennsylvania crude was more plentiful,
cheaper, and burned more efficiently than whale oil (which was getting scarce and expensive as the species was
killed off), lard oil (produced from pork fat), or coal oil (which smelled dreadfully as it burned). The
excitement in the oil regions was all-consuming and would continue for the next decade. Every day there were
new sightings made, new contracts written, new fortunes imagined. The Pittsburgh Daily Commercial, the city’s
business paper, ran a regular front-page section which it entitled “El Dorado.”

William Coleman was one of the more respectable businessmen to join the first wave of prospectors. While most
of the prospectors who decamped along Oil Creek had only enough money to lease the farms they drilled on,
Coleman in 1859 bought the 500-acre Story farm in the center of Oil Creek for about $40,000. In May 1861,
while Carnegie was in Washington, Coleman organized the Columbia Oil Company, which he invited his young
neighbor to invest in upon his return from Washington. Carnegie was intrigued, but before putting down money,
asked Coleman to take him on a tour of the oil region.

Though Oil Creek was about 100 miles due north of Pittsburgh, there were, as yet, no direct—or indirect—rail
connections. Coleman and Carnegie boarded an Allegheny River steamer for Franklin, Pennsylvania. At Franklin,
the two men either transferred to a horse-drawn wagon or, more likely, boarded a flatboat that was pulled
upstream by horses to the Story farm. The region was pockmarked by crude wooden prospector shanties which
dotted the shoreline. Alongside the shanties rose the wooden derricks each prospector hoped would bring black
gold out of the earth. A considerable number of these derricks—and shanties—had been abandoned; others had
been singed or burned down by the oil fires that were endemic in the region. “What surprised me was the good
humor which prevailed everywhere. It was a vast picnic, full of amusing incidents. Everybody was in high glee;
fortunes were supposedly within reach; everything was booming.”²⁶

It was one thing to get the oil from the ground, another to get it to Pittsburgh to be refined and
distributed. Following the path of the lumbermen who had mined the Oil Creek valley of its second most
valuable resource, timber, the oilmen damned the creek at each of the several sources that fed into it from
the north. Twice a week, they opened the floodgates, releasing the dammed water in a floodtide that floated
hundreds of flat-bottom boats, some loaded with barrels, others with loose oil, south to Franklin, where it
was loaded onto steamers bound for Pittsburgh. The flat-bottom boats leaked to begin with, and leaked even
more as they were hurled along in the floodtide, crashing into one another and the shoreline, and taking on
more water, which displaced more oil. The waste was appalling—probably two thirds of the oil pumped from the
ground—but no one seemed to mind, as the supply appeared inexhaustible.

Carnegie, having satisfied himself that there was oil in the ground and a way to ship it to Pittsburgh, agreed
to invest in Coleman’s oil company. While other prospectors fantasized only about the liquid gold that lay
deep in the ground, Coleman and Carnegie believed that in the not too distant future the wells would run dry.
To prepare for that day and turn it to their advantage, Coleman proposed—and Carnegie agreed—to construct a
man-made lake, pump the oil from their wells into it, and leave it there until the supply dwindled and prices
rose. Coleman and Carnegie waited for the region to run out of oil while their lake leaked thousands of
barrels daily. Unable to find any efficient way to store the oil, they had to sell it on the open market.

It was the right decision. By June 1863, the Columbia Oil Company had made so much money it was able to pay
investors a dividend of 30 percent. In August and September, it paid additional dividends of 25 percent each;
in October, 50 percent. In the first six months of 1864, another 160 percent. Carnegie was suddenly a very
rich man.²⁷

He was, as he would be for the rest of his life, generous in spreading his newfound wealth. He sold some of
his stock in Columbia Oil to his old Allegheny City friend Tom Miller; he also shipped barrels of oil to
Scotland to set up Cousin Dod in the “oil trade.” When Dod was unable to sell enough barrels to pay for the
initial shipment, Naig assured him that he “was in no hurry for funds” and would wait as long as he had to for
Dod to make a go of it.²⁸

The tens of thousands of dollars Carnegie earned in the four years he held the Columbia Oil stock were quickly
reinvested in other projects. As oil was found in other places—in Duck Creek in 1864 and Pithole Creek in
1865—Carnegie investigated and invested in new oil companies.

The Civil War had unleashed productive forces that, properly harnessed, were going to yield millions to those
aggressive enough to take the reins. Once the war was over—and the North had won, as Carnegie was convinced it
would—trade could be expected to expand in every direction, especially west following the route of the
settlers who were going to occupy the 2.5 million acres opened to cultivation with passage of the Homestead
Act in 1862.

There had been discussion, for more than a decade, of building a Pacific railroad across the plains and the
mountains all the way to California. In the summer of 1862, President Lincoln signed legislation authorizing
two new companies to construct that road with federal subsidies. The Union Pacific would lay track westward
and the Central Pacific eastward until the two met somewhere between Omaha and Sacramento. Neither the
Pennsylvania Railroad nor any of the eastern railroads participated in building the new transcontinental
railroad, though every one of them expected to profit from increased east-west traffic when it was completed.

Carnegie knew too much about the industry to invest directly in railroad stocks. It was less risky—and in the
long run far more lucrative—to put his money in companies that had sweetheart contracts with the roads to
supply coal, wood, and iron; to build their bridges; grade their crossings; manufacture their rails; and
manufacture their rolling stock, locomotives, and specialized freight, passenger, and sleeping cars.

 

HIS INVESTMENTS IN OIL had paid off handsomely enough for him to contemplate going into business for himself.
In doing so, he fully intended to capitalize on his position within the Pennsylvania Railroad and his contacts
with its two leading executives, Thomson and Scott. He would supply the railroad with whatever was
required—and make a profit doing so.

As the man in charge of keeping rail traffic moving in western Pennsylvania, Carnegie had an intimate
understanding of the damage the railroad’s infrastructure had suffered in the course of the war. Heavy traffic
in materiel and soldiers and reduced expenditures on maintenance had created a near-crisis situation. One of
the flashpoints was the wooden structures that bridged city streets and rivers, lakes, streams, creeks, and
valleys. None of these had been built to last or to support the heavy loads being transported in wartime.
Several had been damaged by fire started by sparks emitted from crossing trains; dozens were literally rotting
away. These wooden bridges would all eventually have to be replaced by iron ones that were fireproof and
capable of bearing heavier loads.

In 1862, Carnegie invited Jacob Linville, the Pennsylvania’s chief bridge engineer, and John Piper and Aaron
Shiffler, also engineers, to join him, Scott, and Thomson in organizing a new company to build iron railroad
bridges in Pittsburgh. The new company, Piper & Shiffler, was a fine example of nineteenth-century crony
capitalism. Carnegie would oversee operations and finances from Pittsburgh. Scott and Thomson, who remained
silent partners in the enterprise, would make sure the new company received lucrative contracts for iron
bridges from the Pennsylvania and its affiliated companies. As he had become the modus operandi of their
investment partnership, Carnegie held Scott’s stock in his own name. Thomson’s shares were put in his wife’s
name. Linville’s participation in the company was also kept secret as, with Scott and Thomson, he remained an
employee of the railroad.²⁹

Carnegie was active in other “start-ups” as well, so many in fact that not even he could keep track of them.
When it came time to write his Autobiography in 1903, he had to contact his old friend, Tom Miller, to ask him
to go over his records. Miller responded with a detailed account of their joint investments, which included
the Citizen’s Passenger Railway, the Birmingham Passenger [horsecar] Railroad, the Pennsylvania Coal Company,
two oil companies, the Third National Bank in Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh Grain Elevator, Western Union, and
something called the Library Hill Company. “So you see Andy,” Miller concluded. “You were in a lot of things
in those active years” of 1860–65.³⁰

In the spring of 1862, some nine months after he had returned to Pittsburgh to take up his post as division
superintendent, Carnegie requested and was granted a leave of absence from the railroad so that he could take
a three-month holiday in Scotland. “I can scarcely believe my senses,” he wrote Cousin Dod in May 1862, “and
yet I’m sure I have just been notified that our Company grants me three months leave of absence to date from
July first. Hurrah! Three cheers for this! There is nothing on earth I would ask in preference to what has
just been given me. The exuberance of my joy I find is tempered by a deep feeling of thankfulness for the
privilege vouchsafed—it seems so much in advance of my deserts. I hope I may be enabled to make good use of
the blessing.”³¹

He had dreamed of returning to visit Dunfermline for the fourteen years he had lived in Pittsburgh. Now, his
pockets filled with oil money, he was able to finance that dream. It was time to celebrate, show off his good
fortune, and reward his mother for all that she had done to make her boy a success in the New World.

On June 28, 1862, as the Army of Northern Virginia, commanded by Robert E. Lee, and the Army of the Potomac,
led by George McClellan, collided just outside of Richmond, Virginia, in what would become known as the Seven
Days’ Battle, with 30,000 killed or wounded, Andrew Carnegie, with his mother and Tom Miller, boarded the
steamship Etna for the two-week trip to Liverpool. From Liverpool, they took the train north to Scotland and
Dunfermline. Carnegie evinced no hesitation at all in leaving his country at this critical moment. He had done
his part in the war and done it well. As his presence was no longer required in Pittsburgh, which was, for the
moment at least, safely behind Union lines, there was no earthly reason for him to stay behind. He needed a
vacation and, having been granted one, sailed away without the slightest regret. His first responsibilities
were to his family, particularly his mother, whom he now brought back to Dunfermline in triumph. She had left
in disgrace as a poor man’s wife; she returned as a rich man’s mother.

Their first glimpse of Dunfermline brought tears to his mother’s eyes and this alone made the trip worthwhile.
They stayed with the Lauders in their cramped living quarters on top of the High Street shop. Like every adult
returning to a childhood home, Carnegie was astounded at how “everything seemed so small, compared with what I
had imagined.” Dunfermline, so grand in memory, had shrunk in size and importance, as had its shops, its
parks, its houses, and its people. “Here was a city of the Lilliputians…. Everything was there in miniature.”
His relatives were “exceedingly kind, but they found it impossible to understand how far he had already
climbed in the New World.” His dear old Auntie Charlotte, for one, could think of nothing grander for a man
than to “keep a shop in the High Street,” which she hoped would be Andrew’s goal now that he had put some
money aside. The visit ended disastrously, with Carnegie taken ill, we don’t know with what.³²

When he was well enough to travel again, he went down to London, where he stayed with his mother and Tom
Miller in the luxurious Grosvenor Hotel and visited the Crystal Palace. “Its thirteen acres filled with
whatever this world has to show of Art and Invention. You have there the most wonderful of everything,” he
wrote his brother Tom, left behind in Pittsburgh to look after the family’s business holdings. “I take it that
Monsieur Carnegie has the office matters all in tip top order, and a prodigious balance in the safe, the
result of some brilliant financiering.”³³

 

AT TWENTY-SIX, Carnegie set himself a pattern he would follow for the rest of his life: declaring a vacation,
disappearing from the workplace, and leaving his partners to look after his affairs. He had enough money now
to travel whenever he chose. His dividend checks arrived whether he was in Pittsburgh or Scotland, at work or
at leisure. Had he relied on his salary, he might have been more hesitant to take time off, but the $2,400 he
received annually from the Pennsylvania Railroad constituted only about 5 percent of his annual income.

Later in life, when Carnegie was called upon to advise young men on how to succeed in business, he never
suggested that unceasing hard work was a prerequisite for acquiring wealth. Though born a Scotsman, he was not
a Calvinist in any sense of the word. He did not regard hard work as a virtue in itself. Nor did he believe
that the accumulation of wealth was a sign of his “election” or a just reward for past diligence. The piling
up of wealth signified nothing in itself, except that one had been in the right place at the right time,
avoided a variety of moral vices, and wisely concentrated one’s energies and talents.

Although Carnegie had, from infancy on, nurtured an abiding dislike for the landed aristocracies of the Old
World, it was this status—and lifestyle—that he now aspired to. “I am determined,” he declared to his cousin
Dod, “to expand as my means do.” His ultimate goal was to accumulate enough money to “own a noble place in the
country, cultivate the rarest flowers, the best breeds of cattle, own a magnificent lot of horses and be
distinguished for taking the deepest interest in all those about my place.” He wanted, in short, to be “a
British gentleman,” but one with a social conscience, “who labors diligently to educate and improve the
condition of his dependents.” This was, as yet, the sum total of his philanthropic impulses; but then again,
he was still in his mid-twenties and captivated by his newfound wealth.³⁴

Carnegie had decided to leave business while still in the prime of life, enter politics, and, as he explained
to his cousin, dedicate himself to “laboring to correct some ancient abuse—to curtail the privileges of the
few and increase those of the many.” He might stay in America or, then again, he might invest his New World
dollars in an Old World estate. “I sometimes think I would like to return to Scotland and try the character
[of the British gentleman] myself, but that cold chilly summer we had was enough to disgust one.”³⁵

By October, the Carnegies were reunited in Homewood and Andy was back at work at the Outer Depot. While the
family had been vacationing in Dunfermline, the rebels had seized the initiative. In early July, northern
troops under General McClellan had been turned back from Richmond. By August, Robert E. Lee and “Stonewall”
Jackson had taken the offensive, moved north, and won a decisive victory at the Second Battle of Bull Run in
northern Virginia.

During the summer of 1862, Lincoln had called on the states to recruit 300,000 soldiers for three-year terms.
Putting muscle behind the president’s request, Congress passed a law defining all able-bodied men between the
ages of eighteen and forty-five as eligible for militia service and authorizing the president to call state
militia into active duty. The states were required—by federal law—to fill their quotas, by all means
necessary, including a draft. In August, the War Department asked for an additional 300,000 recruits for a
nine-month term.

Carnegie, twenty-seven years old and an able-bodied young man, was likely to be drafted when Pennsylvania ran
out of recruits to fill its allotment. Although it was recognized that railroad men were vital to the war
effort, the new federal laws provided no exemptions for them. Tom Scott, recently returned to Pennsylvania
after retiring as assistant secretary of war, wrote Secretary of War Edwin Stanton pleading with him to
provide a blanket exemption for railroad employees. He knew, from firsthand experience in Washington, that the
railroads were indispensable to the Union war effort and that experienced train crews and executives were at a
premium. A draft of executives, engineers, brakemen, or even unskilled yard hands would make it more difficult
to move troops and supplies. It would also force up wages and compel some of the lines now moving troops, like
the Pennsylvania, to curtail other services. Stanton, bombarded by similar requests for exemptions from other
railroad executives, revised his policy to formally exclude telegraph operators and engineers. He would not,
he notified Scott by telegraph, grant blanket exemptions for other railroad employees, but he would make sure
that those “whose services were found to be indispensable to the railroad” would, if drafted, be discharged
immediately.³⁶

This informal understanding protected Carnegie from the draft, but it also provided him with an incentive to
keep his position at the railroad at a time when he was making far more money from his outside business
activities. In 1863, as Robert E. Lee’s augmented Army of Northern Virginia moved northward into Pennsylvania,
threatening Pittsburgh, the city’s leading businessmen, Carnegie probably among them, met at the Monongahela
House on June 12 to plan their defense against J.E.B. Stuart’s Confederate cavalry, which they expected
momentarily. It was agreed to suspend all business activity and put every able-bodied man to work digging
trenches and erecting redoubts around the perimeter of city.³⁷

“You will see by the newspapers that Pittsburg is busy fortifying,” he wrote Dod on June 21; “6800 men
(volunteers) have been at work all week, we will not quit till the city is surrounded by formidable works and
then we are secure from rebel raids.” To those in Scotland who had doubted the North’s resolve—and
resources—he proudly pointed to the “30,000 volunteers armed and equipped [who had been] called together in
less than 3 days.” There was no question, in Carnegie’s mind, but that the North was going “to emerge
triumphant, and slavery to go down,” if only because its cause was just. “A week or a month more or less makes
no difference.”³⁸

As the war approached its fourth year, with no immediate end in sight, and with new recruitments and
reenlistments dwindling, Lincoln was compelled to conscript 500,000 men in February 1864 and 200,000 more in
mid-March. Carnegie’s name was called. Not even his position at the railroad was going to gain him an
exemption or immediate discharge, so dire were the Union’s manpower needs. On receiving his draft notice,
Carnegie contacted H. M. Butler, a Pittsburgh draft broker, who found a recent immigrant from Ireland named
John Lindew who, for $850, was willing to report for duty in Carnegie’s place. On July 19, 1864, Lindew having
fulfilled his promise (unlike many other “substitutes” who took their money and ran), Carnegie received his
“Certificate of Non-Liability” exempting him from the draft until July 1867.³⁹

There is no evidence that Carnegie felt any shame at sending another man off to war in his place. This was the
common practice. A large number of the men of his generation who would later be referred to as “robber
barons,” including Philip Armour, Jay Cooke, J. P. Morgan, George Pullman, Jay Gould, Jim Fisk, Collis P.
Huntington, and John D. Rockefeller, spent the war, as he did, making money by providing the Union armies with
fuel, uniforms, shoes, rifles, ammunition, provisions, transportation, and financing.

 

TOWARD THE END OF 1863, Carnegie jotted down his assets and investments on “Superintendent’s Office,
Pittsburgh Division, Pennsylvania Rail Road Company” letterhead. There are fifteen separate entries on this
“Income 1863” list, with a bottom-line total of $47,860.67 (nearly $8.5 million today).[*][2] Almost 45
percent of that income came from his Columbia Oil investment; 50 percent from investments in companies that
had large contracts with the Pennsylvania Railroad.⁴⁰

Carnegie was not the only enterprising young man who was striking it rich in Pittsburgh. His friends Tom
Miller and Henry Phipps, the son and namesake of the shoemaker who had given Margaret Carnegie shoe-binding
work fifteen years earlier, were also taking advantage of the wartime boom. Miller, a slightly
sinister-looking young man with a goatee and full mustache, worked as a purchasing agent for the Pittsburgh,
Fort Wayne & Chicago Railroad. Miller bought axles for railroad cars from the Kloman brothers, Anton and
Andrew—two Prussian blacksmiths who operated a forge in Millvale, just east of Allegheny City. Sometime in
1859, the Klomans, in need of $1,600 to buy a second trip-hammer to expand their business, offered Miller a
one-third interest in the firm in return for the money. Unwilling to invest money in his own name in a company
he did business with for the railroad, Miller asked Henry Phipps to join him in the investment and register
Miller’s stock in his name.

Henry—or Harry, as he was known to his friends and family—was the younger brother of John Phipps, a member of
Carnegie’s “inner circle” who had died after falling from his horse. Four years younger than Carnegie and
Miller, Harry still lived in his father’s house at 338 Rebecca Street, and commuted across the river to his
job as a bookkeeper in Pittsburgh. Though only in his early twenties, Harry Phipps was already a bit
stoop-shouldered, with the world-weary look and neatly trimmed beard and mustache of a much older bookkeeper.
He was a small man, like Carnegie, and a very quiet one, probably the most reticent of any of the men Carnegie
would work with. Phipps never spoke out of turn or with much expression, but he knew precisely what he was
doing and was impossible to intimidate or ignore. He agreed to take half of Miller’s investment for himself,
hold Miller’s shares in his name, and keep the books for the Kloman brothers.

The coming of war and Pittsburgh’s critical position as the home of the Allegheny Arsenal, a major supplier of
weaponry for the Union armies, led to a wholesale expansion of business for the Klomans—and profits for their
young partners. By late 1861, the firm was working to capacity forging gun carriages which, when completed,
were floated across the river to the arsenal. Even with their second trip-hammer, the Klomans had more
government orders than they could fill. They leased additional land across the river in Pittsburgh, within
walking distance of the arsenal, and constructed a new mill, the Iron City Forge, to manufacture “wrought
iron, plates, bars and nails” on government contract.⁴¹

Miller had originally wanted to enlist Carnegie as a partner in the new ironworks, but Andrew Kloman, the
younger and more dominant of the brothers, feared that Carnegie was too aggressive a businessman and would
quickly take over the enterprise. Kloman was an innovative blacksmith and iron forger, but excessively
mistrustful of his partners. Soon after the incorporation of the new firm, he ousted his brother Anton, who he
feared was getting “careless.” Miller bought Anton’s shares, which gave him and Harry Phipps majority
ownership in the foundry. Andrew Kloman, in an attempt to regain control of his own firm, demanded that Phipps
sell him his share of the company. When Phipps refused, Kloman switched course and demanded that Miller
relinquish his share. Phipps sided with Kloman. Miller, who had brought Phipps into the business, was furious,
but outnumbered. The former friends, barely on speaking terms now, could agree on only one thing: that they
needed an outside mediator and that Carnegie, whom they both knew from childhood, was the best man for the
job.⁴²

Carnegie agreed to mediate, convinced that he could charm the three partners into agreement. But not even his
considerable powers of persuasion were enough. The rancor between Miller, Kloman, and Phipps grew to the point
where Carnegie recognized that reconciliation was impossible. Tom Miller was Carnegie’s oldest and dearest
friend, the man who had accompanied him and his mother to Dunfermline, and then helped to nurse him back to
health when he took ill there. But Miller was, as Carnegie later noted, an Irishman with a temper. Carnegie
reluctantly recommended that Miller remove himself from the management of the firm, absent himself from the
mill, reduce his ownership stake from four ninths to a sixth, and sign an agreement stipulating that Kloman
and Phipps could, with sixty days’ notice, compel him to “retire from the firm” and sell back his stock.

Kloman and Phipps agreed at once to the proposal. There remained one obstacle. Harry Phipps, who was to have a
one-third share in the reorganized company, to be known as Kloman & Phipps, had to come up with $10,000, which
he didn’t have. Into the breach stepped Tom Carnegie, who bought part of Phipps’s share with money borrowed
from his brother.

While suffering through the impossible task of negotiating an agreement, Carnegie had picked up a great deal
of insider information about the iron business in wartime, enough to convince him to finance his brother’s
entry into Kloman & Phipps. When soon afterward, Tom Miller, no longer a partner in Kloman & Phipps, suggested
that he and Carnegie go into the iron business on their own, Carnegie agreed and put up the money for the new
firm.

In the spring of 1864, Miller and Carnegie leased a five-acre plot of land, four blocks from the Kloman &
Phipps Iron City Forge, organized the Cyclops Iron Company, and began construction of a state-of-the-art
rolling mill. In his Autobiography, Carnegie claims that he joined with Miller because he was convinced that
his friend had been “unfairly treated” by Phipps and Kloman. And that is no doubt true. But there is more to
the story, as there always was with Carnegie. With Tom Carnegie as his Trojan Horse inside Kloman & Phipps and
Harry Phipps in his debt, Andrew may have been looking ahead to the inevitable merger of his new firm with the
one four blocks away.⁴³

As war was still going on in 1864 and government contracts for iron goods were as lucrative as ever, the iron
business was enjoying an unprecedented boom. Kloman & Phipps had its best year ever. Once the war was over,
there would be a period of readjustment, followed immediately by a new building boom. New rails would be laid,
new locomotives built, new bridges built. And they would be built of iron.

Kloman & Phipps fought the competition from Cyclops Iron for about six months before suing for peace. Miller
was reluctant to enter into combination with his former partners, who had so recently ousted him, but Carnegie
convinced him that the deal was worth making. In May 1865, the merger was completed. The new company was
called the Union Iron Mills. Its president was Andrew Carnegie, its vice president Tom Carnegie; Kloman was
named superintendent.

[1]: footnote8.html
[2]: footnote9.html

## FIVE

## Branching Out, 1865–1866

ALMOST THIRTY, Andrew Carnegie was the principal shareholder in several thriving companies, a partner in
several more, and a force in local business circles, well known and respected for his acumen and his access to
capital. He paid taxes on an income of $17,500 in 1864, with an additional $1 tax for his one-horse carriage.
A year later, his income had risen to $38,735 ($5.6 million today), on which he paid a tax of $3,655. Again,
he was charged an additional $1 tax for his carriage, $2 for his gold watch, and $4 for his pianoforte.¹

Since William Carnegie’s death ten years earlier, everything had gone right for the family. Tom, though only
twenty-two, was an accomplished telegraph operator and apprentice capitalist. Mag now presided over her own
country estate. And Andrew Carnegie was one of Pittsburgh’s wealthiest young capitalists.

There is a price to be paid for achieving so much, so soon, and Carnegie, at thirty, was beginning to pay it.
Driven as he had been from an early age to make himself the family breadwinner, he had never had the leisure
to contemplate a life devoted to anything else. Only now did he allow himself the luxury of wondering whether
there was not something missing.

On New Year’s Day 1865, a month after his twenty-ninth birthday, Carnegie had written to remind Tom Scott of a
promise he had earlier made. Carnegie had, “for many personal reasons,” decided that the position as American
consul to Glasgow “would be a very desirable one for me…. It is the only enterprise before me just now into
which I could best throw my whole energy.” Scott agreed to contact Simon Cameron on Carnegie’s behalf to ask
if he could arrange for a consular appointment. His “young friend Carnegie,” he informed Cameron, “retires
from Railway life 1st April next—having struck oil, in large quantities [he is] now financially independent
and intends to spend a few years in Europe—being one of Scotland’s boys he has a strong desire to go there in
some official capacity.”²

Carnegie was ready for a change of scenery—and occupation. As he approached thirty, his lack of education and
cultivation concerned him more than ever. He had never been to any of the European capitals and knew nothing
about classical architecture or Renaissance painting or the other subjects required of a man of learning.

In April 1865, as the Civil War came to an end with General Robert E. Lee’s surrender to General Ulysses S.
Grant at Appomattox, Carnegie formally resigned his position with the Pennsylvania Railroad, set his personal
business affairs in order, gave his brother Tom instructions on how to look after the family’s investments,
and said good-bye to his mother. Having had no response to his request for a consular position, he made up his
mind to leave Pittsburgh anyway on a yearlong trip to Britain and Europe, where he hoped to acquire some of
the cultural capital he so sorely lacked.

He recruited Harry Phipps and a new acquaintance, John Vandevort, a neighbor in Homewood, to accompany him. He
chose his companions carefully. Phipps and Vandevort (“Vandy”) were friends but not his equals, intellectually
or financially. Both were four years younger than he and considerably poorer. Phipps was now an officer at the
Union Iron Mills, where he had made a handsome living during the Civil War. Vandy had acquired the funds he
needed for the trip by investing, with Carnegie, in the Columbia Oil Company.³

On May 17, 1865, Andy, Vandy, and Harry—“the boys,” as they would refer to themselves—having paid $132 each
for first-class cabin tickets, boarded the Scotia, the newest, fastest (it held the transatlantic record), and
most luxurious ship in the Cunard Line. Phipps was seasick the entire trip, a source of amusement to his
friends. Carnegie suffered not at all. He played chess like a “champion,” visited with old friends from
Pittsburgh and new ones he met on board, got “badly tanned” and “weather beaten,” and quickly recovered in the
open air from the “slight cold” he had contracted in New York. “An ocean voyage,” he wrote his mother and
brother from shipboard, “is good fun for me and I think we might do as the Duncans [who had also sailed on the
Scotia]—have a summer estate in Scotland and go over every season to enjoy it. How does the idea strike the
two members of the Carnegie firm at Homewood? If approved, how many acres shall we have? Will Pittencrief
[sic], or Pitreavie [the grandest country estates in Dunfermline], answer?”⁴

The Scotia landed in Liverpool in early June; Carnegie took a quick side trip by himself to Dunfermline to see
his relatives. The evening before he left Dunfermline, he stayed up all night singing Scottish songs and
telling stories with Uncle Lauder and family friends. “It was wondrous strange,” Carnegie wrote home, “to be
surrounded with old men who were our father’s boon companions. In America we are an entirely new family, and
outside of Aunts Aitkin and Hogan [his mother’s sisters] we have no relatives nor associations. Here we have a
local history extending to the third generation, and many a one speaks kindly of our ancestors.” Reunited with
Phipps and Vandy and joined by John Franks, a distant relative of Phipps, “the boys” were to begin their
walking tour of England the next morning. “We have our knapsacks, gum coats, canes, etc. and by our next week
we will be able to report progress. We go into the campaign with strong hearts, and as far as tested, very
strong legs, but we will not boast until we can go our twenty miles per day…. I continue to have excellent
health, am wearing the very heaviest underclothing and taking good care not to catch cold in the evenings,
which are generally cool, notwithstanding that the days are quite warm.”⁵

The walking tour had barely commenced when the boys decided to take a detour back to London for the triennial
Handel Festival at the Crystal Palace. Carnegie was overwhelmed at the spectacle of four thousand musicians
performing the Israel in Egypt oratorio. The next six weeks were spent hiking through England, Wales, Ireland,
and Scotland, interspersed with stays at the nation’s most “fashionable watering places” in Leamington Spa,
Bath, Bristol, and Brighton, and a few side trips “to see some rail mills.”⁶

Carnegie had taken this year off to enrich his mind as well as to reinvigorate his body and soak up as much
European culture as was possible in twelve months. Off the trails, Andy, Vandy, John, and Harry stayed in
reputable hotels, ate in good restaurants, spent their days sightseeing, and their evenings in Europe’s
grandest theaters, concert halls, and opera houses. In Paris, they “imitated the Parisians, in sitting down at
the tables in the boulevards, sipping our lemonade”; in Mannheim, they drank a bottle of Johannesberg while
they groaned at “Andy’s joke of ‘having taken a bit at Worms and liking the Diet.’” They bought tulips and
hyacinths in Holland, toured a diamond manufactory in Amsterdam, acted out the trial of Othello in the Doges’
Palace, spent Christmas Day at St. Peter’s, ascended the Tower in Pisa, and visited Vesuvius in the early
morning mist. They were, in short, Americans on the Grand Tour.⁷

Sundays were devoted to “literary labours.” Vandy, John Franks, and Carnegie kept travel diaries in the form
of long letters: Vandy to his brother, John to his sister, Carnegie to his mother. While his companions,
however, were satisfied with writing to their families, Carnegie, according to John Franks, devoted part of
each Sunday “communicating his constant experiences to the Editor of the Pittsburgh Commercial.” Carnegie had
literary ambitions and was attempting to break into print by publishing travel letters in the newspapers.
Writers as celebrated as Margaret Fuller, Bayard Taylor, Henry Adams, and Mark Twain had done the same, though
their correspondence had been commissioned before they left.⁸

The boys got along famously. “John acts as treasurer and does finely,” Carnegie informed his mother. “Harry
attends to outside matters generally, and I play gentleman at present. However I am trying to be careful to
make a show of doing something.” He was joking, of course. His friends found it difficult to keep up with him.
He had to visit every museum, take in every concert, opera, and theatrical event.⁹

“He is full of liveliness fun and frolic,” John Franks wrote his sister from Frankfurt. “It is extremely
difficult to keep him within reasonable bounds, to restrain him within the limits of moderately orderly
behavior, he is so continually mischievous and so exuberantly joyous.” Nothing pleased Carnegie more than
throwing himself headfirst into conversation—with friends, strangers, shipmates, the people at the adjoining
table in the café. The boys argued incessantly, though good-naturedly, Franks reported, “upon most questions,
social, political, etc., Andy brimming first upon one side, then upon the other, with admirable impartiality,
and possibly to keep the balance even.” He had an opinion on everything: the national character of the Germans
and French, the merits of Raphael versus Rubens, religion and war, architecture and music, female labor.
Whenever there was some disagreement, as, for instance, on why there were so many flags flying from so many
houses in Coblentz, Andy not only offered his opinion but backed it up with a wager, on this occasion a pair
of gloves. He reveled in excess: his conversation was endless, his letters too long, his spending
uncontrolled. The boys tried to rein him in and, when they could not, teased him mercilessly about his
“practice of paying high prices for articles which could easily be bought for about fifty percent less. We
continually remind him that the price is his measure of quality.”¹⁰

A year was a long time to be absent from home and family. Carnegie begged his brother to write him weekly and
his mother to write him as often as she could. When she did not, he sent her lighthearted reminders: “You
promised to write me a letter, old girl. Now set about it and see what you can do in that line. I haven’t got
such a memento and would prize it highly, I assure you.”¹¹

In response to one letter from his brother describing a family gathering at Homewood, Andy assured Tom and his
mother that he derived “more happiness hearing of a pleasant evening spent there with our friends than you can
have in being part of the company, for it brings back the old times…I pity the poor wretch who hasn’t a home
to which his best thoughts and warmest affections can always be turned, and now that I am so far from you, it
is the old story—‘distance lends enchantment to the view’ with a very lavish hand indeed.”¹²

From thousands of miles away, he demanded news of the improvements Tom and his mother were making to the
family home. A true country estate requires a name and Andrew, from afar, tried out a few on his brother. For
a time, he referred to their residence as the “Fairview Estate,” then settled on “Fairfield,” which he and his
brother agreed was a better name.¹³

Although he had been deterred by the high price of gold from “buying many things upon the Continent,”
including a fancy music box and some pictures he had had his eye on, Andy hoped that Tom and his mother would,
in his absence, do all they could “to add still further to the attractions of our home.” From Dorchester in
the west of England, he wrote Tom to suggest that he “get the necessary straw targets, bows and arrows, etc.
for a fancy archery arrangement on our place. If you can’t get them in the East, let me know and I will bring
over a set. You don’t know how nice this sport is! I think it will add another attraction to the Fairview
Estate.”¹⁴

Carnegie was, he confessed, a “home bird,” but he was, at the same time, in no hurry to start his own
home—with his own family. All around him, men of his age and younger were marrying and starting their own
families. In Homestead, his brother Tom, eight years younger than he was, was already preparing for his
marriage to Lucy Coleman. The boys in Europe constituted themselves into a “Committee on Matrimony,” which,
according to John Franks, spent hour after hour “passing in review…the beauties of Pittsburgh and neighborhood
and discussing their various charms, physical, mental and metallic, having especial reference to the latter.”
Andy, Tom, and Vandy had already picked out future brides, though Franks confided to his sister that it was
“possible the Ladies in question may have something to say upon the matter before it is finally decided.”¹⁵

Who, if anyone, Carnegie had in mind is impossible to ascertain. Some of the early biographies offer
unsubstantiated rumors that he had, in his twenties, been interested in Ann Dike Riddle, reportedly one of the
most beautiful girls in Pittsburgh and the daughter of Samuel Riddle, the publisher of the Pittsburgh Gazette,
but that she had been wooed away from him by Tom Scott. According to Scott family legend, Andy had asked his
friend and mentor to look after Miss Riddle, who was taking the train, unchaperoned, to Philadelphia. Scott
did so and, in 1865, the same year Carnegie resigned from the railroad and escaped to Europe, Ann Dike Riddle
became the second Mrs. Scott.¹⁶

Carnegie’s only mention of Riddle is in an 1899 article, in which he declares that he had done his widowed
mentor a “good turn” by arranging for him to escort “one of the sweetest girls in Pittsburg…. Well the trip
was made as I planned it, and eventually Colonel Scott and Miss Riddle were married. She was a charming girl
and made him a good wife.”¹⁷

What is, for our purposes, as interesting as the story itself is the fact that it outlived him. Everyone who
has written about Carnegie has tried to find evidence of his romantic involvements as a young man. There may
have been some, but it appears most likely that Andy Carnegie was, in his twenties, thirties, and forties, too
occupied with business to tie himself down to a wife and family.

It is also possible that he felt self-conscious about his looks and his size. During the 1865 tour of Europe,
he wrote his mother—who, like all mothers, worried about her boy’s health—that his was now robust, and cited
as evidence the fact that he had gained weight and was now “7 stone, 11 lbs, in all 109 lbs.” It is difficult
to imagine a thirty-year-old man, in good health and of medium frame, weighing 109 pounds and standing more
than five feet tall.¹⁸

There remains one more reason—and a compelling one—for his reluctance to marry: the possibility that his
relationship to his mother precluded his bringing another woman into his home. As Carnegie matured from boy to
youth to man, his admiration for his mother increased. He was now, at age thirty, no longer a worshipful
child, but he adored his mother more than ever, considered her among his best friends, and spent more time in
her company than with anyone else. She fretted about his health; he teased her about her weight. He greeted
her every morning with “jokes before breakfast”; she refused to pay attention to anything he had to say until
she had “her cup of tea.” He marveled at her skill at whist and euchre, respected her business savvy, and was
delighted that she was now willing to travel widely, by herself, to visit her relatives in the Midwest and her
son in Washington.

In Dunfermline, in September 1865, he spent an evening with relatives exchanging stories about her. “Uncle and
Aunty Morrison cannot get over laughing at the extent and frequency of your travels,” he wrote her from
Dunfermline. “When they hear of you starting off for six or seven hundred miles [on a visit to a relative in
Iowa], it confounds them completely…Although considerably impressed while at home with the belief that Mother
isn’t any of the ordinary kind of mortals, it is only when I come here and we sit up till midnight going over
old times that I fancy Tom and I have a ‘raal born genius’ for a maternal prototype…. Uncle says, ‘When Mag
just makes up her mind to it, there is no difficulty whatever.’”¹⁹

Carnegie did not ignore business entirely on his trip abroad. The boys arranged for their mail to be held for
them at specially designated locations in each city, so Carnegie could receive written reports from Tom on the
state of their business interests. He expected a great deal of Tom and his business partners at home while he
was abroad. In mid-June, barely a month after he had left, Carnegie implored his brother to do more to “pull
up and develop the Union Iron Mills [and to] arrange the locomotive matter as proposed.” He wanted to know
about the “Brick concern,” congratulated his brother for going to Chicago to look after “their supply agents,”
and advised him that the bill from the Adams Express Company was correct and had to be paid.²⁰

“The Carnegie family, my boy, are destined always to be poor,” he wrote Tom later that summer or in the early
fall, after receiving from him a statement of accounts, “but I am poorer than I expected if $8000 in debt. We
must work like sailors to get sail taken in.” He directed Tom to sell some of the shares in an iron company,
at least half their “locomotive stock,” one third of their investment in real estate, their Pioneer Coal
stock, and, if Tom could sell above “par,” some Union Telegraph and Lochiel Iron stock. “Few things, my boy,
hold on to. C.T. [Central Transportation Company, which had absorbed the Woodruff sleeping car company], and
Adams, UIM [Union Iron Mills] and Keystone Bridge, and Freedom Iron. They are pets, family treasures which I
cannot part with.”²¹

The Carnegie family had, through Andrew’s efforts, accumulated capital that Tom hoped would be safely put away
or used to meet the obligations his brother had entered into. His older brother, however, had no intention of
playing it safe. The only way to make money was to invest it; the only question was where.

Carnegie had become more and more interested in the iron business since being brought in to mediate the
Kloman, Phipps, and Miller controversy and ending up as part owner of the Union Iron Mills. While abroad, he
made several side trips—by himself or with his companions—to inspect iron mills in Wales, England, Scotland,
Germany, and France. When Vandy, Harry, and John Franks left Paris for Switzerland, Andy returned to England
to visit more factories and forges. On their tour of Saxony, he persuaded the three of them to visit Rurort,
“where…for purposes of business [Andy] wished to stay, there being large iron works in the neighborhood.”²²

In July of 1865, with Dod (who had been trained as a mechanical engineer at Glasgow University) as his guide,
he visited an iron mill that was rolling rails strengthened by steel facings. The weld between the iron and
the steel, which had been made according to a newly conceived process invented by an Englishman, Thomas Dodd,
was, Carnegie wrote Tom in Pittsburgh, tight enough “to defy separation.” Carnegie planned to investigate
further, though he reassured his brother that he was not ready to spend any money. “I have sufficient faith
only to be interested. You need not fear, therefore, that I shall invest largely for the American right, but I
intend to watch practical results.”²³

After assuring his brother in late July that he had no intention of buying the American rights to the Dodd
process, Carnegie returned to London in September to negotiate the deal. Instead of apologizing for throwing
the family into a rather speculative enterprise, Carnegie bragged about his bargaining skills. “Have had to
exercise every whit of my business ability to convince these gentlemen that it was far better to give our
party their patents without any cash down than to get £5,000 gold from others, but I have succeeded, and feel
repaid for the three weeks I have lost for Switzerland.”²⁴

“I have two or three days to spend here in England,” he wrote his mother, “trying to arrange for some valuable
patents, and will be in London next week, a place which takes my fancy above all others. I wish I knew the
ropes and points in business affairs in London as well as I do in the Iron City. I would certainly try to
persuade the family to come there and try it for a while at least. Nothing like being at headquarters, and all
other places are villages compared to London. How would you like to try a residence near Hyde Park, eh? Or if
Tom will insist on getting married (a very proper thing to do), he might run the machines in America and I do
the foreign business. Seriously, however, I am quite taken with London and would like to spend a year or two
there.”²⁵

The news from home was favorable. As John Franks reported to his sister on November 12, the Pittsburgh boys
were “elated by glorious news in their letters of continued advances in prices, of stocks advancing, of their
mills doing double turns, of large orders pouring in, of new patents pending, and of still greater success in
the future.”²⁶

Still, Carnegie was concerned that he was overextended. From Dresden, in mid-November, he half jokingly
apologized to his brother for placing his—and the family’s—finances in jeopardy. “Your finances are reputed
far from healthy,” he had written Tom. “But how can they ever be otherwise? It was never intended. One of the
firm, at least, was made to be forever head and ears in debt and to crowd full sail, despising to bury in the
ground any of the talents (silver talents, I mean) which might reach his coffers, or to lie long under the
suspicion of having at the bank even a moderate balance upon the right side of the ledger.” Carnegie had
fantasized that “a whole year’s absence from opening up new enterprises…while the funds remained in charge of
a super man, might possibly afford him, upon his return, a new sensation,” that of being solvent. But that was
not going to happen. Attempting to cajole Tom out of his understandable anger by making light of the
situation, Carnegie suggested that he enlist Tom Miller to compose “a ‘jolly dog’ song on the subject
beginning: ‘For a borrower he is, and a borrower he’ll be.’”²⁷

 

CARNEGIE RETURNED to Pittsburgh in the spring of 1866. The soldiers were gone now, the city quieter. Compared
to the year before, the streets were deserted; so too the hotels, theaters, and pothouses (taverns) that had
done so lively a trade in wartime. The wharves and railroad stations no longer bustled with the comings and
goings of wounded veterans, raw recruits, and the volunteers who cared for them, then sent them on their way.
The federal contracts that had so generously fueled the expansion of the city’s manufactories, especially its
ironworks, were no more. But they had increased the nation’s industrial capacity. More coal was being mined,
more pig iron produced, more goods and people moved from east to west. The increased business activity had not
been distributed equally. The big concerns—like the Pennsylvania Railroad and Western Union, in which Carnegie
owned stock—had grown fatter on government contracts; the marginal companies, without access to federal funds,
had suffered and died.

And there remained the smoke, the stench, the dust, and the dirt. Pittsburgh had not gotten any cleaner.
Conditions only worsened as the factories that polluted the air multiplied one upon another. The city was
prospering, the smoke a perverse indicator of manufacturing vitality. On December 16, 1865, an editorial
writer in the Pittsburgh Daily Commercial looking forward to the coming year could not “refrain from
expressing the belief that a glorious future is opening for Pittsburgh. Blessed with almost unexampled
prosperity, rich beyond measure in most of the natural elements of solid character and sure growth, the heart
of an unequaled mineral region, with an industrious and unostentatious population, the present prosperity of
Pittsburgh and the glorious future before her” were guaranteed.

The propeller pulling the local and national economies forward was the railroad. Railroad construction, which
had slowed with the downturn of 1857–60 and then virtually halted during the war years, was resumed. The
American economy would be transformed in the second half of the century as the expansion of the railroads—and
their organization into coherent east-west and north-south transportation networks—made possible a national
market. By lowering the costs of transportation, the railroads lowered the final price of goods and produce,
which led to a surge in national and international trade. Everything from Texas steers to Nebraska corn to
Massachusetts boots and Pennsylvania glass could now efficiently and effectively be produced in one location
and sold in another, thousands of miles distant.

As the railroads laid track across the nation—25,000 miles between 1865 and 1871 and another 50,000 between
1871 and 1881—their capacity to devour first iron, then steel for rails, engines, wheels, and bridges provided
the impetus behind the spectacular growth of that basic industry. Already by the 1860s, half the iron rolled
in the country was being bought by the railroads; by 1880, three quarters of the nation’s steel would be used
to manufacture rails. Iron-and steelmaking establishments that had remained far less advanced than those in
Europe through the 1860s took off in the post–Civil War period. Eight hundred and fifty thousand tons of iron
and steel were rolled in 1870; 3.3 million in 1880; 10.6 million in 1900.²⁸

Unlike the California gold rush of the early 1850s or the Pennsylvania oil boom a half decade later, the
railroad mania reached across the nation, touching small and large businesses, brokers, bankers, bond traders,
real estate operatives, builders, landowners, manufacturers, merchants, politicians, and financiers in every
region, every state and territory. Henry Adams, on his return to the United States in 1868 after a hiatus of
seven years, was astonished at the way the railroads had captured the imagination of his and Carnegie’s
generation. “From the moment that railways were introduced, life took on extravagance.” The “task” of railroad
building was “so big as to need the energies of a generation, for it required all the new machinery to be
created—capital, banks, mines, furnaces, shops, power-houses, technical knowledge, mechanical population,
together with a steady remodeling of social and political habits, ideas, and institutions to fit the new scale
and suit the new conditions. The generation between 1865 and 1895 was already mortgaged to the railways, and
no one knew it better than the generation itself.”²⁹

Andrew Carnegie was only two years older than Henry Adams and, like him, very much a part of the generation
that was “mortgaged to the railways.” He had resigned from the Pennsylvania Railroad just before his thirtieth
birthday not because he intended to sever his relationships with his business partners, Thomson and Scott, but
because by removing himself from day-to-day responsibilities to the railroad, he would be freed to exploit his
business connections with it.

Carnegie returned from England with what he thought was the exclusive franchise to apply the special
technology Thomas Dodd had invented to coat iron rails with a steel facing that would vastly increase their
strength and durability. His intention was to enter into a business agreement with Thomson, similar to his
bridge-building and sleeping car company arrangements. Thomson would get an ownership interest in the “Dodd
process,” and Carnegie’s company would get the contracts to manufacture steel-faced rails for the Pennsylvania
Railroad.

It was common knowledge that tons of rails would be needed in the postwar period. Through the 1850s, railroad
executives had raced one another to extend track into new regions, with little attention paid to the quality
of their rails. Track was expected to stay in place only long enough to win government subsidies and provide
evidence to investors that the roads were actually being built. British iron makers had catered to the
American predilection for cheap rails by producing an inferior grade for export at bargain prices. To sweeten
the deal, they financed the purchase of these cheap rails with loans. American iron makers, who could not
produce rails as cheaply and were in no position to offer credit, had a difficult time meeting the British
competition.

During the Civil War, the American railroad system, burdened by heavier than usual loads of freight, soldiers,
and war materiel, began to fall apart. With credit tight and the investment market for private securities
nearly closed, the railroad companies had tried to put off repairs and new purchases until the war was over.
But when cheap brittle rails cracked, bent, split, flaked, or were ripped apart by sabotage, they had to be
replaced. Unable to import cheap rails from England during the war or afford the more expensive domestic
product, purchasing agents bought “used” rails that had been re-rolled out of scrap iron. But the re-rolled
iron rails, which cost half the price of new ones, did not last long. Nor did the newly rolled American ones,
most of which were made of iron inferior even to the cheapest British grades.

J. Edgar Thomson had become so distressed at the need for constant repairs and replacements that in 1863 he
purchased 150 tons of steel rails from Britain at almost twice the price of iron rails. Thomson installed the
new rails in the Altoona and Pittsburgh yards where traffic was heaviest. The new rails did not hold, but
Thomson, unwilling to give up as yet, imported another batch of steel rails. The second batch worked better.
Thomson, convinced that steel was the future for rails, purchased the essential patent rights and, in June
1865, laid plans to erect a steel rail mill in Steelton, a suburb of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.³⁰

Carnegie, who was at the time on his yearlong European tour, did not participate in the organization of the
new steel company. When he returned, however, he organized his own company to secure the rights to the Dodd
process for strengthening iron rails by coating them with steel facings. Thomson agreed to appropriate $20,000
of Pennsylvania Railroad funds to test the new technology.

On March 12, 1867, Thomson wrote to tell Carnegie that his Dodd-processed rails had failed their first test:
“treatment under the hammer…. You may as well abandon the Patent—It will not do if this Rail is a sample.”
Three days later, Thomson wrote Carnegie again, this time marking his letter with a handwritten “Private” in
the top left-hand corner and “a word to the wise” penned in just below. Carnegie had apparently asked Thomson
for more time—and/or money—to continue his experiments. Thomson replied that the experiments his engineers had
made had so “impaired my confidence in this process that I don’t feel at liberty to increase our order for
these Rails.”³¹

Instead of giving up, Carnegie pushed forward, hawking his new steel-faced iron rails to other railroad
presidents, attempting to get a new contract with Thomson, and reorganizing the Freedom Iron Company in
Lewistown, Pennsylvania, in which he was a major investor, into Freedom Iron and Steel. In the spring of 1867,
he succeeded, despite Thomson’s misgivings, in getting the approval to manufacture and deliver a second
500-ton batch of steel-faced rails. The new rails fared as poorly as the old ones. There would be no further
contracts forthcoming from the Pennsylvania Railroad or any other railroad.³²

Carnegie tried to bluff his way through. When his contacts in England recommended that he purchase the
American rights to a better process for facing iron rails with steel, this one invented by a Mr. Webb,
Carnegie retooled his mill for the new process. He was fooled a second time. Not only was the Webb process as
impractical as the Dodd, but there was, as there had been with the Dodd process, confusion as to who held the
American patent rights. Within a year, the company Carnegie had organized to produce the new steel-faced rails
was out of business.

There was a larger problem here, one that his brother had anticipated. Andrew Carnegie had been so successful
with previous investments that he had begun to believe his judgment infallible. Instead of conserving his
capital, as Tom Carnegie had hoped, Andrew had decided to invest it as rapidly as he acquired it. In February
1865, even before he gambled on the Dodd and Webb steel-facing processes, he had advanced money to two local
businessmen, William W. Grier and R. H. Boyd, to secure the patent for and construct two prototypes of a
coal-mining machine. Unfortunately, there was no way of proving the machine’s worth without a trial and no
coal company was prepared to interrupt mining activities to set one up.³³

The result of this string of failures is evident in the income tax assessment rolls. In 1865, Carnegie
declared an income of $38,750; a year later, his income fell by nearly half, to $20,940.³⁴

These early failures did not deter him from investing in other start-up companies and technologies, but he
would in future be a bit more careful before committing his capital. In March 1869, Tom Scott solicited his
advice about investing in the rights to a new “Chrome Steel process.” Carnegie replied that his “advice (which
don’t cost anything if of no value) would be to have nothing to do with this or any other great change in the
manufacture of steel or iron…. I know at least six inventors who have the secret all are so anxiously
awaiting…. That there is to be a great changein the manufacture of iron and steel some of these years is
probable, but exactly what form it is to take no one knows. I would advise you to steer clear of the whole
thing. One will win, but many lose and you and I not being practical men would very likely be among the more
numerous class. At least we would wager at very long odds. There are many enterprises where we can go in
even.”³⁵

 

CARNEGIE’S GREATEST SUCCESS was the Union Iron Mills, in which he had increased his stake to 39 percent by
buying out Tom Miller. Through the 1860s and early 1870s, the Union Iron Mills’ major source of revenue was
its contracts with another Carnegie company, Piper & Shiffler (and its successor, Keystone Bridge), to supply
iron parts for railroad bridges for the Pennsylvania Railroad. Carnegie and his silent partners, Thomson and
Scott, made money on both ends of the deal. They profited from the contract between the railroad and the
bridge company; then profited again when the bridge company purchased its iron from their iron mill.

Thomson, the president of the Pennsylvania Railroad (whose Keystone shares were held in his wife’s name), made
sure not only that Keystone was awarded Pennsylvania Railroad contracts, but that it was guaranteed a healthy
profit on each of them. When inflation threatened to reduce the bridge company’s profits for erecting a
single-span iron railway bridge across the Ohio River at Steubenville, Thomson, acting on behalf of the
railroad which had commissioned the bridge, renegotiated the contract to allow “an extra sum to secure us from
loss,” as Carnegie wrote in his Autobiography. “A great and good man was Edgar Thomson, a close bargainer for
the Pennsylvania Railroad, but ever mindful of the fact that the spirit of the law was above the letter.” What
Carnegie didn’t mention was that in sweetening the deal for the bridge company, Thomson was taking money from
the railroad’s stockholders to give it to a privately held company in which he held stock.³⁶

In 1868, Thomson increased his investment in Keystone Bridge and directed his chief engineer to have all
remaining wooden bridges on the Pennsylvania replaced by iron ones. Scott also remained a very active, though
silent partner in the bridge company. When, in the spring of 1869, Carnegie got word that Cornelius Vanderbilt
intended to build a “new bridge across the Hudson at Albany,” he wrote Scott asking for “a letter of
introduction—making reference to the Keystone Bridge Co., and its bridges in such terms as the facts may seem
to you to warrant.”³⁷

The connection between Keystone and the Pennsylvania was no secret, though few were privy to the fact that
Thomson and Scott were investors. When, in the fall of 1868, the young Washington A. Roebling, future builder
of the Brooklyn Bridge, visited Keystone, he described the company in a letter to his father as “the direct
offspring of the Penna. RR.” The bridge builders who ran the operation had “all learned their trade there, and
their numerous foremen have all been employed there for some time; and at present they still do all the Bridge
work for the Pa. RR.” Roebling was impressed with the scale of the operation. “They have work enough at
present for a year to come; they have never less than 20 to 25 bridges on hand at once; last fall they had 44
under way at once.” Roebling was struck by the connection between Keystone and “the Union iron works next
door” from which the bridge company got its iron. “Each party is interested in the other’s business. That
alone gives them an advantage as they have both the quality and the supply of the iron fully under their
control.” After being shown around the bridge works, Roebling visited the iron mills, where he met “the two
brothers Carnegie, former supts. on Penna. R.R.,” whom he found to be “very pleasant people.” He was more
impressed by the remarkable state of the “labor saving machinery” employed at both shops, which he described
in exhaustive detail.³⁸

Ten years later, when it came time to build their own masterpiece in Brooklyn, the Roeblings would contract
with Keystone Bridge in Pittsburgh for their iron anchor bars.³⁹

## SIX

## A Man of Energy, 1867–1868

THE HISTORIAN Howard Mumford Jones characterized the half century between the end of the Civil War and the
onset of the Great War as “the age of energy.” Energy, he reminds us, has many meanings. “It may refer to
force or vigor in style,” or to the exercise of power, movement, agency, change, or propulsion in the physical
sense.¹

Carnegie, who was thirty at the dawn of the “age of energy,” embodied it in every one of these meanings. A
self-contained dynamo, he was in continual motion himself and served as a motive force setting off waves of
activity wherever he set his mark. This was what capitalists did. And it was as a capitalist that he now
defined himself.

The postwar years were a heady time for men like Carnegie. As peace returned to the nation, the forces of
industrial capitalism were let loose to work their magic. The eastern railroad magnates, having consolidated
and integrated dozens of short-haul, local roads into four or five east-west “through” networks, were poised
now to extend these networks from the Mississippi, where they terminated, all the way to the Pacific. Each of
these east-west trunk lines would require dozens of feeder lines. No city or town wanted to be left out of the
web of tracks that threaded its way across the nation from east to west and north to south.

There was little rhyme or reason in much of the construction. Many of the new roads were built to connect as
yet unpopulated areas in the prairie states. Others were built along well-served routes. Had there been some
central organizing authority or less capital or better places to invest it, the building process might have
proceeded more efficiently. But in the postwar period, as eastern merchants whose capital had once funded the
cotton trade turned to investment banking, as reserve funds flowed into New York City banks from the
hinterland, as capital was freed up with the refunding of the Union’s war debts, and the federal government
showered cash subsidies and land grants (convertible into cash or credit) on the roads, the incentives to
invest in a new national railway network were too great to resist.

In later years Carnegie would insist that he had never traded or manipulated or speculated in stocks, but had
made his money from manufacturing iron and steel products. His Autobiography backs up his assertions, but only
by carefully editing out a critical period in his business career. From 1866, when he returned from his
yearlong tour of Europe, to 1872, when he entered the steel business, Carnegie would accumulate the fortune
that was later reinvested in his steel mills by doing precisely what he would later condemn: buying and
selling shares in companies whose assets he knew were worth far less than the value of their stock.

In 1864, Thomson and Scott, with their Philadelphia investment partners, had entered the transatlantic
sweepstakes by taking control of a small Kansas railroad, the Union Pacific, Eastern Division.[*][1] Although
the UPED cost the Pennsylvania Railroad and Thomson’s investment partners $1 million, the price was cheap
considering the possible gains. The federal government had granted the railroad 500,000 acres of land for
completing its first forty miles of track, with more to come if the railroad could beat its rivals in the race
to lay track west.²

Carnegie did not invest in the UPED. He had neither the cash nor the interest in tagging along as a junior
partner in an enterprise he was not going to control. There were other ways to make money from the new
railroads. Those who knew where the track was going and where stations and railyards would be located could
make fortunes by buying property cheaply and selling it at a premium when news of the route was disclosed.

“I think this railroad will make me a small fortune yet,” George Noble, the division superintendent of the
UPED in Wyandotte, Kansas, wrote Carnegie in late 1866, proposing that the two work together. “Of course I
don’t expect to make such a one as you have made and will make, but I will be satisfied with a much less one.
If I can buy land…cheap, I will do so and draw on you for the money taking an Equal interest with you.”
Carnegie forwarded “four hundred dollars to be invested in land in Kansas for our mutual benefit.” That $400
bought 38 of the 960 acres in what would become the city of Ellsworth, Kansas. “We own 1/25th of the whole,”
Noble wrote Carnegie. “It is thought that this will be a large city. There is quite an excitement about it
already…. A large hotel is going up now and it is thought there will be 2000 inhabitants there by the first of
August. I think we can make a little money out of it and can’t lose much you know.” Two months later, on May
8, 1867, Ellsworth was formally established. By June, it had a population of 2,000, not much less than its
population today, but Carnegie and Noble’s $400 investment was already worth $1,000. “It will go perhaps to
$2000,” Noble wrote his partner on May 28: “then I think I will sell.”³

Carnegie was doing nothing out of the ordinary or illegal by taking advantage of his connections to make a
quick profit from buying and selling real estate or securities. Insider trading in securities would not, in
fact, be outlawed until 1934 with the passage of the Securities and Exchange Act.

 

IN THE YEARS following his resignation from the railroad, Carnegie continued to make money in partnerships
with Thomson and Scott. In April 1867, he organized the Keystone Telegraph Company, took much of the stock for
himself, and distributed the remainder to Scott and Thomson. Though Keystone Telegraph’s stock was valued at
$50,000, its only assets were a contract from Thomson which gave it the right, for an annual fee of four
dollars a mile, to string two wires along the Pennsylvania Railroad’s telegraph poles. Within six
months—before a single wire had been strung on a single telephone pole—Carnegie sold Keystone Telegraph to the
Pacific & Atlantic (P&A) Telegraph Company, a small Pittsburgh firm that needed a telegraphic connection to
Philadelphia. He received in payment 6,000 shares of Pacific & Atlantic stock, valued at $150,000, and the
contract to string the wires from Pittsburgh to Philadelphia, for which he was to be paid three dollars in
stock for every dollar expended for construction costs.⁴

After making a similar deal in 1871 to string telegraph wires along a route Tom Scott controlled between St.
Louis and Indianapolis, Carnegie secured enough stock to take control of the P&A. In 1873, he traded up again
and exchanged his, Scott’s, and Thomson’s shares in the P&A for shares in the much more valuable Western Union
company.⁵

If ever there were a textbook case of how to wheel and deal one’s way to fortune, this was it. Carnegie
created a company with no assets, added value to it by making deals with his partners Thomson and Scott, and
then, after a series of negotiations and exchanges, transmogrified stock worth no more than the paper on which
it was engraved into shares of Western Union that he would hold and collect dividends on for the rest of his
life. This was crony capitalism at its most basic. And there were no laws on the books to stop it, no
Securities and Exchange Commission to regulate it. Anyone with the money to print stock certificates and the
political influence to get an act of incorporation through a state legislature could play the game.

 

AT THE SAME TIME that he was organizing his Keystone Telegraph Company, Carnegie reentered the sleeping car
business, another industry poised to ride the postwar railway boom. By 1867, the Central Transportation
Company (CTC), the successor to the Woodruff sleeping car company, had secured contracts to run its cars not
only on Pennsylvania Railroad trains but along most of the major routes in the mid-Atlantic states. Its only
competition came from George Pullman’s company, which was dominant in the Middle West.

Early in 1867, the Union Pacific announced that it was ready to award the sleeping car franchise for its
transcontinental trains. The Union Pacific contract promised to be an enormously lucrative one. While sleeping
cars were a luxury that could be forgone on shorter journeys, they were a necessity for transcontinental trips
lasting several days to a week.

In the competition for this contract, Pullman’s company had a giant head start. A brilliant manufacturer and
master publicist with a flair for the spectacular, George Mortimer Pullman was by the mid-1860s building
sleeping cars that were sturdier, quieter, and much more luxurious than the CTC’s. “The car runs so smoothly,”
reported a New York Times special correspondent on the way to Council Bluffs, Iowa, “that the motion of the
water in a tumbler is hardly perceptible. The hangings and upholstery are simply sumptuous; no other word will
describe them. Each car contains thirty-two double berths, and it is no exaggeration to say that one may sleep
in them nearly as comfortably and quietly as it is possible to do in a hotel or at home.”⁶

To make sure that everyone knew how “sumptuous” his cars were, Pullman courted the press, politicians, and
railroad executives. In October 1866, when the Union Pacific (UP) reached the 100th meridian, its directors,
with Pullman’s help, planned a celebration, complete with a simulated “Sioux” raid, a buffalo hunt, and a
closing banquet with fresh-killed game, champagne, speeches, fireworks, and a band concert. To transport the
assembled guests—and journalists—from Omaha over the newly laid track, Pullman volunteered four of his “palace
Sleeping Cars” at no charge, thereby endearing himself to the UP officers who could, despite appearance, ill
afford the celebration they were sponsoring.⁷

Recognizing Pullman’s genius and drive, Carnegie was prepared to do whatever was necessary to fold his old
firm into the expanding Pullman empire. Pullman, for his part, was a shrewd enough businessman to recognize
that it would cost more to fight Carnegie than to accommodate him. The CTC already held several patents on
which Pullman had infringed in building his cars. Needing all the capital he could raise for expansion,
Pullman did not want to be pulled into a lengthy battle in the courts. While he now controlled the midwestern
market for sleeping cars—and was making inroads in the South—he was locked out of the lucrative Pennsylvania
Railroad franchises. Suspicious though he might have been of Carnegie, he knew that behind the little man from
Pittsburgh stood Thomson, Scott, and lots of capital.

Pullman did not make things easy for Carnegie. A self-made businessman brimming with aggressive, almost
ruthless self-confidence, he shared too much in common with Carnegie not to be wary of his advances. Had
Carnegie not been a master suitor, the marriage of minds—and businesses—would never have happened.

Carnegie worked out the projections for future costs, revenues, and profits in pencil on brown pieces of scrap
paper. When he was satisfied with the numbers, he drafted a proposal for the new partnership. There was no
response from Pullman. Six weeks later, in late May 1867, Carnegie wrote again. The members of the CTC board,
Carnegie warned, were convinced that they were going to win a huge judgment against Pullman for infringing on
their patents. Pullman had two choices: He could lose in court or he could agree to consolidate his interests
with those of the CTC.⁸

It would take many months before Carnegie hammered out a mutually acceptable agreement between the CTC
stockholders, Pullman, and the Union Pacific officials, who now demanded that UP be made a partner in any
company chartered to attach sleeping cars to its trains. In the end, Carnegie got what he wanted: a large
ownership stake in a sleeping car company run by George Pullman.⁹

Carnegie, having become Pullman’s partner, did everything he could for the new company. In March 1872, he
wrote Thomson recommending that he invest his own—and the Pennsylvania Railroad’s—money in Pullman stock. “It
is important for the Pennsylvania Railroad to be the largest railroad interest in a concern which influences
to so great an extent the first class passenger travel of this country…. I should know Mr. Pullman by this
time & his mode of conducting business. You can rely upon him & upon the satisfactory condition of his
enterprise & I am as sure as I can be of anything you will scarcely number, among all your strategic
investments, one which will be regarded hereafter with more favor than that I now take the responsibility of
recommending.”¹⁰

Thomson and Scott made large purchases of Pullman stock, then arranged a series of sweetheart deals with the
company so overly generous that an “investigating committee” appointed by the Pennsylvania Railroad’s
stockholders in 1874 indirectly condemned them for making such a disadvantageous deal and recommended to the
stockholders that, in future, the railroad’s “officials and employees…be entirely free from any interest [in]
private transporters” like the Pullman Palace Car, which did business with the Pennsylvania. “There is a
tendency in such companies to verge too far in looking after their own interests, and there may be an
inclination to infringe upon the interests of your Company.”¹¹

 

THERE WAS NO END to the business opportunities that were opening up as the nation and its railroads moved
west. For a time it looked as if Carnegie were attempting to take advantage of every one of them. The only
constant in his business adventures was the umbilical cord that connected him to Thomson, Scott, and the
Pennsylvania Railroad.

As owner of Keystone Bridge and principal partner in the Union Iron Mills, which supplied that bridge company
with its iron, he was perfectly positioned to take advantage of the business opportunities opened by the
legislation President Andrew Johnson signed in July 1866 authorizing the construction of seven bridges across
the Mississippi River and one across the Missouri River at Kansas City.¹²

Carnegie refashioned himself into a traveling salesman for Keystone Bridge, hawking his wares to local
boosters, bankers, promoters, and politicians up and down the Mississippi, Missouri, and Ohio Rivers who hoped
to cash in on the railroading boom by siting bridges in their cities. Carnegie had done no business west of
Pittsburgh, but in partnership with Thomson and Scott, who controlled the largest rail network in the East and
access to considerable capital, he became a formidable competitor for new bridge contracts.

Bridge building was not a business for the faint of heart or risk-averse. Competing firms had to bid low to
get the jobs, but not so low that the bridges they built would not be strong enough to withstand the
increasingly weightier loads they had to bear. Structures and supports had to be stress-tested before, during,
and after fabrication; piers and supports had to be deep enough to withstand the highest tides and the weight
of the debris they carried with them. While structural security was a prime consideration in letting
contracts, it was not the only one. Town fathers, embarked on multimillion-dollar projects, expected that
their bridges would not only be sturdy enough for the heaviest locomotives and the longest freight trains, but
monumental and magnificent-looking.

Securing the contract to build the bridge was only the first—and often the easiest—step in the process. With
all the goodwill in the world, the local bridge-building committees were ill equipped to secure the requisite
capital to begin construction. To guarantee that there would be funds to pay Keystone Bridge, the Union Iron
Mills, and his partners and subcontractors, Carnegie had to raise capital himself by selling bridge bonds and
stocks. But before he could do this, he had to get commitments from the railroads to pay tolls to use the
proposed bridges, arrange for terminals and freight yards to be built, secure rights-of-way, purchase the
needed land, and design the approachways. He then had to write up the prospectuses.

In a few instances, the local committees were able to do some of this advance work, but as often as not, the
ultimate responsibilities fell on Carnegie. From 1866 until 1872, when he began to shift his focus to steel
manufacturing, he was on the road almost continuously, shuttling back and forth to New York and Philadelphia
to meet with investors and railroad executives; to Pittsburgh to consult with his engineers and iron makers;
and up and down the Mississippi to meet with local committees, railroad executives, and the contractors on the
job.

He spent more time in St. Louis than anywhere else, for it was here that the nation’s most ambitious
Mississippi River railroad bridge was being built. St. Louis, the largest city in the Midwest and fourth
largest in the nation (third if Brooklyn and New York City are counted as one, which they were not in 1870),
was an obvious choice for a bridge and one of the sites authorized by the 1866 legislation.

Tom Scott had in 1867 been elected a director of the company chartered to build the bridge, in the hope that
he would direct Pennsylvania Railroad traffic to St. Louis. Because Scott had his own road to run—or rather,
several of them—he brought in Carnegie to make sure that the bridge got built. Carnegie was enthusiastic about
the project. In January 1870, he forwarded to Scott $150,000 worth of stock in the bridge company and
predicted that “within five years it will be worth double.”¹³

Captain James Buchanan Eads of St. Louis, the chairman of the local bridge committee, named himself chief
engineer. Vain, arrogant, and self-confident, Eads both fascinated and infuriated Carnegie, who was forced to
work with him on design, contracting, construction, and financing. “I don’t know what new fangled notion he
may try next,” Carnegie wrote Scott during one series of exasperating negotiations with Eads. “He seems unable
to adopt anything that has been proved to be good, while anything new & untried captures his senses.”¹⁴

The St. Louis Bridge contract was only one of several that Carnegie was working on simultaneously. In November
1867, he won the contract to build the iron superstructure for the pivot drawbridge over the Missouri River at
Kansas City. Keystone Bridge was also awarded the contracts to erect bridges over the Mississippi at Dubuque
and 150 miles to the south, at Keokuk, Iowa.¹⁵

 

AS CARNEGIE spent most of his time on the road, commuting back and forth between New York, Philadelphia,
Pittsburgh, and towns and cities along the Mississippi and Missouri where he was building bridges, he had no
need of a permanent residence of his own. The family’s Homewood estate had been taken over by Tom and his
wife, Lucy. Margaret Carnegie lived with them. When in Pittsburgh, Andrew boarded at the Union Depot Hotel,
adjacent to Union Station. In New York City, where he spent more time than ever making deals and selling
bonds, he stayed at the St. Nicholas Hotel.

In December 1868, at the St. Nicholas Hotel for a meeting with Thomson, Carnegie, who the month before had
celebrated his thirty-third birthday, sat down with his stub-nosed pencil and a scrap of paper to take stock
of his life—and his finances. He tallied his current assets and income and then wrote himself a memo. His net
worth, he discovered, was about $400,000 (close to $75 million today); his annual income in dividends over
$50,000. If he carefully managed his assets over the next two years—and stopped taking fliers on new
investments—he would, he estimated, be able to guarantee this level of income in the future. He resolved:
“Beyond this never earn—make no effort to increase fortune, but spend the surplus each year for benevolent
purposes. Cast aside business forever except for others.” He had already sacrificed too much to the pursuit of
wealth. Like other men, he realized that he had to “have an idol,” a god or goal to reach for. Until now, this
“idol” had been “the amassing of wealth,” which was, he recognized, “one of the worst species of idolatry. No
idol more debasing than the worship of money.” Having chosen his goal, he had been almost single-minded in its
pursuit, unwavering, undeterred, inexorable in his movement forward. “Whatever I engage in I must push
inordinately,” discarding all cares and concerns that might detour him. “To continue much longer overwhelmed
by business cares and with most of my thoughts wholly upon the way to make more money in the shortest time,
must degrade me beyond hope of permanent recovery.”

There was no self-pity here, no regrets. He was thinking only of the future. Three years earlier, he had
contemplated retiring to Europe to pursue his own education, but he had spent only a year abroad. He had,
since then, multiplied his fortune many times, but he had not proceeded very far in acquiring the cosmopolitan
polish he lacked. He did not want to spend what remained of his life making stock deals and chasing bridge
contracts. He was ready now to put aside moneymaking and choose a way of life “which will be the most
elevating in its character.” He would devote the next two years to making money, while spending his
“afternoons in securing instruction, and in reading systematically.” He would “resign business at Thirty
Five,” then “settle in Oxford & get a thorough education making the acquaintance of literary men.” This, he
estimated, would take him about “three years active work,” during which he would “pay especial attention to
speaking in public.” At age forty, he would take up his new life in earnest and “settle then in London &
purchase a controlling interest in some newspaper or live review & give the general management of it
attention, taking a part in public matters especially those connected with education & improvement of the
poorer classes.”¹⁶

There are many fascinating elements in this memo. One that stands out is the absence of any mention of a
future wife or family. Carnegie was still not ready to contemplate getting married. It is possible that,
absent the self-education he planned to pursue, he did not think himself an eligible suitor yet.

Another remarkable aspect about this note—and the life plan outlined in it—is the absence of any external
motivating force. Carnegie had decided to “resign business” not because anyone had asked him to, not because
he had pangs of guilt or shame, not because he had a religious-inspired calling to pursue. He was changing his
life because he wanted to—and had the resources to—and because he did not consider the amassing of dollars an
end in itself.

His pencil-written note was never, it appears, shared with family or friends. There is no mention of it in the
Autobiography or any of his writings, nor is it included in the papers that were later donated to the Library
of Congress. But he held on to it for the rest of his life, and after his death, his wife included it with
material she left to the New York Public Library.

Carnegie would not retire at age thirty-five or forty-five or fifty-five; he would never acquire an Oxford
education, or settle in London. But he would, in his own way, try to live the rest of his life according to
the principles he set down in December 1868.

[1]: footnote10.html

## SEVEN

## “Mr. Carnegie Is Now 35 Years of Age, and Is Said to Be Worth One Million of Dollars,” 1870–1872

ON MARCH 9, 1870, Carnegie set sail for Liverpool on the Russia, the Cunard Line’s first propeller-driven
steamship. It now took eight days to sail the Atlantic, instead of forty-two as it had twenty-two years
earlier when he first crossed the ocean.

Arriving in London, Carnegie made his way to 22 Old Broad Street, the office of Junius Spencer Morgan, to
request an appointment. He had been preceded by a fulsome letter of introduction by Thomson, who was already
well known to Morgan.¹

Junius Morgan, American by birth and upbringing, had moved to London in 1854 to become the partner of George
Peabody, the most successful American banker in the city. A tall man, with a prosperous middle and a serious
mien, Morgan was by 1870 the senior member in his own firm, J. S. Morgan & Company, and a not always silent
partner and majority investor in his son Pierpont’s firm, Dabney, Morgan & Co. Carnegie, who had not yet met
Junius, had become acquainted with his son Pierpont two years earlier when they crossed the Atlantic together.

Carnegie had come calling with the prospectus for the St. Louis Bridge bonds that he had written in New York,
polished on board ship, and had printed as soon as he landed. Though Morgan wrote his son’s firm in
Philadelphia that he found it quite “novel” to buy “a mortgage bond upon a Bridge,” he was prepared to move
forward, probably because Carnegie had priced the issue so low that Morgan would have no trouble reselling it
at a considerable profit. Before finalizing the agreement, he asked that adjustments be made in the wording of
the bonds. As it would take at least three weeks to get approval of these changes from St. Louis, he suggested
that Carnegie, who had planned to vacation later in Dunfermline, had “better go now.” Carnegie, fearful that
Morgan might in three weeks’ time change his mind, sent the proposed changes to his partners via the
transatlantic cable. When, the next morning, he received a return cable approving the changes, he had his
deal.²

The young and now successful bond trader spent the rest of the week in London helping Morgan resell the bonds
by telling whoever would listen—principally the financial editors of the London papers—that the Erie Railroad
scandals of the late 1860s, in which Cornelius Vanderbilt, Jim Fisk, Jay Gould, and Daniel Drew had gambled
with the lives and fortunes of investors by driving up, down, and sideways the price of stock in the Erie, had
been a once in a lifetime aberration. There was, Carnegie insisted, no connection whatsoever between his
rock-solid bridge bonds and the water-soaked railroad stock. The Erie Railroad was a state-chartered
corporation; the St. Louis Bridge, on the other hand, was a “National Post Road,” over which “the Supreme
Court had direct jurisdiction.”³

Carnegie was making it up. The U.S. Supreme Court had no jurisdiction whatsoever over the St. Louis Bridge
Company, its stock and bonds, and he should have known this. Still, in the interests of the larger truth—that
the St. Louis bonds were sounder than Erie Railway stock—he had no hesitation about misleading London’s
financial writers and investors.

Carnegie’s skill as a courtier acquired over the years in his interactions with employers and mentors served
him well in London, as did his diminutive, non-threatening size, his irrepressible charm, and his grasp of
financial details. He had again worked his magic with a man old enough to be his father. Having written the
prospectus with Morgan in mind, he was able to respond immediately to any objections offered. The fact that he
and J. Edgar Thomson were already invested in the St. Louis project and would suffer financially should it
fail must also have carried some weight with Morgan.

 

CARNEGIE’S successful bond-selling venture in London convinced him that he was suited for the world of high
finance. With enviable foresight, he had chosen the perfect moment to enter international bond trading. Bond
trading was then as now, an extraordinarily lucrative line of work for those who were neither risk-averse,
risk-happy, nor weak-hearted. It was, in short, the ideal profession for thirty-five-year-old Andrew Carnegie.
Although later in life he would profess that he had never speculated on stocks or bonds, that was clearly far
from the case. He was through much of his thirties boldly trading in equities and debt, including some highly
speculative bridge bonds.

The successful bond salesman had to play many parts and play them well. This posed no problem to Carnegie, who
had been trying on new roles since childhood. To sell bonds for bridges that had not yet been built, he acted
the part of the gentleman-banker whose word was as good as gold; calculated as a trained bookkeeper would the
interests, commissions, and exchange rates for every eventuality; researched and wrote persuasive
prospectuses; and sold his wares with the gusto of the Yankee peddler and the enthusiasm of the loyal town
booster.

New York had, in the years following the Civil War, become the financial center of the New World, and Carnegie
found himself spending more and more time there doing deals. In 1869, he leased a room for himself at 64
Madison Avenue near Twenty-seventh Street and opened an office at 19 Broad Street in the heart of the Wall
Street district. The following year, he hired a personal secretary, Gardner McCandless, the son of David
McCandless, a future Carnegie partner. Gardner, or “Gardie,” as Carnegie called him, kept track of financial
transactions and correspondence and forwarded messages to Carnegie when he was out of the office, which was
most of the time.⁴

In 1870, after his bond-selling trip to London, Carnegie decided to take up permanent residence in New York.
His mother Margaret decided at this time to leave behind Tom and Lucy, their three children, and the family
home in Homewood to move to New York. Margaret no doubt wanted to be useful—and with Lucy now looking after
Tom, perhaps believed she could do more good taking care of her older unmarried son. A woman of sixty, in
excellent health, she may also have welcomed the excitement of reestablishing herself in a new city.

Andrew, for his part, welcomed his mother. The idea of a grown businessman sharing a hotel suite with his
mother was not as bizarre in 1870 as it might appear today. As Howard P. Chudacoff has noted in The Age of the
Bachelor, the number and proportion of unmarried men in urban communities increased markedly in the last third
of the nineteenth century, and a large number of the older, more financially secure bachelors lived with one
or more parents.⁵

Living with his mother made perfect sense to Carnegie. Her presence converted his hotel suite into a home. It
also gave him a base from which to explore all that the city had to offer wealthy bachelors: theaters, opera
houses, salons, concert halls, social clubs, and, perhaps, less respectable places of amusement.

Andrew and Margaret Carnegie made for a strange pair. Neither was particularly attractive, but where the son
radiated charm, warmth, and gentility, the mother projected an austere solemnity. Like her son, she had a
broad, flat face, but with tiny eyes and a turned-down mouth. The photographs show a glum woman, old beyond
her years, who never smiled. Andrew, on the contrary, looked younger than his years. At thirty-five, he
sported a mustache to go with his full, bushy beard. His forehead was high to begin with and he parted his
sandy-colored hair in such a way as to make it look higher. The effect was to make the huge head sitting
directly on broad shoulders with no neck visible appear even larger. He had put on enough weight to fill out
the boyish frame into that of a middle-aged man. His blue eyes still sparkled.

 

CARNEGIE had been thinking about leaving Pittsburgh for some time—and not entirely for business reasons. The
problem with Pittsburgh was not that it lacked contacts or opportunities for the ambitious businessman, but
that that was all there was. The city was home to hundreds of factories, foundries, potteries, rolling mills,
machinery works, and oil refineries, a few distinguished-looking cast-iron office buildings downtown, and very
little else. There were no fine hotels, no first-class opera company, no symphony society, no respectable
theater, and no men’s social club until the Duquesne Club was founded in 1873.

Wealthy citizens, like Carnegie and his neighbors in Homewood, amused themselves in the privacy of their
parlors where they gathered to play cards and charades. While such entertainments might once have been
sufficient for Andrew, they were so no longer. Having traveled to London and Paris and spent a great deal of
time in New York and Philadelphia, Carnegie could no longer close his eyes to the reality that Pittsburgh was
just too small, too provincial, too uncultured and uncultivated for him.

There was no question but that he and his mother would, on relocating to New York City, take a suite of rooms
in one of the city’s grand hotels. It made no sense to set up housekeeping in a private residence when they
could live in luxury, with all services provided. Though still frowned upon by the older New York families as
not entirely respectable, luxury hotels had become the favored residence of the newly enriched. The grand
residential hotel was an American invention, so vitally and peculiarly American that Anthony Trollope devoted
an entire chapter to it in North America, the record of his 1861–62 travels in the New World. “They are always
built on a plan which to a European seems to be most unnecessarily extravagant in space.” He was disturbed
only by the dismal quality of the food served in the cavernous hotel dining rooms: “I never yet made a single
comfortable meal at an American hotel…. If need be I can eat food that is disagreeable to my palate, and make
no complaint. But I hold it to be compatible with the principles of an advanced Christianity to prefer food
that is palatable. I never could get any of that kind at an American hotel.”⁶

Carnegie might have decided to lease his rooms in any one of dozens of luxury hotels. He chose the St.
Nicholas, the grandest, most luxurious, and most public of them all. The Carnegies took one of the “family
suites,” with spacious parlors for Margaret and her son, large bedchambers, adjoining dressing rooms, and
luxuriously outfitted private baths.

The St. Nicholas Hotel was the preferred New York residence—and office—for the nation’s leading railway
executives, including Scott and Thomson, who favored it for its location at Spring Street and Broadway, in the
heart of the city’s amusement, shopping, and commercial sex district. Wallack’s Theatre, which Carnegie
frequented, was on the next block; there were dozens of exclusive and expensive retail shops close by,
including Tiffany’s (regularly patronized by Carnegie), Brooks Brothers clothiers, Lord & Taylor’s dry-goods
establishment, Crouch & Fitzgerald.⁷

The side streets off Broadway housed numerous high-class, protected houses of prostitution. Whether Carnegie
ever frequented them we do not know, but if he did not occasionally do so, he would have been somewhat of an
anomaly among the city’s wealthy bachelor businessmen.⁸

The hotel offered amenities as yet unheard of in private homes. For ladies, there were several “parlors,”
including a 24-by 50-foot room on the second floor with “gold-colored brocade satin damask window curtains,
interwoven with bouquets of flowers.” For the gentlemen, there was more: “The city’s most fashionable barber,
Phalon, rented the store just to the right of the main entrance…. The lobby alone included a post office that
sold stamps and stationery; a bookstall with newspapers, books and magazines; a travel agent who had tickets
for any means of conveyance to almost anywhere in the world.” There was, as well, a beautifully outfitted
“Gentlemen’s Drawing Room and Reading Room,” a billiard room, and a bar room with its own “Telegraph Office,
with operators in constant attendance by whom messages are transmitted to any point with as much certainty and
dispatch as from the general offices of the different telegraph companies.” Like the city’s other grand
hotels, the St. Nicholas was run according to the American plan, with three meals, each with several sittings,
offered in the massive dining room on the second floor.⁹

Straight down Broadway was New York’s burgeoning financial center. Commuters, packed tightly, thirty or more
at a time, rode in carriages pulled along rails by teams of two to four aged, overworked horses. There were
smaller, more private omnibuses, drawn by two horses, which, not stuck on rails, could dart in and out of
traffic. Carnegie probably used private hackney carriages, the preferred mode of transportation for men who
could afford them.

By early 1870, Carnegie had moved his New York business office about a quarter mile west from 19 Broad Street
to a larger suite of rooms at 57 Broadway. A half block from the Stock Exchange, the new office was almost
directly adjacent to the Adams Express Building and just up the block from 26 Broadway, where John D.
Rockefeller would, in a decade’s time, build his nine-story corporate headquarters.

Carnegie’s office served also as New York headquarters for the Union Iron Mills, Carnegie & Associate, an
investment company he had set up with J. Edgar Thomson, several railroads with which he did business, and the
Iowa Contracting Company that he had organized to build a feeder railroad into Keokuk, Iowa. In 1872, business
had picked up to the point where Carnegie hired DeWitt Loomis as bookkeeper and general assistant. Harry
Phipps, who kept the books of Carnegie’s Pittsburgh companies, had recommended Loomis for the singularly
complicated job, pointing out that “Your books are more difficult to keep than those of an ordinary firm—owing
to the different interests that you manage.”¹⁰

 

BY THE FALL of 1870, Carnegie had become enough of a presence in the business community to be featured on the
front cover of the November 19, 1870, Railroad Gazette, the premier trade journal of the rail industry. The
Gazette was not in the practice of running anyone’s portrait on its front page. The issues preceding this one
had led with articles on “Improved Sliding Door Fixtures,” “Ferris & Miles Patent Steam Hammer,” and “M. N.
Forney’s Improved Tank Locomotive.”

The article, which was written by J. T. Reid, who had been Carnegie’s first employer at O’Rielly Telegraph,
was congratulatory, but surprisingly short on information. It recounted how Carnegie, though “very small and
spare,” had as a boy impressed his potential employers at the telegraph office with a “cheerful, fixed look
about his eyes which said very clearly, ‘If you employ me I will do my duty.’” At the Pennsylvania Railroad he
had become “an object of universal confidence and respect…Mr. Carnegie is now 35 years of age, and is said to
be worth one million of dollars. He carries with him the same unostentatious manner and the same self-poise
and confidence which marked him as a boy.”

“Andy, as we call him,” was described in adulatory terms taken directly from the success manuals written for
would-be businessmen. He was “prompt, correct and faithful,” with “steady, industrious habits,” “a cautious
and well poised brain,” a “cheerful, hopeful, or rather confident, element,” and a “steady, earnest
unfaltering will.” He was also public-spirited, “liberal in his charities,” and fond of books.¹¹

That Carnegie was the subject of this front-page profile is testimony to his growing reputation in the railway
industry, not as a builder but as a financial middleman. The only reference to his current business dealings
appears at the end of the second to last paragraph when we are told that Carnegie has recently returned from a
successful bond-selling trip to London.

One year after the completion of the first transcontinental railroad, there were railroads, bridges, towns,
and cities waiting to be built; and a young army of entrepreneurs eager to organize the labor, resources, and
capital needed to get the job done. At the center of the enterprise were the bond traders, Carnegie among
them. Federal and state governments contributed some funds, but the bulk of the capital needed to move forward
had to be raised privately.

The process for raising capital was simplicity itself. The railroads, including those that existed only on
paper, secured government charters and then issued bonds, the proceeds of which they dispensed to “improvement
companies,” which were contracted to build the roads. The system was designed to facilitate and disguise waste
and corruption. The men who chartered the new railroads and issued stock in them did not expect to make much
profit from the freight or passenger tolls that might come their way once their roads were built. They made
their fortunes instead by skimming money—lots of it—from the construction phase of the project. Because the
same group of men owned stock in the railroad and the “improvement company,” it was easy enough, far too easy
in fact, for them to overpay themselves at every phase of the construction process. It would later be
estimated that the directors of the Union Pacific had funneled to themselves, through the Crédit Mobilier, $30
to $50 million, which had been allocated for construction purposes but wound up in their pockets.

Tom Scott, who in the early 1870s pushed the Pennsylvania Railroad’s network westward, followed the standard
financing practices of the time and established improvement companies similar to the Union Pacific’s Crédit
Mobilier to do the construction work for new railroads. In 1870 alone, he incorporated three new improvement
companies. In 1871, he added at least nine more. Obscuring the fact that these companies were paper entities
controlled entirely by the railroad directors, he gave them grandiose names: Overland, Empire, Domain, South,
Madison, Continental, Occidental, and Central, among others.¹²

The end result of this kind of financing was failure for the railroads, though not for their directors. The
more money skimmed from construction funds, the less remained to complete the projects in time for them to
begin to pay off bondholders. It was the rare railroad that did not suffer at least one failure, bankruptcy,
and reorganization. Gerald Berk estimates that in the 1870s alone, railroads accounting for “over 30 percent
of domestic mileage…failed and fell into court ordered receivership.”¹³

In late 1870, it was the Union Pacific’s turn. Never adequately capitalized, the railroad approached
bankruptcy when President Ulysses S. Grant’s attorney general ruled that it had to repay the interest on its
bonded debt. The news that the railroad was liable for the interest on hundreds of thousands of dollars in
loans forced the price of securities “down almost out of sight,” as Cornelius Bushnell, one the chief
directors, later testified before a congressional committee, “and we had not the money on hand to pay the
interest on our First Mortgage bonds, due on the first of January.”¹⁴

Carnegie was approached to see if he could arrange a loan from the Pennsylvania Railroad. He did so in return
for shares of Union Pacific stock which he and his partners were to hold until their $600,000 loan was repaid.
On New Year’s Eve 1871, he wrote to tell Scott that he had secured an “irrevocable Power of Attorney” for
these shares and could buy enough additional stock to give him and his partners “an absolute majority” and
control of the railroad. “There is a fortune for us connected with the management of this property if attended
to—as well as enhanced reputation—Our aid is so essential that we can make a good bargain…. This would only be
the beginning.” With the control of the Union Pacific would come control over the Omaha Bridge which the
railroad had contracted to build.¹⁵

The $600,000 loan solved the UP’s short-term cash flow problems. Its more serious long-term capital shortage
was alleviated when Congress passed a special bill on February 26, 1871, authorizing the railroad to issue a
new series of first-mortgage bonds for the construction of the Omaha Bridge. The timing of the
legislation—weeks after Scott and Thomson had taken control of the railroad—was far too suspicious to avoid
notice. Scott was later questioned about, but denied having knowledge of funds having been “used directly or
indirectly with members of Congress to secure the passage” of the legislation.¹⁶

Ten days after the legislation was passed, the UP directors met formally in Boston to ratify the takeover of
the railroad by the “Pennsylvania interests.” Scott was named president; Carnegie, Thomson, and George Pullman
were elected to the board of directors.¹⁷

Two weeks later, on March 22, Carnegie sailed to London with a satchel full of Union Pacific–backed Omaha
Bridge bonds to sell. Just before sailing, he authorized his New York broker, Morton, Bliss & Co., to sell the
UP stock that was locked away in his vaults as collateral for the loan. The rescue of the railroad had
dramatically forced up the price of the stock to the point where he could not resist cashing it in. When the
UP directors and stockholders discovered that the “Pennsylvania interests” had, within two weeks of being
elected to the board, sold their stock in the company—at a considerable profit—their suspicions were confirmed
that Scott, Thomson, et al. were not interested in rescuing the railroad, but in turning a quick profit by
manipulating its stock. The three were voted off the railroad board.

Carnegie blamed Scott for the debacle, claiming that it had been his decision to sell the stock; but that was
not the case. The order to sell had come directly from Carnegie. It was, in retrospect, a wise decision. The
UP was a losing proposition in the short term and Scott and Carnegie had no interest in any other term. As
romantic as its quest had been—and remains even today—the first transcontinental railroad was not a
profit-making enterprise. Its income, though growing, was not and would never be sufficient to pay off the
interest on its bond issues. While “through traffic from the Pacific coast” had picked up, there was growing
competition from other transcontinentals. “As for the future of the road,” the Railroad Gazette noted on March
16, 1872, “it is not very certain.”

 

CARNEGIE would spend ten of the next eighteen months overseas, selling bridge and railroad bonds. He took
easily to his new trade. The rhythm of the work was far different than that he had become accustomed to. The
traders he dealt with kept reasonable business hours. There was research to do before and after the meetings,
a great deal of prospectus writing, tinkering with the numbers, and communications back and forth via
transatlantic cable, but this still left plenty of free time to enjoy life in London, Paris, Frankfurt, and
other European financial centers.

In May 1871, just as he was settling in, he was unexpectedly called back to New York by a telegram from Gardie
McCandless, his private secretary. Scott and Thomson required his presence as soon as possible because, as
McCandless put it in his telegraph, the Keokuk Bridge business was “not going smoothly.” The railroads which
had agreed to run traffic over the bridge were threatening to cancel their contracts, because the bridge had
not been completed on schedule. Thomson and Scott were worried that the entire enterprise—and their large
investments in it—would come crashing down. They needed Carnegie to put things right again.¹⁸

Carnegie booked passage on the next ship to New York and took the train from there to Keokuk, where he assured
the concerned parties that their bridge would soon be ready and this was no time to cancel their contracts. He
worked the same magic in St. Louis, where bridge construction was also falling further and further behind
schedule. His greatest difficulties were in his hometown, Pittsburgh, where a virtual war had broken out
between his two companies, Keystone Bridge and Union Iron.

While he was absent in Europe, Keystone had purchased new machinery to manufacture iron links, “the evident
intention being to take from the Union Iron Mills this branch of their business.” This Carnegie could not
permit. Any savings Keystone might gain by manufacturing its own links in its own plant would come at great
loss to Union Iron, which had been tooled to make structural parts for Keystone. Carnegie tried diplomacy at
first to convince the Keystone officers to reverse course. “You [Keystone Bridge and Union Iron] are not
competitors; on the contrary you are necessary to each other. The true policy is to work together. Each has
its special business and happily both have been too successful to render it necessary for one to interfere
with the other…I beg most respectfully to protest and to ask at your hands and of that of your associates, a
careful reconsideration of the questions involved. Let me ask you to consider whether the profits to be made
by entering into competition with a friendly interest, are sufficient to counterbalance the weightier
considerations connected therewith…. As a Director in your Company, I might also protest as in my judgment it
is as unwise as unfair, as it is unnecessary and uncalled for, that we should attack our neighbor in this
manner.”¹⁹

When diplomacy failed, Carnegie took the gloves off. In mid-August, he wrote Jacob Linville, the president of
Keystone, that he, his brother, Harry Phipps, and the other officers of Union Iron had “unanimously decided
that we were prepared to undergo any pecuniary sacrifice to protect our property.” Carnegie notified Linville
that he and his partners were resigning from the board of directors and applying “for an injunction against
you and if defeated there we propose to have a settlement of accounts with Keystone C. and let her seek
elsewhere what we have hitherto supplied her. Our Mills can run half time if necessary, that we can stand…but
one thing we can’t and won’t do, no set of men shall attempt to render any part of our property useless and
succeed, if we can help it. The Keystone Bridge Company never took so dear a step as this will prove, I
think.”²⁰

Linville and the Keystone officers, upon receiving Carnegie’s letter, backed down.

At some point during the summer of 1871, while shuttling back and forth to Keokuk, St. Louis, and Pittsburgh,
Carnegie was visited in his New York office by Colonel William Phillips, the president of the Allegheny Valley
Railroad. Phillips was in need of a quarter million dollars, but had been unable to raise it by selling
Allegheny Valley Railroad bonds, which were payable in dollars, not in gold as the London bankers preferred.
Carnegie recommended that Phillips swap his “dollar” bonds for “gold” bonds held by J. Edgar Thomson in the
Pennsylvania Railroad treasury. Carnegie did the numbers and arranged the bond swap. All he asked of Phillips
in return was the commission to sell the gold bonds Phillips received. To sweeten the deal for Thomson, he
offered to share with him the profits he expected to make from selling Phillips’s bonds.²¹

On August 16, 1871, with a fresh supply of bonds, including issues from Tom Scott, who needed financing for
new roads in the West, Carnegie returned to Europe. His first priority was to gain access to Baring Brothers,
the oldest merchant bank in London.

From Queenstown, off the coast of Ireland, Carnegie cabled Baring Brothers requesting an appointment. Upon
arriving in London, he settled in the Langham Hotel on Portland Place and awaited the summons to the Baring
Brothers office on Bartholomew Lane. He didn’t have to wait long. On August 28, he received the note he was
waiting for: “Messrs. Baring Brothers and Co. present their compliments to Mr. Andrew Carnegie and as he
requests will be happy to give him an interview at 12 o’clock on Tuesday, the 29th, inst.”²²

The next day, Carnegie presented his formal letter of introduction from Morton & Rose, his London brokers:
“The bearer of this, Mr. Andrew Carnegie of Pittsburgh in the US has asked us for a letter of introduction to
you and we have pleasure in complying with his request. He brought letters to us from our New York friends and
was accredited to us as a gentleman of high character, who is connected with important Railway & Iron
interests in the United States. He is a leading Director of the Union Pacific Railway Co. & is well known to
our friends in New York.”²³

The interview went well, but the Barings in the end declined to buy, Carnegie claimed in a letter to Thomson,
because the German chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, had impounded millions of dollars of pounds sterling,
leaving the firm temporarily cash-poor. The likely reason for the Barings’ decision to pass on the bonds was
that Carnegie had priced them too high.²⁴

Carnegie turned to J. S. Morgan & Co., and sold the same bonds “at a reduced price as compared with that
agreed to by the Barings.” The price was, indeed, so reduced that Junius Morgan offered to buy not only all
the bonds Carnegie had in hand, but $2 million more still held by the Pennsylvania Railroad. Carnegie arranged
the sale, by cable, with Thomson in Philadelphia. Morgan then organized a syndicate to resell the bonds and
offered both Drexel & Co., the Philadelphia firm to which his son was now attached, and Carnegie a 25 percent
interest in profits from the resale.²⁵

Probably because the deal had been consummated so quickly and Carnegie, in his estimation, had done little
more than send a cable, Thomson refused to pay his commission. Carnegie was incensed at being treated like a
Pennsylvania Railroad employee or messenger boy instead of a bond salesman, but kept his calm. “I am not
extravagant in my views,” he wrote Thomson, almost apologetically, “having learned through many years in your
service, that the Officers of the Great Corporation are paid only about one half of the value of their
services in cash, and the other half in the honor which is conferred upon them, by being connected with so
great an institution. I would therefore propose that you settle with me upon the usual basis; give me one half
of the ordinary two and a half per cent Commission allowed for such negotiations, and the other half I am very
sure I shall feel fully compensated for, in the undoubted honor conferred upon my by having been entrusted by
you with such an important mission. To receive nothing but honor would not be agreeable.”²⁶

We don’t know whether Carnegie ever got his commission. It didn’t much matter. He came away from Europe
demonstrating that he could sell securities to London’s private bankers. In the past, J. Edgar Thomson had
marketed the Pennsylvania’s bonds by himself. Carnegie now offered him unsolicited advice on how he should in
future proceed.²⁷

He was extraordinarily confident for a man so new to the bond-trading business. As a bond trader, Carnegie was
honest, but not too honest to turn down mutually beneficial partnerships, such as those Morgan had offered
him. And he had a surfeit of that elusive quality called character. “Character,” as Richard White has written,
was not, for Gilded Age financiers, “synonymous with honesty; it had as much or more to do with honor,
dependability, forcefulness, and strength.” A man of character was one who made things happen, who carried
through on his promises, who acted when others might procrastinate. As the Railroad Gazette had declared in
its front-page profile: “What he takes hold of he carries through without fear of miscarriage. This cheerful,
hopeful, or rather confident, element in him is quite marked. His mind seems instinctively to take hold of the
right thing in the right way, and to move it to fruition by a steady, earnest unfaltering will.”²⁸

In his communications with London bankers, Carnegie unfailingly called attention to his knowledge of the
railroads and his personal relationships with the men who ran them. “I find myself keenly regretting my
failure to bring your house & our great Pennsylvania Railroad Co., into business relations with each other,”
he wrote Baring Brothers soon after the collapse of the negotiations for the P&E bonds. “The PRR Co. has
control of the Transportation of the very heart of this Continent. Even its leased lines as a whole, will,
this year, show a direct cash profit. Small, it is true, but certain to increase rapidly, year by year, as the
West grows in population & wealth…Perhaps Mr. Thomson may entrust me with some of his loans in the future and
I may succeed in my wish to do the business through your house.”²⁹

In a letter to Junius Morgan written at the same time, he argued that it was he, and he alone, who had
convinced Thomson and the Pennsylvania Railroad directors to agree to Morgan’s terms. “I had to plead the fact
that what you undertook would go through to satisfy some of our friends here…. They will share my faith next
time.”³⁰

 

MUCH OF CARNEGIE’S energies as a bond seller were spent raising money for Tom Scott, who had been named
president of the Pennsylvania Company, the fully owned subsidiary of the Pennsylvania Railroad which
controlled routes west of Pittsburgh. Scott had discovered that it was far more lucrative—and exciting—to
build new railroads than to manage those up and running. He was a master promoter, a genius at securing the
charters needed; cajoling local businessmen to invest, and incorporating improvement companies to do the
construction work.

While Scott served as the public face of the new roads, Carnegie hovered in the background, doing the
preliminary accounting work, writing up the prospectuses, floating the bond issues which provided the
affiliated improvement companies with construction funds, and preparing for and contesting the inevitable
suits brought by disgruntled bondholders. It is doubtful that either man truly believed that the new
railroads, when built, would carry enough traffic to earn back their construction costs. A great number of
them were along lightly traveled routes, which, like the Gilman, Springfield & Clinton Railroad in Illinois,
connected small cities that did little business with one another. The roads were being built because money
could be made building them. Carnegie profited from the commissions on the bond sales; Scott from diverting
funds earmarked for construction into the hands of the select number of investors, himself included, who were
directors of both the railroad and the improvement companies.³¹

To raise money for roads not yet built and probably not really needed, Carnegie and Scott trafficked in what
Richard White refers to as “the utilitarian fictions of capitalism.” Together, they constructed “plausible
fictions” about the railroads, the passengers and freight that would ride them, the tolls that would be
collected, the villages that would grow into towns and the towns into cities, creating new populations,
products, and commerce.³²

Carnegie, a consummate optimist, took naturally to the task. He was the classic Yankee promoter, the boomer,
the salesman, the purveyor of success tales writ large, but he was also a self-trained professional who knew
how to construct prospectuses for bankers, who had heard it all before. Before he approached Junius Morgan
with a new offering of first-mortgage bonds for the Mansfield, Coldwater & Lake Michigan Railroad, he wrote
Tom Scott from London to request “general data about the route, its objects, location, towns & cities it
passes through, and all features contributing to impress capitalists with its importance.” When Morgan
declined to make an offer, Carnegie returned to the drawing board and gathered still more material to make a
new and better case for the Mansfield bonds.³³

In March 1872, he asked the railroad’s president to secure “a strong letter from the Governor of your State,
saying all he can about the enterprise, its importance, rich land to be developed and certainty to pay, etc.,
anything on official paper, and his signature attested by the Secretary of Commonwealth under Seal, etc.” A
week later, he drafted the governor’s letter of support by himself, as well as additional endorsements to be
signed by Thomson, Scott, and John Sherman, the senator from Ohio. Sherman’s letter, he recommended, should be
“on official Senate Chamber paper” and should emphasize that because the senator’s “place of residence” was
Mansfield, “all of [the] managers of the line are personally known to me. They are men of the highest
character and responsibility; in whose representations, full reliance may be placed.”³⁴

On March 16, he signed separate agreements with Drexel Morgan in New York and Drexel & Company in Philadelphia
to act as their agent and partner in Europe. The following month, he set sail for an extended bond-selling
campaign, this time accompanied by his mother, her traveling companion, Miss Robinson, and Eddie McCandless,
Gardie’s brother, who had been brought along to look after the ladies and act as Carnegie’s traveling
secretary.³⁵

Their first stop was Frankfurt, Germany. The London markets were saturated with American railroad securities
and Junius Morgan had suggested that Carnegie take his bond issues to the Morgan correspondent firm, Sulzbach
Brothers. Carnegie, as always, had no trouble ingratiating himself with his new clients, whom he visited
several times during his six months in Europe. He was assisted by his mother who, dour as she might appear,
got along famously with the Sulzbach women.³⁶

The Sulzbachs, though cordial, were highly suspicious of American securities and had dozens of questions about
the details of Carnegie’s prospectus for the Davenport & St. Paul Railroad bonds. Why, they wanted to know,
were the directors of the railroad also directors of the construction company? Why wouldn’t Thomson and Scott
guarantee, on behalf of the Pennsylvania Railroad, that the line would be completed? Why were the meetings of
the executive committee of the Davenport & St. Paul Railroad Company held in New York City instead of
Davenport?³⁷

The spring and summer of 1872 were not the best of times to sell American securities in London or Frankfurt.
The financial markets were in a state of prolonged hibernation, awaiting news of the settlement of the
British-American dispute over what had come to be known as the Alabama claims.

In July 1862, with British sentiment for the Confederacy at its apogee, the Alabama, a steam-powered,
wooden-hulled sloop, left England, ostensibly for a trial run. Transformed in the Azores into a Confederate
man-of-war, the vessel spent the rest of the Civil War roaming the North Atlantic and inflicting substantial
damage on merchant ships doing business with the Union. The American government, led by Ambassador Charles
Francis Adams in London, demanded reparations from the British for what it claimed—rightly—was a hostile act
of government-assisted piracy.

Adams, who was ambassador to Great Britain until 1868, failed to secure a settlement. In 1869, after his
departure, an agreement was reached, but rejected by the U.S. Senate for being too favorable to the British.
The conflict between the United States and Britain had now consumed the better part of seven years. President
Grant, frightened by the saber rattling of his Democratic opponents, demanded that his secretary of state,
Hamilton Fish, reach an agreement before the 1872 presidential election. Fish enlisted the services of bankers
on both sides of the ocean, including a number of the men Carnegie did business with, such as Anthony Drexel
of Philadelphia, Levi Morton of New York, and John Rose, the Scotsman who was Morton’s partner in London. In
the spring of 1871, the British and American governments agreed to submit the question of monetary claims to
impartial arbitration in Geneva, Switzerland.

Carnegie, like other businessmen with transatlantic interests, paid close attention to the negotiations. In
February 1872, he wrote a long letter to Horace Porter, President Grant’s executive secretary. Fearful that
Grant might accede to those who demanded that the British pay not only the “direct” cost of the wartime damage
but the “indirect” costs as well, Carnegie urged the president not to ask the Geneva arbiters for outsized
reparations. To protect the president from political repercussions, Carnegie proposed his own convoluted
compromise plan. Indulging in the grandiose flattery that would later become his trademark, he suggested to
Porter that Grant could secure himself a place in history alongside President Lincoln if he accepted the
scenario Carnegie had laid out for him.

“Lincoln is to stand in History, when all other of his acts shall have been forgot, as the Emancipator of Four
Millions of his fellow men. Grant may secure equal prominence among the very few essentially great characters
of the world’s history if he succeeds…in being the first who leads nations to substitute for the barbarous
appeal to the sword, the device of peaceful arbitration.”³⁸

In his letter to Porter, Carnegie intimated that he was in close touch with London insiders. He made the same
sort of claims to Baring Brothers, to whom he confided that he had been present when “the president met some
of his friends in Philadelphia,” and, based on that meeting, he was “very happy to be able to say that the
policy of binding England & American together, in the closest bonds of friendship, has no stronger supporter
than General Grant & this fact should not be lost sight of by your Government.” Carnegie asked the Barings to
warn the British government that Grant “should not be pressed too far, otherwise, we may have a much less
friendly administration in power.”³⁹

The negotiations in Geneva over a monetary settlement dragged on into May and June. The longer they took, the
more frightened the capital markets became. None of the major financial houses, including Sulzbach Brothers in
Frankfurt, was willing to buy or sell securities until it was known if a settlement was going to be reached,
how much the British would be obliged to hand over to the Americans, and what effect the transfer of millions
of pounds sterling would have on the price of gold.

Carnegie, after his exploratory visit with the Sulzbachs, had no choice but to take a European vacation. He
spent a day in Brussels sightseeing with his mother and Miss Robinson; enjoyed an “elegant dinner” with Mr.
Jones, the American ambassador; then took off for Antwerp and London to try to do some business. He met up
again with his mother and the full entourage in Paris and crossed the Channel with them in mid-May. “It is too
uncertain for me to predict however as to what Mr. A.C.’s movement will be,” Eddie wrote his brother from
London on May 12, “as the state of the Alabama case prevents his doing much.”⁴⁰

Carnegie decided to remain in London with his mother and Mrs. Robinson “until the Alabama is definitely
decided—& we see how matters look.” His letters to Gardie in New York suggest that he was not terribly upset
at being forced into taking an indefinite vacation. “We find room somehow or other at all the interesting
shows…. Miss Robinson turns out just splendid. Mother & she are perfectly jolly the whole time except when I
suggest that we may have to return ere long—This quiets them.”⁴¹

The Carnegies’ stopover in London turned into an extended vacation. Late in the summer, the arbitrators in
Geneva decided on a British liability of £3.25 million, a vast sum, but one which Prime Minister Gladstone’s
government agreed to pay. Carnegie was able now to return to work and conclude the negotiations with Sulzbach
Brothers and other bankers in Amsterdam, Antwerp, Brussels, Paris, and London that he had initiated earlier in
the spring.

 

IT IS IMPOSSIBLE to discount the importance of this 1872 bond-selling trip for Carnegie. The market
instability caused by the Alabama affair had forced on him an extended period of leisure in which he had
tasted the fruits of semiretirement and found them quite exhilarating. Although he had not yet celebrated his
thirty-seventh birthday, Carnegie would never again return to a full-time work schedule.

His experience in Europe that spring and summer also had a profound effect on the development of the peace
program that Carnegie would spend the final decades of his life promulgating. It was not, as he would learn in
1872, “actual war itself which the world in our day has most to dread…. It is the ever-present danger of war,
which hangs over the world like a pall, which we have to dispel.” There had been no war between Great Britain
and America over the Alabama claims, but the strained relationship made it difficult to do business and gave
unscrupulous politicians, like Senator Charles Sumner, a platform for their warmongering.⁴²

Disputes between nations were inevitable, but some way short of bloodshed had to be found to settle them. The
willingness of both the British and American governments to submit their claims to impartial arbitration in
Geneva had been an important step forward. For the rest of his life, Carnegie would refer to the settlement of
the Alabama claims case in Geneva as an exemplary moment in international diplomacy and Anglo-American
relations, where reason and common sense had peaceably solved a long-festering conflict.⁴³

 

IN HISAutobiography and his other lectures and writings, Carnegie devotes very little space to his years as a
bond salesman. Burton Hendrick ignores this period of his life entirely, as if he had jumped directly from
working for the railroad to manufacturing iron and steel.

Carnegie avoided mention of his bond trading not because he had performed any criminal acts, but because he
was loath to call attention to some morally if not legally questionable deals. Carnegie was sued countless
times during his years as a trader by bondholders like the Sulzbach Brothers, who claimed that he had made
false statements about the issues he was selling, and bond issuers who claimed that he had pocketed profits
that belonged to them. In 1874, to cite but one example, he was sued by a Springfield businessman, Dr. Samuel
H. Melvin, who had been one of the organizers of the railroad connecting Gilman with Clinton and Springfield,
Illinois. Melvin charged that Carnegie and the Morton brokerage firms in New York and London had colluded four
years earlier to cheat local stockholders of $400,000. Carnegie, the suit claimed, sold the Gilman railroad
bonds to the Morton firms at less than market value. The Morton firms then resold them at a huge profit, which
they divided with Carnegie and his partner, Tom Scott.⁴⁴

The charges, which would wend their way through the courts for years before they were dismissed, were true. In
December 1871, Morton & Rose in London, in a letter marked “Confidential,” confirmed that Carnegie and Scott
would divide one quarter of any profit the firm made from reselling the Gilman railroad bonds. In March 1872,
Carnegie received a check for $29,244.94 (over $6 million today), covering his and Scott’s share of Morton &
Rose’s profits.⁴⁵

 

AS A BOND TRADER, Carnegie was obliged to make promises he could not keep. The prospectus he had written for
the St. Louis Bridge bonds he sold to Junius Morgan had, for example, promised that within eighteen months, by
December 1871, the bridge would be earning revenues from toll-paying traffic. But this goal, Carnegie knew,
was not going to be met. The insurmountable problem was Captain Eads’s insistence that the bridge arches be
built of steel even though the only steel then available was expensive, brittle, difficult to work with, and
impossible to secure in large quantities. “I wish the Captain’s genius could devise some plan in which Iron
could be used,” Carnegie wrote William McPherson, a company director and fellow Scotsman whom he considered an
ally, in October 1870. “We would then be independent…. You may think self interest comes inhere as we
Manufacture Iron but if so you are simply wrong. I have a much deeper interest at stake in rendering St. Louis
Bridge a success.”⁴⁶

By late 1871, with Eads still in control of design and construction, Carnegie had had enough. He began selling
his stock in the bridge company—and offered to do the same for Scott and Thomson. “As we are partners in this
St. Louis affair, I think I should offer to take care of your interests as of my own…. I am disgusted with the
affair, through out.”⁴⁷

Only in his correspondence with Junius Morgan did Carnegie continue to boost the St. Louis Bridge as an
income-generating project. In September 1872, he predicted that the bridge would be open for traffic by the
summer of 1873, then, as that date approached, promised that it would be done by the end of 1873. Morgan, his
frustration barely disguised, wrote back in May of 1873 that he and his partners were “glad to hear there is
some prospect of the St. Louis Bridge being ready for traffic during the present year. We have been told the
same story the last three years; we shall therefore not encourage too strong hopes of the accomplishment of
what we have been so long anxiously waiting for.”⁴⁸

It would take another year before Keystone completed work on the St. Louis Bridge’s superstructure. On May 23,
1874, the bridge was opened to pedestrian traffic. Some 25,000 people paid ten cents apiece to walk across the
upper deck and then, because the work on the east embankment had still not been completed, turn around and
walk back. In June, the lower deck for railway traffic was finally completed. On July 2, as crowds cheered
from the shore below, an elephant was led across the lower railway deck. The belief was that if the bridge
were unsafe, the elephant would sense it and turn around. When the elephant strolled the length of the bridge
without hesitation, the bridge was tested again and found satisfactory by fourteen locomotives, averaging 40
tons each.⁴⁹

The St. Louis Bridge over the Mississippi would succeed for a time as a tourist attraction, but fail as a
business venture. By the time it was completed, the major east-west railroads had made other arrangements to
cross the Mississippi. With few toll-paying rail customers, the St. Louis Bridge Company quickly defaulted on
its loans. In April 1875, the company declared bankruptcy and surrendered its assets to two receivers, one of
them Pierpont Morgan, Junius’s son. The Morgans held on to the bridge company for three more years, then
reorganized it in August 1878. Under the reorganization plan, the bondholders, including Morgan and his
associates, were fully protected. Stockholders were not. The stock which Carnegie and his associates had so
wisely sold years earlier was now worthless.⁵⁰

Though the St. Louis company had gone rather quickly into default, Carnegie, his associates, and the Morgans
had made their profits and moved on. Timing was everything in railroad and bridge financing. Each time there
was a delay in completing the project or a cost overrun, new monies had to be borrowed to pay off old loans.
Private bankers, like the Morgans, were happy to lend such money, for short terms and at inflated rates.
Delayed projects—and almost all of them were delayed—led to pyramiding debts for railroads and bridge
companies and pyramiding profits for bankers and middlemen like Carnegie who arranged short-term loans to back
up long-term bonds.

The failure of the St. Louis Bridge project had no effect on the Morgans’ perception of the business acumen of
the little man who had sold them the bridge bonds in 1870. They remained on good terms with Carnegie and
continued to buy his bond issues. What counted in the end was not the ultimate success or failure of the
railroad or bridge, but whether the investors made a reasonable amount on their investments. And the Morgans
had.

## EIGHT

## “All My Eggs in One Basket,” 1872–1875

CARNEGIE RESIGNED from the railroad because he wanted to be his own man; but without capital to float large
issues on his own, he remained dependent on the Morgans, the Drexels, and the Morton firms to form the
syndicates, market the issues, and handle the always complicated exchanges from gold to pounds to dollars and
vice versa. Had his responsibilities to others ended with the sale of the bonds, he might have been more
content. But as the chief and often the only liaison between European bankers and American railroad, bridge,
and construction companies, he was on constant call. It was he, and he alone, who was required to know
precisely what was going on at all times. Were the roads the bonds were supposed to fund being built on
schedule? If there were delays—which there always were—what was causing them? How soon could tolls be
collected and interest payments made?

 

THE CARNEGIE ENTOURAGE returned to New York in September 1872 after an absence of almost five months abroad.
Andrew and Mag hoped that Tom and his wife Lucy would be at the pier to greet them, but the Tom Carnegies were
reluctant to interrupt their holiday at Cresson, an exclusive mountain resort in the Alleghenies. And so the
day after their arrival, Mag and Andy were back on the road again, this time via the Pennsylvania Railroad to
Cresson, to visit Tom and his family.¹

Carnegie spent much of the fall with his mother in Cresson, with side trips to Pittsburgh for business. He
could board the express in the morning and arrive in Pittsburgh four and a half hours later, in early
afternoon. Though a resident of New York City, his monies were invested almost entirely in Pittsburgh firms.
He held two-fifths interest in Carnegie, Kloman & Co. (Union Iron Mills), one-fifth in Keystone Bridge, stock
in several western Pennsylvania railroads and manufacturers, and a two-fifths interest in a new furnace
company named Lucy, in honor of Tom’s wife.²

Unlike their competitors, the Carnegies and Harry Phipps were newcomers to the iron business. Andrew Kloman
was the only partner who had any experience in the trade, but as a mechanic, not a manufacturer. Carnegie was
convinced that the fact that he had begun work for the railroads, rather than in the iron industry served him
well. He was astonished by the laxity with which the iron barons kept their books. “I was greatly surprised to
find that the cost of each of the various [production] processes was unknown.” He instructed Harry Phipps to
set up the kinds of cost-accounting procedures that were already in place at the railroads. “I insisted upon
such a system of weighing and accounting…as would enable us to know what our cost was for each process and
especially what each man was doing, who saved material, who wasted it, and who produced the best results.”
Phipps sent his monthly accounts to Carnegie’s New York office, where the absentee partner examined them line
by line. “By the aid of many clerks and the introduction of weighing scales at various points in the mill, we
began to know not only what every department was doing, but what each one of the many men working at the
furnaces was doing.”³

As his Pittsburgh firms expanded in size and profitability, Carnegie extended his oversight. He was not an
engineer and had no technical training, but he enjoyed an insider’s understanding of the mechanical arts and
the iron trades and was a shrewd judge of talent. His initial success in iron manufacture and bridge building
had come, in large part—and he recognized this—because he had partnered with engineers Jacob Linville and John
Piper at Keystone Bridge; a brilliantly innovative mechanic, Andrew Kloman, at Union Iron Mills; and two solid
businessmen, his brother Tom and Harry Phipps, who oversaw his Pittsburgh operations.

William Abbott, who knew both Carnegies from their early days at the Pittsburgh iron mills, thought Andrew a
genius, but regarded Tom as the “better business man.” Tom, Abbott told Burton Hendrick, “was solid, shrewd,
farseeing, absolutely honest and dependable.” The two brothers had very different notions about business.
Andrew was the ambitious one, filled with new ideas; Tom “was content with a good, prosperous, safe business
and cared nothing for expansion. He disapproved of Andrew’s skyrocketing tendencies, regarded him as a plunger
and a dangerous leader. Tom wanted earnings in the shape of dividends, whereas Andrew insisted on using them
for expansion.” There were other differences as well. While Andrew sought out publicity, Tom ran away from it.
He was silent, retiring, “not a mixer in society, was tongue-tied at dinner parties and social gatherings.” As
a child and young man at the dinner table, Tom would “disappear from the family circle—into an upper room,”
away from his talkative brother. Like his older brother, Tom Carnegie was remarkably efficient and known for
his ability to accomplish a day’s work in a morning. He got along well with his subordinates and was well
liked by the workingmen. His fatal flaw was his drinking. According to Abbott, he would leave the office for
lunch and drink all afternoon, seldom returning to work before four o’clock.

Harry Phipps, on the contrary, never seemed to leave the office. An extraordinary bookkeeper, he spent his
days watching over costs and seeking out new efficiencies. “He was a cheese-parer in every direction,” Abbott
recalled, “making economies that would never occur to anyone else.” Like the Carnegie brothers, he was a tiny
little man.⁴

While Tom and Harry Phipps watched over the business, kept costs down and orders up, Carnegie supplied, from a
distance, a businessman’s sense of the directions in which the market was moving and how to capitalize on
them. He also organized and directed the firms’ early ventures into marketing, publicity, and advertising. The
sales pamphlets and illustrated catalogues for Keystone were among the most polished in the industry, with
beautifully designed wood engravings of bridges and detailed tabular summaries of the firms’ past
accomplishments. In the mid-1870s, after Linville invented what he called the “Rivetless Post,” Carnegie
suggested that the company place “advertizements [sic] in every journal devoted to the mechanical, engineering
& architectural arts…. Some one should read a paper upon it before the Engineers—your Franklin Institute
should know about it—indeed I should, within ten days, have so advertised it as to render it almost impossible
that any man of intelligence should be ignorant of the fact that an important step had been taken by us in the
use of wrought iron columns. Excuse me for dwelling upon the immense importance of publicity & of printers
ink—It is a department in which I believe you have permitted our most formidable rivals…to distance you.”
Carnegie sketched for Linville the kind of “short well-displayed advertisement” he had in mind and cautioned
him to “go to work & get up some handsome lithographs, add below a few words explanatory of their merits [and]
don’t mix up this new Post advertisement with anything else—It should stand alone as a specialty.”⁵

In early 1874, Carnegie learned that Calvert Vaux, the architect commissioned to design the “Centennial
Palace” at the 1876 Philadelphia Exposition, had decided to construct it of wood instead of iron. He fired off
a letter to an acquaintance, J. Lowber Welsh, whose father was president of the exposition’s board of finance.
Making his case for an iron structure, Carnegie argued that it would demonstrate American progress in the
“arts, manufactures, and products of the soil and mine,” the theme of the exposition. He also conjured up
images of the fire that might destroy the exposition should the “palace” be constructed of wood. “If our great
Centennial Palace is to be only a modern tinder box how will foreign exhibitors be affected—can any one be
induced to risk valuable articles in such a structure? The risk of fire during the two years it will be under
construction will be even greater than while it is occupied—a spark may render any exhibition at all
impossible.” To save the centennial palace from potential conflagration, Carnegie offered to build it of iron
for $4.5 million, only $1.75 million more than it would cost in wood. He closed his letter with a veiled
threat to go public with his concerns—about safety, sparks, and fire damage—if the commissioners declined his
offer. The notion that “Pennsylvania and especially Philadelphia” might hold its exposition in a wooden
building “fairly amazes me—perhaps I am too partial to iron as an iron manfr. Still we shall see how the
country takes the idea.”⁶

The commissioners took Carnegie’s advice and constructed the main building’s skeleton of iron. They did not,
however, award Carnegie the contracts for the ironwork on the main exposition buildings. The only contract
Keystone Bridge was given was for the iron skeleton for the smaller horticultural building.⁷

To guarantee his companies’ products a prominent place at the exposition, Carnegie had himself appointed to
the “committee of seven” that the American Iron and Steel Association organized to oversee the display of iron
ores and goods. When the exposition opened on May 10, 1876, with President Grant presiding, the “Carnegie
Brothers & Company” displays were so well placed “along the southern portion of the Main Building” that J. S.
Ingram noted in his guidebook, The Centennial Exposition, Described and Illustrated, that they were among the
few that “prominently attracted our notice.” Though it is unlikely that the general public flocked to see
Carnegie’s “rolled wrought-iron coupling” or the model of his Lucy furnace, contractors who bought and sold
iron products certainly did.⁸

 

CARNEGIE HAD RETURNED from Europe in the fall of 1872 with money in his purse from his bond sales, which, as a
good capitalist, he felt obliged to invest. The Pennsylvania oil business was already being colonized by
Rockefeller of Cleveland and was, in any case, too speculative for Carnegie. He knew better than to invest in
overpriced railroad stock. His coal-mining investments were paying a reasonable dividend, but not enough to
encourage him to invest more. His iron furnace, iron mills, and bridge-building company were sufficiently
capitalized at present and doing well.

A less adventurous capitalist might have bided his time and hoarded his money or made incremental investments
in familiar firms. But Carnegie was convinced that there were fortunes to be made manufacturing stronger, more
durable rails, of steel. In 1870, the Republicans, now in control of the presidency and the Congress, turned
the business environment upside down with the imposition of a $28-a-ton tariff on imported steel. The door was
opened wide for American steel manufacturers. At a stroke of the pen, the British steel mills lost their
competitive advantage. The iron and steel tariff would remain in place, in one form or another, for the next
thirty years—as long, that is, as Carnegie remained in the steel business. It became the centerpiece of
Republican policy and, with the Republicans the dominant party in Washington, a cornerstone of national
economic policy. The passage of the 1870 tariff was, Carnegie later claimed, the single most important event
in prompting him to enter the steel business.⁹

Carnegie had kept abreast of the latest iron-and steelmaking technologies since the mid-1860s. No trip to
Europe had been complete without a pilgrimage to iron and steel foundries and discussions with the
manufacturers. While waiting for the settlement of the Alabama case in the summer of 1872, he had traveled to
Sheffield to tour Henry Bessemer’s steel plant and marvel at his new furnaces.¹⁰

Bessemer had invented a process for making a less brittle, stronger iron product that he first called
malleable iron, then changed the name to Bessemer steel. Because Bessemer steel was cooked in large batches in
giant converters, it could be produced more efficiently, with much less labor, than the wrought iron which was
currently being manufactured in small ovens in the Pittsburgh mills.

The technological advances pioneered by Bessemer in England, combined with the new protective tariff, induced
several American manufacturers to move into the steel business. By 1872, there were eight steel manufactories
in the country, including Pennsylvania Steel in Steelton and Cambria Iron in Johnstown, Pennsylvania.
Curiously enough, while Pittsburgh was the home of a large number of iron mills, there were as yet no steel
manufactories in the city.

Carnegie’s partner in the oil business, William Coleman, who had experience in the iron industry, began
scouting the nation’s Bessemer steel plants to see for himself whether it made sense to invest in the new
technology. He was intrigued by what he saw, especially in Harrisburg, Johnstown, and Troy, New York, and
began rounding up partners to invest in a steel rail mill in Pittsburgh. By the time Carnegie returned from
his bond-selling European tour to Pittsburgh in mid-September 1872, Coleman had contracted with Alexander
Holley to design the new plant. Holley, who had graduated from Brown University, was, at age forty, the
foremost steel engineer in the nation. He had already played the lead role in designing steel mills at Troy,
Cambria, and Steelton. There was no one better qualified or with more experience. Having secured Holley’s
services, Coleman took out an option on a site in Turtle Creek Valley at Braddock’s Field, so named because it
was on this spot that General Edward Braddock had been defeated in the French and Indian War in 1755.¹¹

It was an ideal site for a new steel plant. The two major ingredients in manufacturing steel were coke (made
by cooking bituminous coal until the gas has been expelled) and iron ore low in phosphorous (high-phosphorous
ores did not work well in Bessemer furnaces). The best coal for coking was found in the Connellsville region,
fifty miles southeast of Pittsburgh. Quality iron ore came from the Lake Superior iron mines, which were
considerably farther but, via lake steamer and rail, closer to Braddock than to any other steel mill. The
Baltimore & Ohio tracks ran through the center of the site; the Pennsylvania Railroad tracks ran along the
northern border; the Monongahela River, still a major highway, flowed along the southern edge. The city of
Pittsburgh was barely twelve miles away.

Carnegie was one of the first to join with Coleman in the new venture. The steel manufactory was organized as
a separate partnership, with no legal ties to any of Carnegie’s other Pittsburgh firms. On November 5, 1872,
Carnegie signed both the lease for the Braddock site and the “Articles of Co-Partnership.” Coleman and
Carnegie chose for their partners men of wealth and reputation. David McCandless, vice president of the
Exchange National Bank, agreed to invest $100,000 for ten shares of stock. Coleman took ten for himself.
Carnegie, the principal stockholder, subscribed for twenty-five. The other partners—John Scott (who was not
related to Tom), a railroad vice president and bank president; David Stewart, Carnegie’s partner in Pittsburgh
Locomotive and Tom Scott’s nephew; and Phipps, Tom Carnegie, and Andrew Kloman—purchased five shares each. As
was standard operating procedure, the stockholders were expected to pay for their shares on a monthly basis.
The new firm was named Carnegie, McCandless, and Company, in recognition of Carnegie’s oversized financial
contribution and McCandless’s reputation. Everyone but Carnegie lived and worked in Pittsburgh.¹²

The fall of 1872 marks the beginning of a new chapter in Carnegie’s life. Burton Hendrick describes the moment
with operatic overkill: “The change that came over the man in this, his thirty-seventh year, resembled the
religious experience known as conversion, and like that experience it came as the exaltation of a single
moment. A mind that had lived in apparent darkness was illumined by a sudden flash of light…. The dazzling
brilliance of a Bessemer converter…in the twinkling of an eye, transformed Andrew Carnegie into a new man.”¹³

Hendrick may be forgiven for substituting metaphor for analysis in attempting to explain how Carnegie, the
businessman who had so many balls in the air, could in the space of only a few years let almost all of them
fall to earth so that he could focus his attention—and his capital—on the steel business. Carnegie, returning
from Europe in September 1872, was no Saul on the road to Damascus. There had been no blinding revelation, no
moment of exaltation, no sudden conversion from iron to steel. Carnegie had no intention of concentrating
either his capital or his attention on the steel business. At the same time that he became a partner in the
new steel rail mill, he was selling bonds for several bridge and rail concerns, negotiating the merger of
Pacific & Atlantic Telegraph Company with Western Union, overseeing the completion of the long-delayed St.
Louis Bridge project, opening discussions to build a bridge over the Hudson River at Poughkeepsie, attempting
to secure control of the rail lines that connected the proposed Poughkeepsie bridge to New England, and
purchasing, with William Coleman, a new coal company in western Pennsylvania, Kier Coal & Works.¹⁴

The only business activity he backed away from was active bond trading, and that decision was dictated by
market conditions. It was becoming increasingly difficult to market bonds in Europe because of the glut of
securities on the market. In January 1873, some sixty days after he had signed the co-partnership agreement
for the Braddock steel mill, the Sulzbachs informed him that they had been unable to sell the bonds “for which
we have contracted with you.” By the spring, the situation had deteriorated to the point that Morgan suggested
Carnegie put off his already planned bond-selling trip. “Our market is at the moment over-supplied with
American securities and we do not think you could accomplish anything by coming now. On the continent it is
still worse, as they have as a rule a more stringent money market and have also suffered largely by
investments in second or third class American Railroad Bonds, so that we doubt if they would touch anything at
this moment.”¹⁵

To scare up commissions for new bond issues would have meant another round of travel—to Iowa and Missouri and
Kansas and Illinois, where new roads and bridges were being built. In previous years, Carnegie might have been
prepared to take to the road again and live out of his satchel for days on end, cajoling railroad purchasing
agents, chambers of commerce, and self-appointed men of affairs who had decided to establish themselves and
their cities by building bridges across the Mississippi or Missouri. But he had lost his taste for this sort
of wheeling and dealing, especially in a down market. It made more sense to invest his money in Pittsburgh and
to oversee the new business from his home in New York.

 

IT REMAINED for the partners to agree on a name for their steelworks. Carnegie, thinking strategically as
always, suggested they name it after the nation’s most respected railroad executive, J. Edgar Thomson, in the
expectation that the name would provide the works—and the rails it produced—with an instant reputation for
reliability. The name might also lure other investors to the project and help secure contracts for steel
rails. Thomson himself might even invest.

In late October, Carnegie wrote to ask Thomson for permission to use his name. The letter is an early
masterpiece of manipulative flattery of the sort that Carnegie would employ for the rest of his life in
conversing with the rich and powerful. He and his partners, he reported to Thomson, had grappled with the
question of

what to call the Works…until “Edgar Thomson” was suggested & carried by acclamation. “Just the very thing,”
was the unanimous expression…. We are all quite satisfied that Pittsburgh is the best present location in the
Country for the Manfr. of Steel Rails & we hope to give the “Edgar Thomson” brand a place alongside of the
“John Brown” Rails [the premium imported English product at the time]. If we felt that calling our Works after
you were an honor conferred upon you we could readily offer reasons why you deserve it, but as we all
sincerely feel that the honor will be entirely upon our side in being permitted to do so, we have nothing to
say except to assure you that there is not one of our party who is not delighted that an opportunity has
arisen through which expression can be given, however feebly, to the regard they honestly entertain for your
exalted character & career.

With sincere respect, I am always

Your Obt. Servt.

Andrew Carnegie¹⁶

In mid-November, Thomson granted Carnegie permission to “use the name you suggest, if the names you sent me
[the partners] are individually liable for its success and as I have no doubt will look after its management—I
have no funds at present to invest, having been drained by the Texas & California [Scott’s new railroad]—and
Sanborne’s Mexican project [a highly speculative railroad enterprise].”¹⁷

Carnegie also tried to enlist Tom Scott to invest in the new steelworks, but Scott was even more “drained” of
capital than Thomson. In the end, he agreed to purchase some stock—we don’t know how much—but, like Thomson,
did not want to be listed as a partner. He asked that his shares be registered in his secretary’s name, not
his own. “Mr. Scott was alarmed at danger of becoming a partner,” Carnegie wrote one of his Pittsburgh
associates, “& I relieved him of that. I only hope he will never be involved in anything worse.”¹⁸

The partners didn’t really need Thomson’s or Scott’s money. While they expected to be awarded Pennsylvania
Railroad contracts for their rails, they did not intend to operate as a subsidiary of one railroad. The intent
behind the decision to build the new steel mill adjacent to the B&O tracks and on the Monongahela River was
unmistakable. Carnegie, who had made his fortune by playing the game of crony capitalism, was signaling to
Thomson that he would play that game no longer. The Edgar Thomson steelworks would sell its wares to the
highest bidders—for the highest price—and transport its raw materials and finished goods on the roads that
offered the best rates. It would be captive to neither Thomson nor his Pennsylvania Railroad.¹⁹

In later years, Carnegie’s enemies would claim that one of the sources of his early success was the “special
concessions” on freight rates his companies received from the Pennsylvania Railroad. Carnegie denied that the
Pennsylvania gave him any preferential treatment. He claimed on the contrary that the railroad discriminated
against him and his companies. “I was fighting the Pennsylvania Railroad all the time.” Having broken faith
with the company, he courted trouble. In the years to come, he would have to fight every inch of the way to
get reasonable freight rates from Thomson’s successors.²⁰

The first priority was hiring a general manager for E.T. (as Carnegie would in future refer to the steelworks
at Braddock). Carnegie was looking for a “business man” as shrewd and calculating as he was. The “business
man,” as such, was a relatively new arrival—so new, in fact, that it would not become a single word for a few
decades to come. Prior to the 1880s, men in business were identified by industry or function. There were
railroad superintendents and presidents, iron manufacturers, merchants, financiers, and so on, but no
“businessmen” such as Carnegie was looking for with skill sets readily transferable from one sector to
another.²¹

Carnegie’s choice for general manager was Daniel Morrell, the “aristocratic” Philadelphian who in the
mid-1850s had been brought in to reorganize the Cambria ironworks near Johnstown. Morrell had stayed on as
manager and a principal owner, and in 1871 he oversaw the conversion to steel production. Carnegie was so
convinced of Morrell’s worth that he agreed to pay him the annual salary of $20,000 that he demanded, an
unusually high amount in 1872, with no doubt an additional offer of equity in the company. Carnegie’s partners
were opposed to bringing in Morrell—at such a high price—and offended that their New York partner had acted on
his own in opening negotiations with him. They agreed, nonetheless, to “stand up loyally for whatever you have
done if the thing is settled between you.”²²

In the end, Morrell refused the position. Carnegie and his Pittsburgh associates offered it next to William
Shinn, a vice president at the Allegheny Valley Railroad who came highly recommended by McCandless and by John
Scott, president of the railroad. Shinn was a tough manager, a disciplined accountant, and an ambitious
businessman. Though self-contained, solemn, and introverted, he was not shy about offering his opinions, even
when they conflicted with Carnegie’s own. This too was a plus. Carnegie was confident enough in his own
judgment not to require affirmation from his subordinates. Carnegie worried only about Shinn’s loyalties, as
he refused to resign his vice presidency at the Allegheny Valley Railroad after agreeing to take on the new
position at E.T.²³

Because neither Shinn nor any of the partners had experience in steelmaking, it was imperative that they
hire—as general superintendent—someone who had. The Union Iron Mills and the Lucy furnace had proved so
successful because, while Phipps and Tom Carnegie ran the business, Andrew Kloman served as general
superintendent. What Carnegie needed was someone like Kloman with the capacity to oversee men at work. He
found those qualities—and much more—in Captain William Jones (the title was an honorary Civil War one).
Although Carnegie, who adored telling stories about workingmen who had risen through his ranks to become
millionaires, claimed that Jones had come to work for him as a “two-dollar-a-day mechanic,” that was far from
the case. The son of a dissenting Welsh minister, Jones had risen to the rank of chief assistant to the
general superintendent at Cambria before resigning his position. Alexander Holley hired Jones to assist him in
designing and building E.T., and when construction was completed, recommended him for plant superintendent.
Like Carnegie, the captain was tiny, always on the move, and spoke with a slight accent (Welsh, not Scottish).
Until he was killed in a furnace explosion in 1889, Jones oversaw the day-to-day operation of the steelworks,
invented and patented a large number of labor-saving improvements, and supervised the skilled workforce.²⁴

 

ONE OF CARNEGIE’S many gifts as a businessman was his capacity to generate enthusiasm for his projects—in
partners, potential customers, and the public at large. Carnegie was not a “dour Scotsman,” or a cold,
calculating capitalist, but a little man brimming with excitement for whatever business he was engaged in at
that moment. He was, in the early 1870s, consumed by excitement about steel rails, as he had earlier been
about sleeping cars and iron bridges. By applying the same cost-accounting procedures he had employed in his
other Pittsburgh firms and constructing the most efficient plant in the nation, Carnegie was confident that he
would be able to undersell the domestic market for steel rails. With a $28-a-ton tariff slapped onto their
products, British manufacturers would never be able to compete. In a letter written in mid-December to the
Sulzbach Brothers in Frankfurt, he sounded like a child with a new toy: “I have been very busy with my Iron
business. We are building a Works to manufacture one hundred tons Steel Rails per day, in addition to our
present Mills for Iron, etc., so you see, in this fast Country one can’t stand still.”²⁵

He was so energized by the new project that in early November, six months before ground was even broken for
the mill, he was already contracting for the low-phosphorous iron ore required to manufacture steel through
the Bessemer process. In New York, he met with Samuel Tilden, the future Democratic nominee for president and,
at the time, a partner in a firm that owned mines in the Marquette district of Michigan. Carnegie contracted
for 10,000 tons of Tilden’s “first class ‘New York mine’ speculum ore,” which he believed, combined with
western Pennsylvania “fuel”(i.e., Connellsville coke), would yield high-quality “Bessemer Pig Metal.” He
invited Tilden and/or his agents to visit his Pittsburgh furnace during the smelting “and follow the product
until it appears as a steel rail, as we trust it will.”²⁶

As excited as he might have been by his new business venture, Carnegie had no intention of overseeing it from
Pittsburgh. He worked in spurts now, and spent as much time away from the office as in it. In February 1873,
five months after his return from Europe, he abandoned his partners in Pittsburgh and his office in New York
for a two-month rail and riverboat excursion to New Orleans and Jacksonville, Florida. He was accompanied by
his mother; Miss Robinson, her traveling companion; his niece Retta; his partners Coleman and McCandless;
Uncle George Lauder, who was visiting from Dunfermline; Sol Schoyer, one of his lawyers; and all of the wives.
Carnegie was the perfect travel guide. There was never a dull moment on a Carnegie excursion. During their
stay in Jacksonville, where the hotels were “all filled and a great deal of gayety [was] going on,” the party
enjoyed “several dances.”²⁷

Carnegie returned to New York via Washington and Philadelphia in early spring, stayed a few weeks, and then,
when the weather turned warm, relocated with his mother, a small entourage of servants, their carriage, and a
horse or two, to Cresson in the Alleghenies.

Accessible only by the railroad, hours from smoky Pittsburgh and far enough from an almost equally polluted
Altoona, Cresson offered Philadelphia and Pittsburgh businessmen, railroad executives, and politicians
aesthetic and hygienic relief from putrid city air and threats of cholera, typhus, and tuberculosis. The first
building on the site had been a sanitarium because the springs there were believed to have healing powers.
There was hiking, hunting, and fishing, well-groomed paths for carriages and horseback riders, and a boardwalk
for pedestrians. Most of the vacationers stayed in the Mountain House, a luxury resort hotel; the privileged
few, like the Carnegies, rented private cottages for the season.²⁸

In 1873, Andrew and his mother spent the entire season at Cresson. Tom and Lucy joined them there for a few
days; Uncle Lauder and his wife for two weeks. The family took its meals in the Mountain House dining room and
slept in Cottage D, a four-room wooden cabin. The total cost for the summer was $1046.40, including $50 per
week per person for board, an additional $9 for wine, 30 cents for postage and paper, $27 for six crates of
peaches, $10 for fires, $1 for laundry, and $52 for livery charges.²⁹

Carnegie, the good-natured paterfamilias, organized amusements, took family and friends for horseback or
carriage rides, hunting, and fishing, and, after dinner at Mountain House, chose, rehearsed, directed, and
starred in the evening’s amateur theatrical, led his guests in songs and storytelling, or organized rounds of
whist.

With the Pennsylvania Railroad tracks a short carriage ride away, no need went unmet. When supplies were
required, Carnegie wrote or telegrammed his private secretary in New York. On August 7, 1873, he asked Gardie
McCandless to “please send another case champagne—same as last—also claret—likewise three packs cards.” He
told Gardie that he was already looking forward to the following summer, when he planned to build his own
cottage and invite Gardie with his wife and daughter to visit. If Gardie’s wife “should happen just
accidentally to have a delightful friend (say Miss Waller for instance) to accompany her, why we could manage
her too, I mean we could manage to provide for her.”³⁰

Carnegie was, it appeared, as he approached age forty, beginning to advertise his availability as an eligible
bachelor. Cresson was the perfect place to entertain female guests. But as comfortable as Carnegie was at
Cresson, he never stayed there—or for that matter, anywhere—for long stretches of time. In July, he left on
the train bound for Pittsburgh and then continued on to Marquette, Michigan, to oversee the first shipment of
iron ore from Tilden’s mine to the Lucy furnace. For any other businessman, a trip to the iron mines of
Michigan would not have afforded much time for pleasure, but Carnegie was a master at making the best of any
situation. “It is quite cold—light overcoat is indispensable,” he wrote Gardie on July 9 from the
North-Western Hotel in Marquette. “This is the place for avoiding summer heat sure. I am having a splendid
time of it—fishing and boating. My complexion may be classed as ‘rosey.’ I am awfully sun burnt of course. We
have quite a number of Pittsburghers at the Hotel.”³¹

He returned to Cresson in late summer and remained there with his mother through early autumn. On September
17, he again took the train west to Pittsburgh, to spend a week “getting all matters right” before returning
to New York City “for the season…. All well,” he reported to Gardie, “but all sorry to leave the Mountains. It
is warm this morning even here.” He suggested that Gardie plan his own vacation: “I think you should take a
week or two in Philadelphia for a change with Mrs. McC & the baby. You could do so nicely when I return.”³²

Gardie was not to get that “week or two” for quite some time.

 

THE DAY AFTER Carnegie posted his letter, his idyllic summer came to a halt with the receipt of a telegram
announcing the bankruptcy of Jay Cooke & Co., one of the nation’s most respected bankers. The failure came as
a shock not only to Carnegie but to the rest of the nation’s businessmen. If the house of Cooke could fall,
was any firm safe?

The repercussions were immediate. Carnegie was kept abreast of the deteriorating situation by telegrams
received at the nearby rail station. Like all financial panics, the signs had been there to see—but no one
bothered to look until it was too late. Businesses had been failing and banks hiking their interest rates
since the spring. Jay Cooke, who had in 1869 been overtaken by the transcontinental madness, found it
difficult, then impossible, to borrow what he needed to complete construction of his Northern Pacific
Railroad. When he ran out of his own and his investors’ money, he reached into his banking clients’ accounts
and “borrowed” until there was nothing left. He attempted to sell Northern Pacific bonds at a deep discount,
but there were no takers. With his railroad only partially built and his own, his investors’, and his
company’s coffers empty, he had no choice but to declare bankruptcy on September 18, 1873.

The failure of Jay Cooke & Co. set off a round robin of bank and business failures. Stocks tumbled,
out-of-town banks took back the reserves they had parked in New York City, causing New York banks to call in
their old loans and raise the rates on new ones. The sell-off of securities was so panic-driven that the New
York Stock Exchange closed its doors on September 20—and stayed closed for ten days. The railroads, which
survived on credit, were instantly crippled. The effect on Pittsburgh’s manufacturing firms, including
Carnegie’s, was immediate because the railroads with which they did so much business no longer had money to
pay their bills. Banks were no use in the crisis. Those that remained open suspended payments. In October,
customers who tried to withdraw their deposits from the Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh were sent away with Judge
Mellon’s promise that they would get their money eventually, but not now.³³

The Panic of 1873 spun Carnegie’s business life in a new direction. Until this point, he had been able to
juggle many balls in the air and add new ones from time to time. Suddenly, he had to cease all new investments
and concentrate his energies on keeping his existing businesses intact and protecting his investment in E.T.
To raise money to meet his payrolls, he sold stock in a variety of businesses, including the Pullman Company.
He also paid exorbitant rates for short-term loans.

“We are all right for ten days or two weeks,” he wrote Gardie on October 24 from Pittsburgh, where he had
relocated to manage the crisis. “I think we can go through all right. I find nobody is paying anything [either
past-due bills or interest on outstanding loans] but we have gone paying right along. We can ease up that way
if we are forced to do it. We have now no loans outside of Pittsburgh and we can manage them.”³⁴

Through the fall, as the crisis deepened, Carnegie tried to keep his spirits up, until the strain became too
much even for him. Marooned in Pittsburgh, where he was staying with his brother until the situation
stabilized and he could return to New York, he took sick late in October and was “confined to the house.” “I
have never suffered so much in my life & am still very weak,” he wrote Gardie on November 8.³⁵

By mid-November, he convinced himself that he and his companies had weathered the immediate storm. “We are now
all right for a while at least. I shall hope our Banks can squeeze through. You know they haven’t suspended….
So far Pittsburg comes out splendidly.” He sent his mother ahead to New York and wrote to ask Gardie to look
in on her. He was, he confided, feeling better, but still had to be careful. “Glad to see you are selling
Pullman [stock] so well—We need money but are not just bare. Business awful as a general thing & the order of
the day.” He then listed the Pittsburgh businesses which had recently failed.³⁶

With the railroads, the Carnegie firms’ major customers, still unable to pay their bills, he and his partners
had no choice but to borrow money from the local banks. His partners had solid reputations in the Pittsburgh
business community; Carnegie did not. “Up to this time,” he admitted in his Autobiography, “I had the
reputation in business of being a bold, fearless, and perhaps a somewhat reckless young man…. Although still
young, I had been handling millions. My own career was thought by the elderly ones of Pittsburgh to have been
rather more brilliant than substantial…. My supply of Scotch caution never has been small; but I was
apparently something of a dare-devil now and then to the manufacturing fathers of Pittsburgh. They were old
and I was young, which made all the difference.”³⁷

Carnegie was able to convince the bankers that, appearances notwithstanding, he was not a speculator and owed
no money to anyone. On the strength of his and his partners’ business statements, the endorsement of William
Coleman, and the expectation that the “bills receivable” from the railroads would one day actually be
received, the banks agreed to lend his companies what they needed to survive.

His strategy of investing everything he earned paid off in the end. By the fall of 1873, when the panic
struck, he had accumulated a healthy portfolio of stocks and bonds which, even when liquidated at a loss,
provided the capital required to keep the Union Iron Mills, the Lucy furnace, and Keystone Bridge companies
afloat. Still, the shortage of investment capital that was both cause and consequence of the Panic of 1873
forced him to temporarily halt construction of his new steel mill, sell off almost all his holdings in other
industries, and cease investing in new ventures. He had survived the worst of times without defaulting on his
loans or having to declare any of his firms bankrupt. The panic surely could not last forever, and when it was
over, he would pick up where he had left off. In a December 1873 letter he assured Junius Morgan that “we are
steadily outgrowing the foolish panic here—It is most a fright—& the spring will see things prosperous
again—but we must drive slower.”³⁸

 

CARNEGIE was among the fortunate few to weather the Panic of ’73 without significant losses. Tom Scott, who as
the years passed had become more adventurous than his former pupil, was not so fortunate. Like Jay Cooke, he
had been stricken by the transcontinental madness and had poured his energies and resources—and those of his
friends and associates—into building a new railroad along the southern borders of the nation, from New Orleans
through Texas to California. Carnegie would later claim that he had urged Scott not to proceed with the
project, but in his first reference to Scott’s new railroad, in February 1872, he recommended only that Scott
not name it the “Texas Pacific Railroad. Names are great things, and Texas is not comprehensive enough for a
through route. Southern Pacific is far batter, and should be adopted exclusively.” Scott met him halfway and
changed the name to the “Texas and Pacific.”³⁹

Scott offered Carnegie one of forty $250,000 shares in the construction company he had organized to build his
new railroad and asked him to inquire whether Morgan and Sulzbach Brothers were interested in buying shares
for themselves or putting together a syndicate to market the bonds in Europe. Carnegie, who had subscribed for
one $250,000 share, and J. Edgar Thomson, who had subscribed for two, had both been led to believe that Scott
would “call” on them for only 10 percent of the stock price. But Scott was desperate for capital.⁴⁰

In July 1873, while Carnegie remained behind in the United States having been warned by Junius Morgan that the
market for American securities was all but dead, Scott traveled to London and the Continent to try to sell his
Texas & Pacific bonds. He failed. In August, desperate for funds, and having exhausted the resources of his
associates, Scott asked Thomson to loan him marketable securities from the Pennsylvania Railroad treasury. On
August 18, a month before the panic, the Pennsylvania Railroad board approved Scott’s request and received, as
security, $4 million in T&P construction bonds.⁴¹

The fall of Jay Cooke & Co. and the bank failures that followed made it impossible for Scott to secure the
additional short-term loans he needed to keep his project alive. He remained in Europe through the autumn,
trying but failing to raise cash by selling the Pennsylvania Railroad securities Thomson had loaned him. By
late October, his Texas & Pacific railroad and construction companies were more than $7 million in debt.
Having exhausted all other possibilities, Scott called on his investors, Thomson and Carnegie among them, to
put up more cash. Thomson, who was personally liable for the half million in stock purchased in his own name
and professionally responsible for the debts incurred by the Pennsylvania Railroad, pressured Carnegie to give
Scott what he asked for. “I think that you should tax your friends, if you have not the means yourself, to
meet your calls for the Texas Concern,” he wrote Carnegie. “The scheme itself was good enough, but it has been
most woefully mismanaged financially, Scott having acted upon his faith in his guiding star, instead of sound
discretion. But Scott should be carried until his return, and you of all others should lend your helping hand
where you run no risk—if you cannot go further.”⁴²

Carnegie came up with the money. But further than this he would not go. In November, another note for $300,000
fell due, and the Texas & Pacific, with no resources to meet the payments, began its final slide into
bankruptcy.

On January 12, 1874, Carnegie received a telegram from Scott in Philadelphia: “Please come over tomorrow
Monday on 12:30 train and meet me at my house at 4 p.m. If you cannot come over at that time, come over later
in the day so I can see you at my house between 10 and 11 p.m. I shall be out early in the evening.
Important—please answer.”⁴³

Scott asked Carnegie to endorse some of the outstanding notes. By endorsing the notes, Carnegie would have
made himself liable to repay them if the T&P defaulted. He refused to do so. This, he tells us, “marked
another step in the total business separation which had to come between Mr. Scott and myself. It gave more
pain than all the financial trials to which I had been subjected up to that time. It was not long after this
meeting that the disaster came and the country was startled by the failure of those whom it had regarded as
its strongest men. I fear Mr. Scott’s premature death can measurably be attributed to the humiliation which he
had to bear.”⁴⁴

Carnegie exaggerates both the magnitude of Scott’s tragedy and his responsibility for it. Scott remained in
control of the Texas & Pacific until a month before his death, when he sold his holdings to Jay Gould for a
reported $2.4 million ($425 million today). He died in the spring of 1881, at age fifty-seven, not a
remarkably young age by nineteenth-century standards. On his death, he left an estate which the newspapers
claimed was worth not “less than $17,000,000.”⁴⁵

Until his dying day, Scott remained in touch with Carnegie and collaborated with him on several business
deals. In December 1874, less than twelve months after Carnegie had refused to bail him out, Scott arranged
the loan (no doubt through the Pennsylvania Railroad, of which he was then president) that made it possible to
complete construction at E.T. Carnegie repaid this favor on several occasions. In May 1876, to mention just
one, he used his good offices to broker an agreement with Collis P. Huntington, who was at the time racing
with Scott to complete a southern transcontinental railroad. When, after long delays, Scott was finally ready
to lay tracks through Texas, Carnegie was among the first to bid for the steel contract.⁴⁶

Though they continued to do business together, the breach between them was never entirely healed. And this
greatly bothered Carnegie. He prided himself on his loyalty to friends—and his generosity—and could not
forgive himself for not finding a way to help out Scott in his time of trouble. In January 1879, traveling in
Singapore, Carnegie learned from “a line in a New York paper, picked up here…the terrible news” that Scott had
“been stricken with paralysis and taken abroad. All our miserable differences vanish in a moment—I only
reproach myself that they ever existed,” he wrote in a long handwritten letter so heartfelt that Scott
uncharacteristically kept it until his death. “This blow reveals there lay deeper in my heart a chord which
still bound me to you in memory of a thousand kindnesses for which I am your debtor—I wish I were near you….
If you are not so ill as I fear, & return to work, we can remain apart—If you are still ill & in Europe, I
wish to go to you as I pass but in either event rest assured for the future I have nothing but kind thoughts &
kind words for you & of you.”⁴⁷

In his Autobiography, Carnegie tells his story of the break with Scott in rather mawkish detail not simply
because he was sorry for what he had done, but to emphasize that by the early 1870s he was his own man,
beholden to and linked with no one else, certainly not a speculator like Thomas Scott. He preferred to be
remembered as the stolid capitalist and manufacturer who put his friend’s life at risk rather than endorse his
bad debts. This would be a recurrent theme in Carnegie’s later accounts of his business career. He insisted in
language that borrowed its moralistic tone from generations of success manual authors, from Benjamin Franklin
to Samuel Smiley, that a man’s reputation was the most valuable of all assets and should be kept inviolate,
and that he himself had never strayed from the path of righteousness, had never speculated, cheated, lied, or
deceived. To solidify his moral standing as a businessman, Carnegie elevated his decision not to endorse
Scott’s notes into a general business principle. In “The Road to Business Success: A Talk to Young Men,” a
lecture delivered to the Curry Commercial College in Pittsburgh in 1885, he identified three dangers that lay
in the path of success for the young businessman: “I beseech you, avoid liquor, speculation, and indorsement.”
The first two could be found in most success manuals. But the final one was Carnegie’s own. “The third and
last danger against which I shall warn you is one which has wrecked many a fair craft which started well and
gave promise of a prosperous voyage. It is the perilous habit of indorsing—all the more dangerous, inasmuch as
it assails one generally in the garb of friendship.” He repeated his warnings against the dangers of
“indorsement” in a later article, “How to Win Fortune,” and again in his Autobiography.⁴⁸

 

CARNEGIE and his mother rode out the financial storms of 1873–74 in New York, a full day’s journey from his
Pittsburgh firms. Celebrating their good fortune perhaps, they changed their residence in 1874 from the
luxurious but dated St. Nicholas to the even more luxurious Windsor Hotel on Forty-sixth Street and Fifth
Avenue. Unlike the St. Nicholas, the Windsor was “removed from the bustling business centres” and had been
designed as a “family residence,” offering large suites with multiple bedrooms, each with its own bathroom and
fireplace. The hotel’s main dining room was on the second floor; there were smaller dining rooms “for the
accommodation of late diners or private parties”; and two children’s dining rooms, “one for those attended by
white servants and the other for such as have colored servants waiting on them.” The servants’ quarters were
carefully sequestered from the rest of the hotel, in the basement. For the convenience of businessmen, the
main floor had a newsstand, a telegraph office, and an elaborately designed barbershop.⁴⁹

“The world and his wife came to the Windsor, and I met them both,” James Bridge, who became Carnegie’s
assistant in the 1880s, wrote of his time with Carnegie at the Windsor. The Carnegies had their regular table
in the main dinning room, as did most of the permanent guests. Leland Stanford’s table was close to the
Carnegies’. George Pullman and wife, who stayed at the Windsor when in New York City, always came by to
“exchange greetings with Carnegie and shake his mother’s hand.” George Westinghouse, a business acquaintance
from Pittsburgh whom Carnegie had tried to help when he was struggling to patent and make money for his air
brake, spent winters at the hotel with “his somewhat eccentric wife…her blonde hair ‘bobbed’ and prettily
curled,” and their boy, “dressed in velvet and lace like Lord Fauntleroy.” Jay Gould, who lived at 578 Fifth
Avenue at Forty-sixth Street, stopped by to read the newspapers and talk business in the lobby with his broker
and railroad colleagues. The editor and writer Frank A. Munsey lived at the Windsor, as did Josh Billings, the
humorist and lecturer, who was one of Carnegie’s favorite authors.⁵⁰

Carnegie was, it appears, spending more time now with women of a marriageable age: at the theater, at dinner,
and riding in the park. As he approached forty, he may have been considering—but only considering—the
possibility of marriage. Sprinkled through his correspondence are lighthearted references to women, including
Miss Waller and a certain Miss Wright, whose name first appeared in a letter written to Gardie from London in
May 1872. Although the city was “overflowing—such a jam…we might even squeeze a small one, say Miss Wright,
into a place if only we had her here.” A year later, he was still asking after Miss Wright. “I trust Miss
Wright is now well—you don’t say—and that I shall see her next week.”⁵¹

He was acquiring something of a reputation as not only a bon vivant but a ladies’ man, or at least a man who
enjoyed being around young ladies. In February 1874, when Mrs. E. D. Loomis of Cincinnati, the mother of
DeWitt, his bookkeeper, heard that he was planning an excursion by rail to Yosemite and San Francisco, she
wrote to suggest he might take a friend of hers with him. “I have just returned from spending an evening with
my charming friend Mrs. D. Murphy, and when I told her I heard you were going to get up a party this summer
for a trip to the Yosemite Valley, she exclaimed ‘O,’ I wonder if he won’t invite us to chaperone his young
ladies, supposing of course you are to be the Napoleon of the party, and that party to be composed of young
and pretty girls.” There was “not the most remote probability,” Mrs. Loomis assured Carnegie, of her accepting
any invitation to accompany the party, but she wanted him to know that he “could not have a greater
acquisition to it in the form of an agreeable and fascinating woman than Carrie Murphy.”⁵²

One of the singular advantages of the Windsor was its proximity to the park and its nine miles of carefully
groomed carriage trails. Carnegie was seldom as happy as when he was on horseback, sitting high in the saddle,
boots polished to a shine, cap pitched at a jaunty angle, looking down on every man and woman standing.
Carnegie, the most sociable of people, seldom rode alone. Several “young ladies,” he admitted in his
Autobiography, were on his list of riding companions. Among them were his future wife, Louise Whitfield; Mary
Clark of Hartford, a friend of the family; the Shakespearean actress Ellen Terry; and a few women whose names
we cannot identify.⁵³

Carnegie put a great deal of money into his horses and carriages. They not only provided him and other
gentlemen of his era with an acceptable way to spend an afternoon with a proper woman; they were, in the last
decades of the nineteenth century, an essential element in everyday life. It is difficult in the twenty-first
century to comprehend the vital importance of horses to the metropolis—or the variety of vehicles they pulled
behind them: delivery carts, wagons, and wagonettes; hearses; sleighs; lightweight buggies and buckboards;
hansom cabs, broughams, phaetons, omnibuses, stagecoaches, and personal carriages. From Fourth to Sixth
Avenues and along the side streets in the Forties and Fifties, within walking distance of the Windsor Hotel,
were hundreds of storefront establishments catering to the horse-and-coaching set. Carnegie patronized dozens
of them, including several saddle, harness, and bridle and carriage makers; horseshoeing establishments;
tailors and importers of ladies’ riding habits. His horses were stabled at 58 West Forty-third Street.⁵⁴

He was always in the market for a good horse. In February 1882, a P. Tobin of the Philadelphia Riding Club
Stable wrote to tell him that he had found a “five year old Kentucky horse, brown color, highly bred and very
stylish,” to match the one Carnegie had purchased in May 1881. Tobin, knowing that Carnegie, unlike his fellow
millionaires, was less interested in racing or breeding his thoroughbreds than in riding with lady friends in
the park, assured his customer that the Kentucky horse, though “very spirited,” was easily handled. “I will
give him to my most timid lady customer without any hesitation or advice as to how she will handle him. He has
a slight quarter crack, but I will hold myself responsible that it will never amount to anything and would not
be noticed. I will keep this horse for you until I hear from you and I hope you will try and come over and see
him in action.”⁵⁵

Carnegie treated his horses as if they were family. He sent them to be cared for in New Jersey when he
traveled and had them shipped—along with his carriages—to Cresson for the summer in private railway cars,
courtesy of the Pennsylvania Railroad. The price for transportation from New York via ferry to Jersey City and
then Cresson in June 1880: “four horses, 16,000 lbs @43 cents per hundred: $68.80…and transportation free for
one man. Two carriages on flat car, 20,000 lbs @23 cents pr. 100:$46.”⁵⁶

 

CARNEGIE had moved to New York City because it was becoming the “literary” as well as the “financial” capital
of the New World. He had promised himself in late 1868 that he would, as soon as practicable—probably in two
years—“settle in Oxford & get a thorough education making the acquaintance of literary men.” Though he had
chosen New York rather than Oxford, he was dedicated to fulfilling the rest of the bargain he had made with
himself.⁵⁷

As in the past, he chose as his tutor and cicerone an older woman, Madame Anna Botta, the sixty-year-old wife
of a professor of Italian literature, who had for more than a quarter century presided over New York’s most
distinguished literary salon. From the 1840s and 1850s, celebrated writers, actors, and politicians who passed
through New York stopped at Madame Botta’s parlor to pay their respects and engage in the elevated
conversation she presided over. At her salons, one might encounter the actresses Fanny Kemble, Lydia
Sigourney, or Adelaide Ristori; Senators Henry Clay and Daniel Webster; writers Bayard Taylor and Margaret
Fuller; editor and poet William Cullen Bryant, and Edgar Allan Poe. As Madame Botta outlived her guests, they
were replaced by a new generation of writers and editors, including Henry Ward Beecher, Richard Watson Gilder,
Julia Ward Howe, Charles Dudley Warner, Robert Ingersoll, and Andrew White, the president of Cornell. “The
position of the Bottas in the literary and artistic world,” Carnegie later wrote admiringly, “enabled them to
draw together not only the best-known people of this country, but to a degree greater than any, as far as I
know, the most distinguished visitors from abroad, beyond the ranks of mere title or fashion. No home, I
think, in all the land compared with theirs in the number and character of its foreign visitors.” Carnegie had
sought admission to this salon in large part because it was short on “millionaires and fashionables” but
replete with “the literary, musical, professional, and artistic celebrities—the leading ministers, physicians,
painters, musicians, and actors, and especially the coming man or coming woman in these branches.” He wanted
to be judged—and accepted—as a man of culture, not just another millionaire recently moved to the great
metropolis.⁵⁸

Unlike the ill-spoken, ill-educated, and crudely dressed provincial businessmen who drove Edith Wharton’s New
York social elites to distraction, Carnegie had impeccable manners (learned earlier in Pittsburgh’s drawing
rooms), could quote lines from Burns and Shakespeare appropriate to any occasion, had traveled widely, and was
a great storyteller. He made no apologies for being a businessman or a Scotsman, but integrated these
attributes into his own complexly exotic persona. Approaching age forty, he had become slightly portly. His
white beard and graying hair were finely trimmed; his three-piece suits well tailored; his lack of stature
compensated by perfect posture. Intellectually curious, he had an appetite for new ideas. Though he could—and
often did—dominate the conversation, when in the company of people whose intellects he admired he restrained
himself, listening with rapt attention and good humor, before he contributed his opinions.

 

AS MUCH AS he might have preferred to dedicate his full time and energy to securing a privileged position
within New York’s literary circles, Carnegie could not afford to ignore Pittsburgh entirely. He was not
independently wealthy and had no large stocks of cash or rent-paying real estate to rely on. The largest part
of his fortune, indeed almost all of it, was tied up in his Pittsburgh iron and bridge firms and the plot of
land where construction had begun, but been halted, on the Edgar Thomson steel rail mill.

In 1874, Carnegie had planned on taking his mother and a large group of friends on a railroad excursion west
when the weather got warm; but William Coleman, the senior partner at Edgar Thomson whom he had invited along,
suggested they postpone their vacation and try instead to raise money in Europe to complete construction of
their steel mill.⁵⁹

Coleman recommended that Carnegie ask Alexander Holley, the plant’s designer, to accompany him to Europe. When
Holley learned that Carnegie was prepared to offer him $2,500 plus expenses, he accepted the invitation. “I
shall be prepared to devote the necessary time—say from four to six weeks, (besides voyages)—to your service,
in explaining E.T. advantages to capitalists, etc., and in visiting the various steel works and getting hold
of all such drawings and information as may be of value to the Company.”⁶⁰

The trip to Europe turned out to be more vacation than work for both of them, and for John Scott, another
partner whom Carnegie brought along at his expense. As Holley wrote his father from London in August, the
“money-raising part” of the business trip abroad was “abandoned” when Carnegie discovered that his Pittsburgh
associates could secure better terms at home than he could abroad. By the time Carnegie returned to the United
States in the fall, construction had started up again.⁶¹

It was not the best of times for iron and steel manufacturers whose major customers were the railroads. In
December 1874, just as E.T. began turning out its rails, Carnegie took the train to Philadelphia for an
emergency meeting of the American Iron and Steel Association. With demand for finished iron and steel products
drastically reduced, a committee of furnace owners had determined that the only way out of a spiraling price
war was for them all to voluntarily limit their output. After a heated discussion, a resolution mandating that
the furnace owners reduce production to one-half capacity was passed, with the proviso that it would not go
into effect until two thirds of the furnace owners signed it.⁶²

Two months later, the American Iron and Steel Association held its regular annual convention in Philadelphia,
which Carnegie also attended. Again, the delegates were greeted with a somber report on the state of the
industry. “The decline in the world’s demand for iron which commenced in 1873,” they were told, if they didn’t
already know it, “has continued during 1874, and, with the decline in demand there has ensued a resulting fall
in prices…. It has been most severely felt in the United States.”⁶³

In Pittsburgh, the iron manufacturers responded to the fall in prices and profits by cutting the wage rates of
the puddlers, who cooked the raw pig iron in their ovens, stirring, heating, and watching over it until it
became wrought iron. The puddlers were paid by the ton according to a preestablished “sliding scale.” When the
price of iron went up, so did the rates the puddlers were paid on every ton; when the price went down, so did
the rates, but never below a negotiated minimum. Though Carnegie would later intimate that the notion of the
sliding scale had been his, the idea had first been broached by the Sons of Vulcan, the puddlers’ union, in
their 1865 negotiations with Pittsburgh’s iron manufacturers. In 1867, the manufacturers had abandoned the
scale, but the iron workers went on strike and stayed out until it was reinstituted.

Now, in November 1874, after seven years of peace and stability, the iron manufacturers gave thirty days’
notice that they were going to terminate the existing scale and substitute, in its place, one with a lower
minimum. When the Vulcans refused to accept the new scale, the iron manufacturers, including Carnegie’s Union
Iron Mills, locked out their puddlers. The lockout continued in force through the spring, ending only in April
1875, when the iron manufacturers, who were losing contracts to firms outside Pittsburgh, “officially
capitulated” and invited the puddlers back to work at their old rates.⁶⁴

The Sons of Vulcan won their battle but not without great difficulty. It had not been easy to convince other
skilled workers to stay off the job to protect the puddlers’ wage rates. As soon as the lockout was called
off, they reached out to the unions that represented the other skilled metalworkers. In 1876, the Sons of
Vulcan joined the other metalworkers’ unions in the new and stronger Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel
Workers.

In the end, both labor and management suffered from the extended lockout: the workers lost months of wages;
the manufacturers, contracts for new work. The Amalgamated, which was born of the crisis, committed itself,
from this point on, to doing everything possible to avert future lockouts and strikes. The iron manufacturers,
for their part, recognized that they had little choice now but find a way to work with the new union, which
was too strong to ignore, but, fortunately, too conservatively led to pose any enormous problem, at least for
the moment.

Carnegie remained in New York City during the winter and early spring of 1874–75, leaving his partners in
Pittsburgh to manage the crisis, which they did, by following in lockstep with the other iron manufacturers.
There is no indication that he had strong opinions as yet about the unions or their sliding wage scale.

## NINE

## Driving the Bandwagon, 1875–1878

GEORGE THURSTON, who published one of the many centennial histories of Pittsburgh that appeared in 1876, was
near ecstatic in his description of the new Edgar Thomson steel mill at Braddock. “These works, standing…on
the very area of a famous frontier battle, are a striking illustration of the conquests of trade, the progress
of civilization, and yet more so of the progress and growth of Pittsburgh. No grander monument to the growth
of the nation, the progress of the city, or the triumph of American manufactures and of American mechanics,
could well be built, than this complete and comprehensive steel works.”¹

Everything about the works was designed to perfection. The first American steel manufacturers had had to
squeeze their converters into functioning iron mills. Alexander Holley was given a bare plot of land, 106
acres in size, equal to one hundred football fields or sixty-six New York City–sized blocks. He laid out the
transportation grids first and then placed the sheds, structures, and yards accordingly. As he later explained
in Engineering, he designed the Edgar Thomson steelworks “not with a view of making the buildings artistically
parallel with the existing roads or with each other, but of laying down convenient railroads with easy curves;
the buildings were made to fit the transportation.” The tracks that led to the two buildings in which coal was
burned were elevated so that the coal could be delivered in railroad cars straight from the mines and dumped,
without need for laborers to offload it, “directly upon the floors.”²

E.T. was supplied with pig iron by rail from the Lucy furnaces (a second furnace had been constructed in 1877)
in Lawrenceville, eleven miles away. On arriving at the steel mill, the pig iron, now solidified, was
re-melted in a 107-by 44-foot cupola house. The molten iron was then poured with two 12-ton tilting ladles
into 6-ton, egg-shaped converting vessels, heated by coke and mounted on axles. Blasts of air were shot into
the vessels—and through the iron—at high pressure. The air stoked the fire and burned away the carbon and
other impurities, which exited the top of the vessel in an avalanche of white flames and sparks. At this
signal, a small amount of Spiegel, an iron compound with a high percentage of manganese and carbon, was added
to the mix, “carburizing” the purified iron and converting it into steel. The vessel was then tipped onto its
side, pouring white-hot liquid steel into a casting ladle, which conveyed it to the molds.

[image]

The explosion of flame and sparks from the top of the converter, followed almost immediately by the flow of
molten steel, was both exhilarating and intimidating to those who witnessed it. In The Jungle, Upton
Sinclair’s fictional character Jurgis Rudkus, after applying for a job at a Chicago steel mill, is taken on a
tour of the “domelike building, the size of a big theater,” that housed the Bessemer converter. There before
him were

three giant caldrons, big enough for all the devils of hell to brew their broth in, full of something white
and blinding, bubbling and splashing, roaring as if volcanoes were blowing through it—one had to shout to be
heard in the place. Liquid fire would leap from these caldrons and scatter like bombs below—and men were
working there, seeming careless, so that Jurgis caught his breath with fright…. And suddenly, without an
instant’s warning, one of the giant kettles began to tilt and topple, flinging out a jet of hissing, roaring
flame. Jurgis shrank back appalled, for he thought it was an accident; there fell a pillar of white flame,
dazzling as the sun, swishing like a huge tree falling in the forest. A torrent of sparks swept all the way
across the building, overwhelming everything, hiding it from sight; and then Jurgis looked through the fingers
of his hands, and saw pouring out of the caldron a cascade of living, leaping fire, white with a whiteness not
of earth, scorching the eyeballs. Incandescent rainbows shone above it, blue, red, and golden lights played
about it; but the stream itself was white, ineffable. Out of regions of wonder it streamed, the very river of
life; and the soul leaped up at the sight of it, fled back upon it, swift and resistless, back into far-off
lands, where beauty and terror dwell.³

The steel that flowed out of the furnace was hardened into molds or shaped into multiton ingots, then loaded
on railway cars and transported along internal narrow-gauge track to the 380-foot-long rail mill, the largest
and perhaps most imposing structure on the lot. Here the ingots were successively rolled into smaller and
smaller shapes, until they left the finishing end of the mill as rails. Finally, they were loaded into their
own containers and transported on another internal low-level wide-gauge railway to the B&O and the
Pennsylvania Railroad tracks for shipment to their destinations.

“Our competitors in steel,” Carnegie noted in his Autobiography, “were at first disposed to ignore us. Knowing
the difficulties they had in starting their own steel works, they could not believe we would be ready to
deliver rails for another year, and declined to recognize us as competitors…. We sent our agent through the
country with instructions to take orders at the best prices he could obtain; and before our competitors knew
it, we had obtained a large number—quite sufficient to justify us in making a start.”⁴

In his telling of the tale, Carnegie presents the Edgar Thomson steelworks as the underdog, the new kid on the
block who must prove himself. He describes the challenges he and his associates encountered during the Panic
of 1873 and gives us thumbnail descriptions of key partners. He also pays special tribute to Captain Jones,
and then, almost as a postscript, concludes that success was inevitable. “So perfect was the machinery, so
admirable the plans, so skillful were the men selected by Captain Jones, and so great a manager was he
himself, that our success was phenomenal.”⁵

What he does not do, either in his Autobiography or any of his other writings, is take credit for the triumph
at Braddock. He did not claim that he, as an individual, had been responsible for the success of the venture.
Nor, for that matter, did he believe any of his fellow millionaires had accumulated their fortunes because of
their particular virtues or talents. On the contrary, as he explained in an article published in 1906 in the
North American Review, in “the commercial and industrial age in which we live…wealth has been produced as if
by magic, and fallen largely to the captains of industry, greatly to their own surprise.” Attempting to divine
the root cause behind the “difference in wealth” that marked this age, Carnegie found it not in “labour, nor
skill. No, nor superior ability, sagacity, nor enterprise, nor greater public service. The community created
the millionaire’s wealth. While he slept it grew as fast as when he was awake.”⁶

To illustrate his point, Carnegie offered his readers the story of a millionaire who had made his fortune in
Pittsburgh. Although he did not explicitly identify himself as that millionaire, there was no mistaking the
autobiographical character of the narrative. The first and most significant step in the future steelmaker’s
rise to success was a fortuitous accident. Through no foresight on his part, he had been “so fortunate as to
settle in Pittsburgh when it had just been discovered that some of the coalfields, of which it is the centre,
produced a coking-coal admirably adapted for iron-ore smelting…. Everything indicated that here indeed was the
futureiron city, where steel could be produced more cheaply than in any other location in the world.
Naturally, his attention was turned in this direction. He wooed the genius of the place. This was not anything
extraordinarily clever. It was in the air. He is entitled to credit for having abiding faith in the future of
his country and of steel, and for risking with his young companions not only all he had, which was little or
nothing, but all they could induce timid bankers to lend from time to time.” The key to their success was the
rapidly growing domestic population which demanded their products. “Without new populous communities far and
near, no millionairedom was possible for them. The increasing population was always the important factor in
their success.”⁷

What Carnegie was trying to say was that his success was due, in large part, to his luck in being in the right
place, Pittsburgh, at the right time, the last decades of the nineteenth century, when the nation and its
railway networks were expanding westward. Most of his biographers have assumed that Carnegie succeeded as a
steelmaker primarily because he ruthlessly undersold his competition, stole their orders, forced them out of
business, and established a monopoly. This explanation presupposes that the steel manufacturers competed with
one another on price, which was seldom the case. On the contrary, they allocated market shares among
themselves, based on productive capacity. Because Carnegie was always among the largest producers, he got the
largest share of the market. The key to his success was the scale of his operation and his insistence on
producing more each year than he had the year before.

The railroads, their major customers, did not encourage price competition among the steelmakers, but did what
they could to make sure each of them succeeded. “Railroads and steel mills were not,” as Thomas J. Misa has
argued in A Nation of Steel, “atomistic actors meeting in a classical free market.” With considerable capital
invested in the steel companies, the railroads had an incentive to make sure the mills made a decent profit
selling their rails. Any reduction in steel company profits would diminish the value of their investments.
There was another reason why the railroads were committed to securing the financial health of the steel
companies: the steel producers were well on their way to becoming the railroads’ largest freight customers.
The higher their profits, the more steel they would produce; the more steel they produced, the greater the
shipping charges they would pay the railroads to transport finished rails and coal, coke, iron ore, and
limestone.⁸

Rail prices were usually determined not in free market competition, but by gentlemanly negotiations among the
steel companies and between them and the railroads. The nation’s ten steel manufacturers were a cozy little
group. With few exceptions, their plants were designed and constructed by Alexander Holley, with whom they
still consulted. They shared the same basic patents and had organized themselves as the Bessemer Association,
which divided royalties on those patents and licensed (or, more often, refused to license) new plants to use
the patents. As the holder of the critical patents needed to produce Bessemer steel, the association was able
to block the construction of new steel mills, thereby guaranteeing its members a healthy profit.⁹

On June 1, 1875, three weeks before the plant was scheduled to go on line, Carnegie asked Shinn to get in
touch with Tom Scott and request permission to bid on the following year’s Pennsylvania Railroad order.
“Unless Mr. Scott can aid us here I fear before we get a chance Pennsylvania Steel and Cambria will be quietly
arranged with for the 500 tons steel required. I think you should address a communication asking permission to
offer for them and Mr. Scott should see to it…. [P.S.] The harder we fight for this the sooner our friends
will agree to our sharing of offers especially if Mr. Scott is going to offer the proposed resolution.”¹⁰

The quietly assured tone of the letter is indicative of Carnegie’s confidence that, with Tom Scott behind him,
his competitors would have no choice but to cooperate with him. No one wanted a bidding war. Carnegie was a
known quantity in Pittsburgh and a familiar of presidents Daniel Morrell of Cambria (whom he had tried to hire
at E.T.) and Samuel Felton, the former railroad president who now ran Pennsylvania Steel. Cambria and
Pennsylvania Steel, founding members of the Bessemer Association, were owned in part by the Pennsylvania
Railroad, delivered most of their rails to it, and cooperated with one another—and the railroad—on production
quotas and price schedules. One June 10, 1875, Daniel Morrell invited William Shinn to the meeting in
Philadelphia at which the firms divided up the market. It made perfect sense for Cambria Iron and Pennsylvania
Steel to include the Edgar Thomson works in their informal cartel, as they could not, by themselves, meet the
Pennsylvania Railroad’s demand for new steel rails. In the end, E.T. ended up with a share of the rail order
equal to that of the other Pennsylvania steel mills.¹¹

With this order guaranteed, E.T. had no problem turning a profit from the very first day. After eight months
of production, Carnegie, in a letter to Shinn, was already extolling the profitability of the new mill: “It is
a grand concern, and sure to make us all a fortune. With you at the helm, and my pulling an oar outside, we
are bound to put it at the head of rail making concerns…. Where is there such a business.” Carnegie estimated
profits of, on average, $40,000 for each $100,000 in stock, or a 40 percent return on investment. “Some years
we shall do far better, but as an average it is not too sanguine.”¹²

Carnegie then set out to establish a working relationship with its chief rival, the Baltimore & Ohio. John
Garrett, the B&O president, had delayed switching to steel because, his railroads having suffered severe
service disruptions and financial setbacks during and immediately after the Civil War, he could not afford
them.¹³

Carnegie, knowing that the tariff had raised the price of steel imports so drastically that Garrett would have
to switch to domestically produced steel, had cleverly sited his new plant on the B&O tracks. In November
1875, he called on Mr. Garrett personally on a Saturday morning to discuss the possibility of selling steel
rails to the B&O. He followed up with a note to William Keyser, the B&O’s second vice president in charge of
purchasing. The B&O would, he estimated, require up to 7,000 tons of new steel rails in the year to come.
Carnegie asked for “a small order now to prevent the stoppage of our works during the winter months.” It was,
he argued, in the railroad’s interest to keep E.T. open and prosperous as the steel company was shipping its
coke and other raw materials to Pittsburgh on B&O trains. Should E.T. be forced to stop production for lack of
orders, the B&O would forfeit considerable freight charges it might otherwise collect.¹⁴

Knowing that the B&O was short of cash, Carnegie offered to take “car wheels and old axles” (which he would
then melt down and reuse elsewhere) in exchange for steel rails. If the B&O preferred to pay cash, he would
sell the rails outright for $66 a ton. Garrett chose neither option, but instead declared that he was going to
convert the rail mill he had erected at Cumberland, Maryland, from iron to steel and produce his own rails.
Carnegie volunteered to give him an estimate of how much the conversion would cost. His figures must have been
persuasive because Garrett dropped the idea and, after failing to incite a bidding war between Pennsylvania
Steel and E.T., divided his order between them.¹⁵

 

“SHINN BOSSED the show; McCandless lent it dignity and standing; Phipps took in the pennies at the gate and
kept the pay-roll down; Tom Carnegie kept everybody in a good humor…Andy looked after the advertising and
drove the band wagon!” So reported an Edgar Thomson insider to James Bridge, Carnegie’s former secretary who,
after a falling out, wrote a rather unflattering, but not entirely inaccurate Inside History of the Carnegie
Steel Company.¹⁶

Carnegie appointed himself chief salesman for Edgar Thomson. In mid-December 1874, months before the works
went on line, he wrote Shinn to tell him that he had “been thinking that this office [at 57 Broadway] might
try to represent the concern & do its best to obtain orders. No commission received. The Company might pay
part of cost, rent, stationery, clerks etc. We should want more room than we now have—but there will be time
enough to talk over this. Meanwhile we should not lose a day in informing the railroads [that E.T. was
prepared to take orders].”¹⁷

He was a master booster and salesman for steel rails, as he had earlier been for iron bridges. Even James
Bridge, his harshest critic, was moved to admiration by his skill. “The part at first selected by Andrew
Carnegie for himself was the development of outside trade and the procurement of orders. Here he displayed an
originality so marked that it amounted to genius. Endowed with a ready wit, an excellent memory for stories,
and a natural gift for reciting them, he became a social favorite in New York and Washington, and never missed
a chance to make a useful acquaintance. His mental alertness, ready speech, and enthusiastic temperament made
him a delightful addition to a dinner party; and many an unconscious hostess, opening her doors to the little
Scotchman from Pittsburgh, has also paved the way to a sale of railroad material.”¹⁸

It was difficult not to like the little man built like a pony, with broad shoulders and a white mane.
“Carnegie’s sunny personality radiated warmth and light,” Bridge recalled. “He loved to find his own joy of
living reflected by those about him. He was the most consistently happy man I ever knew.”¹⁹

Carnegie’s charm was not a come-on or a performance intended to solicit or win business contacts. Good
conversation was, for him, not a means to an end but an end in itself. He was as proud of his gift of gab as
he was of his business acumen. With an easy, open smile, he was easy to befriend. If some among those
befriended might later prove helpful in his business, he would have been a fool not to follow through. Andrew
Carnegie and his steel business were one entity. It only made sense that personal friends would become company
friends—and vice versa.

He approached his colleagues from the railroad industry, like Sidney Dillon at the Union Pacific and Collis
Huntington at the Central Pacific, “as brother capitalists.” Without preamble or excuse, he asked that they
“give me a preference” should they be in the market for steel. Those he had helped out in years past were
reminded that he had done them a favor and asked for a favor in return. “It was,” he added, “good business for
them to do it,” as his steel was the best—and cheapest—product on the market.²⁰

Years later, testifying before a House of Representatives investigating committee, Carnegie took issue with
those who believed that huge corporations would always outperform partnerships. Carnegie Steel, though
incorporated by the state of Pennsylvania, was administered not as a corporation but as an old-fashioned
partnership, with “the partners managing their own business.” The firm was an extension of their persons. If
it failed, they failed. If it succeeded, they succeeded. Partners were there for the duration and could be
trusted to follow through on their promises. The railroad presidents he dealt with knew that he stood behind
his products and, trusting him, trusted his steel.²¹

 

THE MID-1870S were not an auspicious time to throw more steel rails onto the domestic market. By the fall of
1875, when the first rails were rolled at Edgar Thomson, the depression that followed the panic was at its
height—and the iron and steel business at its nadir. The railroads had virtually stopped buying new rails;
those that absolutely needed them had no cash, but were instead offering securities and/or notes. Carnegie,
anticipating that he might have to accept railroad securities instead of currency for his rails, wrote to
Junius Morgan in August 1875, the week before the works opened: “Our ET steel works start this week—shall make
40,000 tons steel rails per annum.” He inquired whether Morgan would buy the “good railroad paper” he expected
to acquire as payment for his rails.²²

Having secured his first orders from the Pennsylvania Railroad, Carnegie used that bit of information to win
contracts with its affiliates. He wrote Franklin B. Gowen, president of the Philadelphia & Reading, on
Christmas Eve 1875, to remind him of his earlier “promise to try a lot of our steel rails…. We have just been
awarded 5,000 tons by the Pennsylvania Railroad—should like very much indeed to have you test our rails in
comparison with others upon your line—Prices at all times equal to the most favorable.” Similar letters were
sent to dozens of other railway presidents. As Carnegie asked only for a trial for his new rails—and promised
to undersell his competitors—it was difficult to turn him down. Few did.²³

 

CARNEGIE quickly catapulted himself into the lead position among the Edgar Thomson partners. His critics,
James Bridge chief among them, charged that he gained majority control of the company by ruthlessly shoving
aside his partners and extorting their shares. That was not the case. Each of the partners had pledged to pay
for his interest in the company on the installment plan. When, following the Panic of 1873, they had trouble
doing so, Carnegie bought them out. “That is what gave me my leading interest in this steel business…. I had
to buy so many of them out during the panic that I became the controlling” partner.²⁴

Among the partners who sold their shares to Carnegie was William Coleman, who had been the principal force
behind the company’s founding. Coleman had asked Carnegie for a loan so that he could hold on to his E.T.
shares, but Carnegie, short of cash, offered instead to buy Coleman’s ten shares in the steel company, pay him
6 percent annual interest on his $100,000 investment over the next five years, and return the principal in
years six, seven, and eight. Coleman tried to get a “better bargain,” but after six months of negotiations—and
consultations with Tom Carnegie—he accepted Carnegie’s terms.²⁵

In 1879, Carnegie, traveling in Shanghai, received word that William Coleman had died. In a lengthy paragraph,
one of the few to be excised from his travel journal when it was published by Scribner’s four years later,
Carnegie converted Coleman’s death into a personal tragedy: for him. “I could not realize for a time that I
was to miss upon my return one of my oldest, best, and dearest friends—one who had been a friend in boyhood to
me, when the aid of such a man counted for so much. Why did I not appreciate him sufficiently while he lived?
But we never do. The finest characteristics of our friends seem only to shine with the brightest luster when
we are denied their presence on earth.”²⁶

 

THOUGH EDGAR THOMSON had gone on line in a depressed business climate, Carnegie did not let this slow him
down. On the contrary, he appeared almost to glory in the adverse conditions. Other entrepreneurs might have
reduced output until the market was stronger, but Carnegie pushed Shinn to keep the new plant operating seven
days a week, twenty-four hours a day.

Steel rail prices fluctuated wildly through the 1870s and early 1880s. In 1873, the railroads could afford and
were paying up to $120 a ton. By the fall of 1875, when E.T. rolled its first rails, the price at which the
railroads were willing to buy them had fallen to $66. By December 1876, it was down to $52; a year later, to
$42.²⁷

Where his competitors, in bad times, reduced production, cut shifts, and laid off workers rather than accept
orders at low prices, Carnegie insisted that E.T. take whatever orders it could get, no matter what the price,
in order to keep the plant running and the workforce intact. The key to success was pumping up volume and not
worrying about the profit margin per unit. “You know my views,” he wrote Shinn that December, only months
after the first rails had been rolled, “fill the works at a small margin of profit—get our rails upon the
leading lines next year. The year after, take my word for it, you will make profit enough.” “Don’t be greedy,”
he warned Shinn the following month, “‘small profits & large sales’ in golden letters above your desk is
respectfully recommended.”²⁸

Carnegie’s tactics made little sense to his competitors and several of his partners. “The Cambria people,”
Shinn wrote back in December 1875, “are becoming very bitter against us for making, as they claim, unnecessary
concessions in prices, so early in the season, each reduction fixing the market at a price which will be still
further reduced at the next sale. Our Board are very apprehensive of bad effects from this policy, and while I
know your view of our policy is, to fill up at any price not involving loss, I feel it my duty to advise you
that the managers are of the opinion that it would be better to make less tonnage at a fair profit.”²⁹

Carnegie’s response was that he was willing to cooperate with his competitors, but not if it meant restricting
production in his mills. If Cambria and Pennsylvania Steel agreed to fix prices for rails in the West, as they
were already doing in the East, Carnegie would be prepared to enter into an agreement with them. But until
that happened, it was every company for itself.³⁰

By early 1877, Carnegie had gotten his way. Daniel Morrell at Cambria recognized the folly of trying to
compete with the Carnegie juggernaut and agreed to enter into a variety of pooling and price agreements with
his new rival. The two companies divided orders, purchased and transported iron ores from the Great Lakes
together, and in May agreed to “appoint joint Agents” to solicit new orders for rails in the West.³¹

 

THOUGH HE HAD inserted himself into most major areas of decision making, Carnegie rarely visited Pittsburgh.
He seldom attended board or executive committee meetings and took no administrative title or position in his
new steel company. He and his partners knew from the very beginning that there would be limited face-to-face
communications between them. New York City was just too far away from Braddock.

It takes ninety minutes today to fly from New York to Pittsburgh and another thirty minutes to drive from the
airport to Braddock. In the mid-1870s, the trip took fifteen hours. Travelers to Pittsburgh began their
journey at the Cortlandt Street pier on the North River, as it was then known, where they boarded the ferry
for Jersey City. The “Fast Line” train departed at 9:30 A.M. and arrived in Philadelphia at 12:20 P.M., where
passengers boarded the express to Pittsburgh. The first stop after Philadelphia was Harrisburg, where the
train stopped at about four for a quick dinner break. There was a second stop at Altoona around eight o’clock.
If the weather was good, the track clear, and there were no delays, the train reached Pittsburgh sometime
after midnight. The trip to Braddock took another half hour.³²

Carnegie relied heavily on the telegraph to communicate with Pittsburgh. Telegrams offered instant
communication, but they were unreliable for many business purposes. The cost was prohibitive, the telegrams
were delivered in ungainly and almost unreadable formats, and there was no guarantee of privacy. To protect
themselves from eavesdropping operators, businesses developed elaborate cipher books. Large corporations had
their own printed and distributed to key personnel. Smaller ones bought blank cipher books and filled in the
words and phrases they were most likely to use in their messages.

The black leatherbound book marked “1878” found in Carnegie’s papers at the Library of Congress is an example
of the self-made code book. Each page has two columns: on the left, an alphabetized series of words, some
real, some invented; on the right, the Edgar Thomson code. In coding or decoding telegrams, Carnegie, or more
likely Gardie, scrolled down the left-hand column. “Abaft” meant “Have received letter of 1st”; “Avenge” was
“We are awaiting reply to telegram of”; “Laugh”—“Delivered at Boston Massachusetts by rail”; “slow”—“Bank of
Pittsburgh”; “spray”—“Cambria Iron Company.” By 1896, the company was publishing its own “Private Code for Use
of the Carnegie Steel Company, Limited, and its Partners and Agents” with both columns preprinted. The 1896
cipher book was 192 pages long, with sixty to seventy entries on each page.³³

The primary vehicles of communication between Carnegie and his partners and managers were the detailed cost
sheets delivered monthly by U.S. mail to his office at 57 Broadway, then marked up and sent back to
Pittsburgh, often with lengthy memos attached. Every month he was sent, on his request, a statement of the
costs per ton for raw materials, labor, maintenance, repairs. A quick learner, with a head for figures and a
prodigious memory, he kept track of everything: the price of limestone, the amount of coke used to smelt a ton
of pig iron, the length of time a cast-iron mold should last before wearing out, the number of tons of steel
ingots produced per heat in the furnaces. He was preoccupied with getting the lowest possible costs—on
limestone, coal, coke, ores, freight rates, and labor. “Carnegie never wanted to know the profits,” Charles
Schwab remarked much later to publisher Clarence Barron. “He always wanted to know the cost.”³⁴

When Carnegie discovered an item that cost more than he thought it should have, he asked for an explanation.
If the explanation were not forthcoming or insufficiently enlightening, he followed up with a rebuke and a
warning to pay more attention in the future. One of the advantages of being at a distance from Pittsburgh and
dealing with numbers on a cost sheet was that Carnegie was spared face-to-face confrontations with
flesh-and-blood supervisors who might not be pulling their weight and laborers whose wage rates were going to
be reduced. Since leaving the railroad, he had purposefully constructed a life that kept him away from men
with shovels. He had no taste for the daily grind of superintending a workforce, no desire to run roughshod
over people.

Surprisingly, given later developments, Carnegie paid little attention to his workers, their attempts at
unionization, or their pay scales through most of the 1870s. He had, as far as we can tell, no input into his
partners’ decision in late 1874 to join the other iron mill owners in locking out their puddlers. His letters
to Pittsburgh were more likely to touch on the price of limestone, the quality of iron ore, the availability
of coke, the costs of freight shipments. Labor was, for him, simply another item in his cost sheet, one that
was being efficiently controlled by his on-site managers.

At E.T., he relied on Captain Jones to get the most out of his large and growing workforce. Both men supported
the industry wide “sliding scales” that had determined wage rates in the metal trades since 1865. Skilled
labor, Carnegie believed, was entitled to share capital’s prosperity in good times, but only if it agreed to
share its sacrifices in slack times. Friction between capital and labor would be eliminated forever, he would
later explain in a 1886 Forum article, if both sides could agree to “a plan by which the men will receive high
wages when their employers are receiving high prices for the product, and hence are making large profits; and,
per contra, when the employers are receiving low prices for product, and therefore small if any profits, the
men will receive low wages.”³⁵

In theory, the “sliding” wage scale appeared fair; in practice, it had worked rather well in the metal trades.
But there was a fatal flaw in the scheme. While capital and labor could with comparative ease agree on how to
share the wealth in good times, there was no consensus on how to share sacrifices in bad times. When markets
soured, prices fell, and profit margins dipped, capitalists might rein in personal and corporate spending, but
their sacrifices seldom endangered their own or their families’ well-being. Wage workers, on the contrary, no
matter how skilled they might be, existed at the margins of prosperity. To ask them to accept cuts in wages
that would reduce their take-home pay to less than they needed to feed, clothe, and keep their families warm
in winter was far different from asking capitalists to accept smaller profit margins. The workers, of course,
recognized this and built into the sliding scale a minimum wage rate.

Captain Jones expected Carnegie to pay the Edgar Thomson skilled steelworkers well so that he, Jones, could
work them hard. Just as Carnegie did not stint on buying the highest-grade ore, so should he not hesitate to
employ the highest-grade workforce. Years later, testifying before a congressional committee, Carnegie
parroted almost verbatim Jones’s message to him: “You have got to pay men in this country the wages you can
get the best men for. Labor is a commodity like anything else…. It pays to get the best men and pay the
highest wages for labor…. Fewer men do your work, and you are getting honest, respectable, sober men.”³⁶

Jones’s and Carnegie’s commitment to decent wages was commendable. Still, there is no gainsaying the
inevitable callousness that resulted from their looking at labor in the abstract as just another commodity,
one of many “inputs” in their production system. “Had an unfortunate accident this morning,” Jones informed
Carnegie in March 1877. “Rope on cupola hoist broke and cage fell catching the Hoist Boy in the act of
crossing under, crushing him to a jelly. It was caused by the boy’s carelessness, and disobedience of order
and the poor fellow paid the penalty with his life. Delayed Works slightly. Damage slight.”³⁷

Let it suffice that the “poor fellow” is not given a name and is held accountable for his own death. In the
end, what appears to matter most for Jones and Carnegie is that the accident only “slightly” slowed down
production and that the “damage” was minimal.

Even in extolling the work habits of their workers, the captain and Carnegie seldom referred to them as
individuals. When, in March 1878, Carnegie pushed Jones to speed up production to meet new orders, the
captain, demurring, reminded him of a recent horse race in Louisville: “You noted that they did not rush the
horses on the first mile, but aimed at a gait that would give a good four mile average…now in conclusion you
let me handle this nag in this race, I think I will keep her on the track, and may keep her nose in front. I
think at the end of this year I will have her ahead, and when we stop to rub down, you will find her in
excellent condition.”³⁸

Though Carnegie would, in later years, profess himself a supporter of organized labor, neither he nor his
unacknowledged mentor, Jones, believed in collective bargaining. They did not intend to give their
steelworkers the same control over the pace and rhythm of work that the puddlers exercised in the iron mills.
Nor did they believe they had to.

The technologies of iron-and steelmaking were radically different. Unlike steel, which was cooked in huge
converters, iron had to be “puddled” manually by highly skilled artisans, who stirred the molten mass with an
iron rod inserted through a hole in the furnace door. The puddlers worked in two-man teams, spelling one
another just before exhaustion set in. They were their own supervisors. Only they knew how long each “heat”
was going to take, when it was time to pour off the molten metal, and when it was time to take a break. By
custom—codified by union rules—the puddlers ran five heats a day, which generally took about ten hours to
complete. On Saturday, they devoted a half day to repairing equipment and cleaning out the furnaces; on
Sunday, they rested.

As long as the puddlers remained at the center of the production process, there was no way to expand output
other than by building more furnaces and hiring more puddlers. One of the great advantages of the Bessemer
process—at least from the point of view of the employers—was that it eliminated the puddlers and their control
over the workplace. In the Bessemer converters, the “stirring” of the molten metal was not done by puddlers
wielding iron rods, but by air blasts, which could be regulated by “managers.” This meant that the pace of
work could be sped up as fast as the technology would allow. While the puddlers managed only five heats a day
or twenty-five a week, Carnegie’s Bessemer furnaces, operating twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week,
could run more than one hundred heats.

Because they employed no puddlers and their mill was located in Braddock, just beyond the Pittsburgh city
limits, Carnegie and his partners were able to detour around the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel
Workers which represented the skilled metalworkers in Pittsburgh. Edgar Thomson rolled its first mills as a
non-union shop. Its owners were determined that it remain as such. In November 1876, barely a year after the
works had begun operations, Carnegie and Jones shut down operations for routine maintenance and repairs. There
was nothing out of the ordinary in such a shutdown, especially of a steel plant which, unlike the iron mills,
operated twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. Workers were accustomed to being sent on hiatus—without
pay—while machinery was overhauled. In December, five weeks after the shutdown, Captain Jones announced that
the works were going to reopen, but only to those workers who agreed to sign an “ironclad” agreement to “join
no Union and quit all you belong to,” modeled on the one Daniel Morrell had instituted at Cambria. Jones
simultaneously announced that the Edgar Thomson mills would henceforth pay the same wage rate that the
non-union workers at Cambria were receiving. When some of Carnegie’s men refused to sign the agreements, they
were barred for life from returning to the site.³⁹

 

HAVING EXPELLED the Amalgamated from the E.T. works, Carnegie and Jones were better prepared than most
employers, certainly better prepared than the railroads, to weather the storms that swept through
Pittsburgh—and the nation—in July 1877, when the trainmen went on strike. Like the iron industry, the
railroads had been hit hard by the Panic of 1873 and had reacted by cutting wages. Three and a half years
later, their profit rates still endangered, as much from financial malfeasance as the lingering effects of the
panic, the railroads instituted a second round of wholesale wage reductions. On May 24, 1877, Tom Scott
announced that all Pennsylvania Railroad employees who earned more than a dollar a day would be cut 10 percent
on June 1.

As the engineers were the most highly paid, the least readily replaced, and the best organized of the
trainmen, their actions were carefully monitored in the days that followed Scott’s announcement. If they went
out on strike, the rest of the railroad’s employees would certainly follow.

Though Carnegie had not worked for the railroad for more than a decade, he felt obligated to intervene. A
prolonged railroad strike would have a devastating effect on the local economy and on the companies, like his
own, which relied on the railroad for orders. On May 29, the day before he was to sail for Liverpool for his
summer vacation and two days before the Pennsylvania Railroad’s wage cut was to take effect, Carnegie wrote a
personal letter to more than a dozen engineers, offering unsolicited advice: “I am not interested any more in
the Pennsylvania Railroad, either pecuniarily or officially; but I do profess to have a lasting interest in
its welfare and in the welfare of the men, like yourself, with whom I was associated for many of the best
years of my life and I wish to express to you my opinion, as a friend, that, taking into consideration all the
circumstances, the Engineers should acquiesce in the reduction as proposed. These are trying times and the
country must now bear the penalty of past inflation, and no class can escape contributing its share.” The
railroad, Carnegie insisted, had “dealt fairly with their employees” and had “not been unwilling to share
their prosperity with them.” It was now the employees’ obligation to reciprocate and accept the wage cut. If
they decided to “refuse to serve for reduced compensation,” Carnegie warned, they would not “carry public
opinion” with them.⁴⁰

While Carnegie was in the mid-Atlantic on his way to Liverpool, a grievance committee of engineers and firemen
representing the local brotherhoods met with Tom Scott in Philadelphia to discuss the rate reduction.
Following the meeting, the committee agreed to accept the cut. It appeared that the railroads would have their
way.

Early in July, Captain Jones closed down the steelworks for repairs and to “put in some additional machinery.”
The new machinery worked “admirably,” he wanted Carnegie to know, and “gives us complete control of rail from
rolls to hot bed, and also allows us to dispense with services of two men and two boys, saving us at least
$100 per month on wages, and as the machine did not cost of $100 you will see that it is a very good
investment. We are running Works under tight rein.”⁴¹

Five days after Jones’s letter, less than 200 miles away in Martinsburg, West Virginia, firemen and brakemen
working for the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad, upon being informed that their wages were being reduced by 10
percent, walked off their jobs. The West Virginia militia, deployed to keep rail traffic moving, joined the
strikers instead. The strike quickly spread to other railroads and other cities, including Pittsburgh, where
by July 20 it encompassed even the reluctant engineers who six weeks earlier had accepted the wage reduction.

When the Pittsburgh militia refused to disperse the strikers who had gathered at the railroad yards, six
hundred militiamen from Philadelphia were dispatched to protect railroad property and end the strike. They
arrived on Saturday, July 22, and that same day fired into a crowd of unarmed, unemployed, and angry trainmen
and civilians at the Outer Depot on Twenty-eighth Street. The crowd, incensed and terrified by the gunfire—and
the sight of twenty fallen comrades—surged forward to repulse the soldiers. They moved on to attack
Pennsylvania Railroad property, destroying more than a hundred locomotives, two thousand railway cars, and
almost every building in the yard.

And then there was quiet, an eerie silence suffused by the acrid smell of smoke. Having wreaked their
vengeance on the Pennsylvania Railroad, the crowds retreated. There were reports that mill workers in the city
and the adjoining suburbs were preparing to join the railroaders in what some hoped—and others feared—might be
the beginning of a general strike. Many workers, including those from the tubeworks at McKeesport and
Carnegie’s steel mill at Braddock, expressed their solidarity with the railroad men by leaving their jobs on
July 24 and parading in their support. They did not, however, go out on strike.

The events of July 1877 pushed local labor leaders to step up their organizing at the workplace and to enter
the political arena through the newly established Greenback Labor Party. But they did not appear to have any
long-term effects at Edgar Thomson or the other Pittsburgh iron and steel mills. Though Carnegie and the
manufacturers had been frightened by the specter of a general strike, they concluded, in the end, that the
cause of the uprising had been the railroads’ intransigence and the local authorities’ incompetence. Carnegie
and his partners would continue to work with the Amalgamated in the iron mills where it was well established,
but do everything they could to prevent it from establishing a beachhead at Edgar Thomson.⁴²

Confident that he had nothing to fear from organized labor, Carnegie, in May 1878 from his safe haven in New
York City, suggested to Captain Jones that as steel prices hovered around $40, an all-time low, it might be
necessary to reduce wages across the board. Jones “earnestly” implored him to

leave good enough alone. Don’t think of any further reductions. Our men are working hard and faithfully,
believing that hard pan has been reached. Let them once get the notion in their heads that wages are to be
further reduced and we will lose heavily. I am or have promised rewards, if we accomplish certain output. It
looks as if what I am aiming at will be accomplished. So of all things, don’t think of reducing wages. Now
mark what I tell you. Our labor is the cheapest in the country. Our men have “Esprit de corps,” and our cost
of maintenance is way under that of any other works. Low wages does not always imply cheap labor. Good wages
and good workmen I know to be the cheapest labor. Our men are taking good care of our property and are pulling
with us so heartily that I even can’t dream of again attacking them.⁴³

Carnegie—recognizing that Captain Jones knew better than he how hard his workingmen could be
pushed—acquiesced. Wage rates would not be cut in 1878.

## TEN

## Round the World, 1878–1881

WHEN A.B. FARQUHAR, a Pennsylvania businessman, mentioned to Carnegie that he was always sure to be in his
office by “seven in the morning,” Carnegie remarked laughingly:

“‘You must be a lazy man if it takes you ten hours to do a day’s work.’

“‘What I do,’ he said, ‘is to get good men, and I never give them orders. My directions seldom go beyond
suggestions. Here in the morning I get reports from them. Within an hour I have disposed of everything, sent
out all of my suggestions, the day’s work is done, and I am ready to go out and enjoy myself.’”¹

What was most remarkable about Carnegie’s newfound success as a capitalist was how little it required of him.
At each stage of his business career from bobbin boy to steelmaker, he had worked less and earned more. Since
moving to New York City, in his middle thirties, and settling into a state of semiretirement, his income had
increased exponentially. Carnegie had no delusions at all about the virtues of hard work. He avoided the topic
of “diligence” in his lectures, speeches, and articles on “how to succeed in business.” On the contrary, he
took great pride in his own rather idiosyncratic work habits. He had become, as Farquhar noted in his memoir,
an “absentee landlord.” With an eerie similarity to the English landed gentry he so despised, Carnegie had
established a residence in the city, a day’s journey from the land that provided his succor, and left his
estates in the hands of superintendents.

With his partners watching over the business in Pittsburgh, Carnegie could devote more of his time and energy
to self-education, literary and cultural pursuits, and his nascent career as a philanthropist. Contrary to a
common, but quite mistaken notion, Carnegie began giving away his money long before he retired. Although he
did not, like his contemporary John D. Rockefeller, regard philanthropy as a “religious duty” and had not, as
Rockefeller had, donated 6 percent of his first paycheck to charity, he was by age forty giving away
significant sums of money.²

Carnegie’s first formal benefactions were to Dunfermline, to which he donated £5,000 in 1874 for a combination
recreation and health club, to be known as the Carnegie baths. The centerpiece of the facility was the 70-by
30-foot swimming “pond,” with a smaller pond in another part of the building and separate “Turkish, sitz,
vapour, and plunge baths.” Carnegie placed control of the baths in the hands of a group of local trustees,
chosen by him.

The baths were formally dedicated, in his presence, in the summer of 1877 in a grand event, fully covered in
the local papers. The provost opened the proceedings by toasting Carnegie. He was followed by “Mr. Wilson,
Chairman of the Associated Swimming Clubs of Scotland [who] then pointed out, in a very forcible manner, the
importance of swimming as a branch of science and as a means of promoting sanitary reform—giving some
excellent illustrations of the same.” After members of the Swimming Clubs had demonstrated the standard
strokes, as well as “ornamental swimming; plunging, touching, and turning; diving, sculling, floating, and
spinning,” some of the local gentlemen, “including one clergyman and several members of Town Council—had a
swim in the pond.” Carnegie closed the proceedings with a short speech. He hoped the baths would be used “and
would lead to good results, more especially among the working classes. If such was the effect, he would, he
was sure, be amply repaid, and he wished the Council to take the baths as an evidence of the deep and abiding
interest he had always had, and ever would have in the prosperity of his native town.”³

 

WITH MORE free time and money in his pocket, Carnegie was able to indulge himself in his favorite pastime:
reading and in preparing himself for the literary career that had long been his dream. In childhood, he had
had to rely on the kindness of others for reading material. A rich man now, he could indulge himself in buying
and subscribing to books and journals. In 1880 alone, he purchased subscriptions from Brentano’s Literary
Emporium at 39 Union Square for dozens of American and British literary and political journals, including
Harper’s and Harper’s Weekly, St. Nicholas, Leslie’s, The Nation, Bullinger’s Monitor Guide, Blackwood’s
Magazine, Contemporary Reviews, Fortnightly, Nineteenth Century, North American Review, Punch (of London), and
the Scottish American Journal. He was a subscriber as well to New York’s most solidly conservative and
Republican Party newspapers, the New York Times and the Evening Post, and to a number of trade journals,
including Railway World and Railway Gazette, American Manufacturers, and Iron Age.⁴

Reading was not a solitary occupation for Carnegie. He was too sociable, in fact, to do anything by himself.
As a teenager in the United States, he had read American history and political theory to prepare for his
debate with his cousin and uncle in Dunfermline, then organized informal reading and discussion groups with
his Allegheny City friends, and joined a larger Pittsburgh debating society. As a young man, he had dived into
the literature of Swedenborgianism in the company of his aunts and his father.

Much of what he read, he committed to memory. When, in 1878, he took his trip “round the world,” he left his
books of Burns poetry behind because, he claimed, he had memorized so much he no longer needed to refer to the
text. “No, no Robin, no need of taking you in my trunk; I have you in my heart.” He took with him instead the
thirteen-volume set of Shakespeare that his mother gave him as a going-away present.⁵

In the travel diary which he later published, he cited hundreds of lines from Burns and Shakespeare, and
dozens more from Tennyson, Byron, Cowper, Sterne, Milton, Arnold, Macaulay, Thackeray, and Wordsworth, as well
as a Scottish clergyman, Norman Macleod; the German poet Friedrich Schiller; the German-born Oxford professor
and translator Max Müller; and a number of American writers, including Twain, Bryant, Emerson, Bayard Taylor,
and Bret Harte.

Carnegie’s talent for memorization did not wane as he grew older. Richard Gilder, his poet-friend, toured
Canada with him in 1906, and reported in a letter home that he was receiving “a liberal education. A.C. is
truly a ‘great’ man, i.e. a man of enormous faculty and a great imagination.” Gilder couldn’t recall ever
having met anyone with “such a range of poetical quotation…(not so much range as numerous quotations from
Shakespeare, Burns, Byron, etc.).”⁶

Carnegie recycled literary citations into his conversation, his letters, and his publications. Armed with a
working memory of lines from the great poets, historians, novelists—from contemporary plays, ancient
philosophers, and the latest articles in the leading journals—he could enter any room and engage anyone in
conversation. College presidents, theologians, philosophers, university professors, industrialists, or
politicians: Carnegie declaimed before them all, and with such good cheer that seldom did anyone complain of
his being pompous or pretentious. He memorized and recited poetry because he loved the sound of the words—and
of his own voice. He was a literary name-dropper, but a rather sophisticated one. Most of his citations were
close to perfect.

Carnegie recognized at an early age how useful his talent for recitation might be. In the Carnegie Papers at
the Library of Congress, there is a two-page, unrevised transcript he dictated for his Autobiography, but
never published. Recalling the officials he worked with at the Pennsylvania Railroad, he confessed that he
could not “at the moment think of one who could be called a Reading Man.” This gave him a comparative
advantage, which he exploited to the fullest. “I think that my influence grew more from [my ability to
provide] apt quotations than anything else…Some times I suspected they passed as original. This was delicious.
One case in point. President Thomson of the Pennsylvania Railroad had risked his private fortune to complete
the railroad to Chicago.” When Thomson’s plans were disrupted by Jay Gould, who had surreptitiously offered an
exorbitant sum to lease one of the roads Thomson required to complete his through route, Carnegie advised him
to swallow his pride, recognize that he had been successfully blackmailed, and offer to lease the road for the
same terms Gould had proposed.

After giving my views of the immense advantages certain to flow from one united railroad interest from the
Seaboard to Chicago the needed quotation came to mind and I wound up with, “And thus, Mr. Thomson, you will
‘pluck from the nettle danger, the flower safety.’”

“What’s that, Andy? What’s that?” I hear the very tones of his voice. I repeated it. Great point also to be
called “Andy” by the formal President, so reserved to others. Such are the things that tell.

…My subsequent intimacy with him and calls to Philadelphia upon occasions may be largely attributed, I think,
to that apt quotation and perhaps some others, hitting the nail on the head and clinching it, as Shakespeare
does.

In this unpublished fragment from a draft of his Autobiography, he warned the young men he hoped would read
and profit from his teachings not to confine their reading to books that had a practical application to their
work. “Nothing will bring promotion—and better still, usefulness and happiness, than culture giving you
general knowledge beyond the depths of those with whom you may have to deal. Knowledge of the gems of
literature at call find a ready and profitable market in the industrial world. They sell high among men of
affairs as I found with my small stock of knowledge.”⁷

For some time now, Carnegie had been contemplating a second career—or vocation—as a writer. He had first begun
writing letters to the editor of the New York Tribune in the 1850s, had sent a firsthand report of the Battle
of Bull Run to the Pittsburgh Chronicle in 1861, composed a series of travel letters for publication during
his 1865–66 European tour, and in November 1867 wrote Major William Blackwood II, the current editor of
Blackwood’s Magazine, in Edinburgh, to complain about coverage of American matters and offer his services as
writer or contributing editor.⁸

To become a published author, he required a subject to write about and the free time to do it. A trip “round
the world” would furnish both. He had been contemplating such a trip since 1873, but had had to postpone it,
most recently, because of the illness of his friend and traveling companion, John Vandervort (Vandy).⁹

On October 12, 1878, he bid farewell to William Shinn, the E.T. general superintendent, sent off his “last
business note for about a year” to Edward Y. Townsend, the president of Cambria Iron, and made the first entry
in the travel diary of his trip around the world.¹⁰

“Bang! click! the desk closes, the key turns and goodbye for a year to my wards—that goodly cluster over which
I have watched with parental solicitude for many a day; their several cribs full of records and labeled Union
Iron Mills, Lucy Furnaces, Keystone Bridge Works, Union Forge, Cokevale Works, and the last, but not least,
that infant Hercules the Edgar Thomson Steel Rail Works—good lusty bairns all, and well calculated to survive
in the struggle for existence—great things are expected of them in the future, but for the present I bid them
farewell; I’m off for a holiday, and the rise and fall of iron and steel ‘affecteth me not.’”¹¹

The first stop was Pittsburgh, where he met up with Vandy. The two had hoped to take a leisurely train ride
across the country, but upon learning that their ship was to leave four days earlier than scheduled, they
secured seats on specially chartered Pennsylvania Railroad cars straight through from Pittsburgh to St. Louis
to Omaha, Nebraska, where they boarded a Union Pacific train of three Pullman cars bound for Ogden. At Ogden,
they changed trains again, onto the Central Pacific line to Sacramento, then southwest to San Francisco.¹²

The day before he sailed for Japan, Carnegie cabled his private secretary in New York with final instructions:
“Send my foreign papers to Lucy after you read them. You will not subscribe for any that run out. Remember to
duplicate my Christmas gifts on this side. You needn’t send any to Scotland as I shall be there.”¹³

 

IN THE three decades since Carnegie’s first ocean voyage, the world had grown considerably smaller. His
ultimate destination, “the East,” was halfway round the world, but not so far that he couldn’t be reached in
an emergency. Underwater cables, linked to landlines, connected North America to Europe, via Newfoundland;
Europe to Egypt, via Malta and Sicily; Egypt to Bombay, via Aden; India to Penang and Singapore; Singapore to
Hong Kong and Shanghai on the mainland.¹⁴

Though Carnegie considered himself a fearless traveler, he had no intention of departing from the well-worn
paths of other round-the-world travelers or visiting locations out of reach of a telegraph office. He and
Vandy would stay in large cities with a significant Western presence, sleep in the best hotels, eat in
restaurants that catered to Westerners, and travel back and forth across the China Sea on European-managed
steamers and ferries.

Vandy was the perfect traveling companion, amused, not annoyed, by his friend’s gregariousness, boundless
energy, and mild eccentricities. In his own travel diary, Vandy recalls how on Christmas Day, 1878, in Hong
Kong, after enduring a sleepless night because of the mosquitoes and suffering from a cold he had carried with
him from Canton, he was roused from a very “uncomfortable morning” by Carnegie bounding into the room to wish
him a Merry Christmas and present him with “a pair of Japanese shirt studs and sleeve buttons.” Though he
would much have preferred to stay in for the day, Carnegie persuaded him to “take a stroll though the upper
portion of the Chinese town. AC, having the gong fever badly insisted on going into every junk shop we passed
and trying their gongs—tried several but they did not come up to his idea of sound so did not invest—did not
wonder as he had already purchased some 10 in Canton. Almost every thing he takes a notion for he goes for
them wholesale.”¹⁵

Vandy’s travel diary was—like the man—understated and squeezed into two tiny notebooks. Carnegie’s was much
grander, written into a sturdy full-size notebook, with a brown marbled cover. On returning to the States,
Vandy put away his notebooks; Carnegie had his transcribed, edited, privately printed, and widely distributed.

There was, he knew, no better way to break into print. Travelogues required neither plotting nor characters,
presented no organizational problems, and could be written in the first person. There were dozens of models to
draw upon, from Washington Irving to James Fenimore Cooper to Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Nathaniel Hawthorne,
Bayard Taylor, and, most recently, Mark Twain. As William Stowe has noted in Going Abroad: European Travel in
Nineteenth-Century American Culture, the traveling class was also a reading and a writing class. “By 1875 so
many people were sending accounts of their travels to newspapers that the guidebook author M. F. Sweetser saw
fit to warn his readers that ‘among the thousands of our people who visit Europe every summer, many scores are
afflicted by the cacoethes scribendi.’”[*][1]¹⁶

Carnegie’s account of his trip is readable, though filled with clumsy stylistic flourishes, extended asides,
and intrusive citations from Burns and Shakespeare. His sentences are lengthy but, while not particularly well
crafted, never lose their way. The little man without much formal schooling could not resist displaying his
learning to the folks back home. In the first five or so pages of what is ostensibly a record of his trip, he
expatiates on the human need to fulfill “early dreams,” America’s newfound supremacy in raising and training
“trotters,” the future of the American export trade in beef, how Bret Harte’s work deteriorated when he
relocated to the east coast from the west, a comparison between “fresh California grapes” and the “hot-house
grapes of England,” and the future of American winemaking—all this before he boards ship. In the edition
published by Scribner’s in 1884, Carnegie subjects his extended audience in the first sixty pages alone to
miniature essays on Buddhism, Chinese immigration, American missionaries and Chinese converts to Christianity,
Japanese decorative arts, Queen Victoria’s lavish and expensive lifestyle, and Japanese currency inflation.

What saves readers from drowning in tedium is the narrator’s sprightly conversational tone, his
self-deprecating humor, and his remarkable powers of observation. There is lots of information on local
workers and wage scales, much of it apparently garnered from Vandy’s travel diary. In China, tradesmen earned
fifteen cents a day and received a rice ration worth another six to eights cents. In the coffee plantations of
Ceylon, men were paid eighteen cents a day, women fourteen cents. In India, “railroad laborers and coolies of
all kinds receive only four rupees per month…these are worth just now forty cents each…Upon this a man has to
exist. Is it any wonder that the masses are constantly upon the verge of starvation?”¹⁷

We are, as we proceed with Carnegie across Asia, left with renewed admiration for this little adventurer in
his pith helmet. He is never dismissive, condescending, or prey to simplistic racial stereotyping. He
constantly warns his readers that despite appearances, Japanese, Chinese, and Indians are all the product of
old and established civilizations and religions that deserve respect. At a moment in U.S. history when few,
indeed, had kind words to say about the Chinese, Carnegie dissents from the prevailing wisdom. “Let us not
forget that our ancestors were using their fingers—barbarians that they were—when the Chinese had risen,
centuries before, to the refinement of these [chop]sticks, for the fork is only about three hundred years
old.” He dismissed the agitation against the Chinese in California as little more than “the usual prejudice of
the ignorant races next to them in the social scale.”¹⁸

Wherever he traveled, Carnegie took it on himself to investigate and write about the status of women. In
Shanghai, he took note of “the almost total absence of young ladies [at] a very good amateur theatrical
performance” in which “Shanghai society was present in force, and in full evening dress.” He then segued into
a long commentary on “the marriage customs of the East.” Directly addressing “my lady friends,” he described
the sad plight of women in China and Japan who were forced to cede their separate individualities. Only if and
when the married woman gave birth to a manchild was she “invested with a halo of sanctity which secures rank
and reverence from all…. The older she becomes the more she is reverenced as being nearer to heaven, dearer to
the gods.” Robbed of all distinguishing characteristics, Chinese women were—for Carnegie and, he ventured, for
Chinese men as well—indistinguishable. “They are as like as peas, and one may as well marry one as another.”
Husbands in China might never know “the joys of love,” he continued, but neither would they suffer “the
anxieties pertaining to that super-sensitive condition,” for the wife, once chosen, was not selected to be the
man’s “constant companion…. The position of woman, would seem, therefore, to be almost entirely different from
what it is with us: in youth she is nothing there, in old age everything; with us it is the opposite. The
‘just mean’ between the two would probably yield better results than either.”¹⁹

At the conclusion of his travelogue, Carnegie returned again to the subject of matrimony, evidence that he
was, though thousands of miles away from home, thinking about his own future as a husband. The East, he wrote,
lacked two of the “most important elements” that made life worth living in the West. There was no day of rest,
no Sunday, to break up the workweek; and there was a decided

want of intelligent and refined women as the companion of man…. It has been a strange experience to me to be
for several months without the society of some of this class of women—sometimes many weeks without even
speaking to one, and often a whole week without even seeing the face of an educated woman. And, bachelor as I
am, let me confess what a miserable, dark, dreary, and insipid life this would be without their constant
companionship! This brings everything that is good in its train, everything that is bright and elevating…. To
see a wealthy Chinaman driving along in his carriage alone was pitiable. His efforts had been successful, but
for what? There was no joy in his world. The very soul of European civilization, its crown and special glory,
lies in the elevation of woman to her present position (she will rise even higher yet with the coming years),
and this favor she has repaid a thousand-fold by making herself the fountain of all that is best in man. In
life, without her there is nothing.

Carnegie attributed even the absence of music—“Not an opera nor a concert—not even a hand-organ. Scarcely a
sweet sound in all our journey”—to the absence of women from social life. “Were women there as with us,
wouldn’t music spring forth also!”²⁰

These remarks might be read as a public admission that Carnegie was ready to marry and determined not to
settle, as he feared Chinese men did, for a wife who was any less of an “individual” than he was or one with
whom he would be unable to fully experience the “joys of love.” There can be no doubt that Carnegie’s
admiration for his mother had had a profound influence on his thinking about women. Like all the Morrison
women, Meg had been every bit as capable as her husband when it came to providing for her family. But that she
had had to supplant her husband as breadwinner was not, in the end, healthy for her or her family. It would
have been far better for all had Will Carnegie been able to put food on the table, leaving his wife to run the
household, raise the children, and bring sweetness and light into the home as Carnegie hoped his wife would.

 

CARNEGIE concluded his year abroad in Dunfermline, where he met up with his mother before sailing to New York.
Two years earlier, he had dedicated the private baths and recreation center. Now, with his mother beside him,
he offered the city a second grant, this one for a library and reading room to be built above the indoor
“ponds.” Unlike the first grant, this one was conditional on the town corporation agreeing to support the
library, once it was built.

The Library Act of 1850, which had been extended to Scotland in 1855, provided town corporations with the
authority to levy a small tax on local rate payers for such a purpose, but the Dunfermline councilors were
evenly divided on whether or not to do so. Carnegie privately offered the town an additional £5,000,
“conditioned upon acceptance of the Library act.” As he wrote his uncle Lauder in December, he would withdraw
the offer if there was any “contest over the question—It must be generally—say universally approved or not
submitted at all.” In February 1880, Carnegie’s proposal was accepted at a public meeting in Dunfermline.²¹

 

CARNEGIE and his mother returned to New York City in the early summer of 1879, then boarded the train for
Cresson, where he intended to put the finishing touches on his travel diary. To help him in the process, he
hired, as his personal editor, John Denison Champlin, a writer and editor who was currently employed by the
publisher Henry Holt. Champlin, writing on Henry Holt letterhead, returned the first thirty-one pages of the
manuscript on July 7, 1879, with a note to Gardie McCandless. “You will see by the marks that I have been
obliged to score it pretty badly. If Mr. Carnegie is very particular to have it correct, I think it would be
well for me to see another proof of these pages after my corrections have been made…. Please suggest to Mr.
Carnegie that the opening sentence is a little confused, the pronouns being in both the third and second
persons…. I have endeavored to preserve his language all through, and to make the sentences according to his
marks; but if I had carte blanche in the matter, I should not make the sentences quite so long in some places,
as they are apt to be a little involved at times.”²²

Notes on a Trip Round the World was published in the fall of 1879 (the later Charles Scribner’s edition was
revised and published under the title Round the World ). Bound in red leather and professionally edited by
Champlin, the book was designed to present Andrew Carnegie in a new light. It was sent to hundreds of people,
including distant family members; new and old friends from Dunfermline, Allegheny City, St. Louis, Chicago,
and New York; business associates; unmarried women; and the men of letters whose attention Carnegie was most
interested in. He received, in return, dozens of personal notes, postal cards, and letters of acknowledgment.
Uncle Lauder in Dunfermline congratulated him on the abundant citations from Robert Burns. His old friend
Holmes, with whom he had worked as a messenger boy in Pittsburgh, reported that he had been surprised by
Carnegie’s “literary style.” Robert Ingersoll, lawyer, politician, lecturer, and freethinker, whom Carnegie
had befriended in New York City, thanked his “dear friend” for the book, which he had read “with great
interest. It is filled with joy and…above all is natural.” Anthony Drexel claimed that he had read the
travelogue in a single sitting. Collis Huntington told Carnegie that he too had read it “from end to end,”
which for him was remarkable since he had “not read a book for years except my ledger, and I did not intend to
read yours, but when I began it I could not lay it down.” Carnegie also received warm notes of congratulation
from several dozen women.

Lidie Laughlin of Pittsburgh, the thirty-year-old daughter of steel magnate James Laughlin, a founder of Jones
& Laughlin, thanked Carnegie for his “delightful looking book,” which she had not yet read. “I expect [it] to
be very entertaining, spicy, and instructive. I thank you very much for remembering me. It is very good of you
to give your friends the benefit of your travels. We shall be very glad to have you call and see us when you
are in Pittsburgh.” Lydia Harper, the twenty-four-year-old daughter of a Pittsburgh bank president, was every
bit as congratulatory. Bertha Harton, in a mildly flirtatious note, marked “At Home Sunday” in the
upper-left-hand corner, addressed her note to “My good friend. A long time ago you asked me to tell you ‘six
things’ that pleased me in your book, and now after closing it for the second time I realize how impossible it
would be for me to select only ‘six’ out of dozens that delighted me. In this book you have shown yourself the
many in one. No one ‘ideal’ man could have written such a book. The eye of artist and poet, the head of the
statistician and the statesman; the common sense of a practical man, and the heart of one who loves his fellow
men, are all clearly defined, each holding his own place, never clashing with each other.” Fanny Richardson, a
twenty-nine-year-old teacher, was quite enthusiastic, as was Laurie Faulkner, who suggested that Carnegie
“take a short journey (not around the world) from the Windsor to 345 Fifth Avenue some Tuesday evening and
give us a personal outline of the ‘great journey.’” Jennie Johns from Pittsburgh, who would later be invited
to accompany Carnegie on a coaching trip in Britain in 1881, thanked him for the book and for the “pretty
shawl” he had also sent her.²³

Although it is never easy to read between the lines of formal notes written by unmarried women, there is no
mistaking the coquettish tone in a large number of them. Had Carnegie somehow authorized such behavior by
giving these women the impression that he was, at age forty-five, prepared to take a bride? It appears he had.
The year before, his Dunfermline relatives had come to the conclusion that he had, in fact, already
married—without telling them to whom. “We have all been much exercised about his marriage,” his uncle, George
Lauder, wrote to a friend. “Today we have looked over the papers to see if there is any mention, but no.”²⁴

Carnegie had somehow signaled to his family in Dunfermline and to the women he corresponded with in America
that he was ready to get married. An undated newspaper article, probably from the mid-1880s, found among his
papers, describes a visit to Cresson by a reporter who was “denied the pleasure of an interview with Mr.
Carnegie, not because he is not approachable to a news gatherer but for the fact that he is, I am told, almost
continually SURROUNDED BY LADIES while at Cresson. It was, however, our privilege to pass him on the road…a
slight rain falling at the time. He was almost hidden by the umbrella which he was striving to hold over two
pretty girls that were clinging to each arm. We had given about the last dollar we had for a buggy to do this
trip in, while the man who owned the whole country thereabouts was footing it in the rain, with his companions
laughing and talking like a boy and girl just out of school.”²⁵

It was soon after his return from his round-the-world trip that Carnegie became reacquainted with the woman he
would eventually marry: Louise Whitfield.[*][2] He had met Louise years before on a New Year’s Day call with
his friend Alexander King, a Scotsman who had prospered in the thread business. King was a friend of Louise’s
father, John Whitfield, a partner in a house that specialized in notions, fancy dress materials, and imported
French and English white goods. The Whitfields, an old and respected though not particularly wealthy New York
family, lived in their own house on Forty-eighth Street, between Fifth and Sixth avenues.

Having been initiated into the custom of making New Year’s Day calls, Carnegie, in the years to come, returned
several times to the Whitfield home. He paid little notice during these holiday calls to Louise, the oldest
daughter, a well-schooled, well-groomed young lady who had done all the things young women were supposed to do
to prepare them for marriage. She had toured Europe with her family at age sixteen, was educated at Henrietta
B. Haines’s School in Gramercy Park, learned French from Mademoiselle de Janon, Miss Haines’s partner in the
school, learned to sing and play the piano, and “came out,” though informally, at eighteen at a private party
in the Whitfield parlor in December 1875.

That same year, her mother, Fannie, was taken ill—she would be an invalid for the rest of her life—and Louise
took over the household. While the servants did most of the household work, Louise knew enough about cooking,
baking, dusting, and polishing silver to supervise them. When, in 1878, her father died, Louise took on the
added responsibility for raising her four-year-old brother, Henry (Harry), and her sister, Estelle (Stella),
who was a few years younger than she was, but quite frail and “delicate,” like their mother.

On New Year’s Day 1880, Carnegie, who had turned forty-four in November, walked the two blocks north from the
Windsor Hotel and round the corner to call on the Whitfields. This time he took special notice of Louise.
Though never a beauty, Louise Whitfield had grown into a rather attractive young lady, slender, with brown
hair, blue eyes, and a perfect complexion. She was taller than Andrew, but not by much. Louise already had a
full supply of callers and suitors, but perhaps because of her mother’s illness, her father’s death, and her
family responsibilities, she had paid little attention to any of them.

Carnegie was interested enough to make a subsequent call, perhaps with his mother, and ask Mrs. Whitfield if
he might take her oldest daughter, who was an accomplished equestrienne, riding in Central Park. Once Mrs.
Whitfield’s permission was secured, Andrew began to call on a regular basis to ask Louise to go riding with
him. He would send his valet in the morning with a note to alert her that he was going to call that afternoon.
If she did not reply at once, he would appear at her door to escort her to the stable.²⁶

Carnegie, who was only two years younger than Louise’s father would have been, appeared at first a most
unlikely suitor for the twenty-three-year-old woman. He was tiny, white-bearded, devoted to and living with
his mother, and growing stouter by the day. But she was enchanted nonetheless. “The courtship,” according to
Louise’s biographers, who had access to diaries that have subsequently been lost, “began over a book,” The
Light of Asia, Edwin Arnold’s narrative prose poem about the life and teachings of Buddha. Carnegie had become
captivated by the story of Prince Siddhartha, its pacifist message, and the comparisons Arnold drew between
the teachings of Buddha and Christ. Carnegie, as the story goes, bought a copy of the book for Louise and the
two spent many hours reading it to one another. It became a talisman of their relationship. Louise later told
her biographers that she carried the book with her always. On their wedding day, Andrew would give Louise a
first edition: on the flyleaf, he acknowledged that the book was “the first gift I ever gave to my wife, then
the young lady Louise Whitfield…Reading and quoting it at times to her, I first discovered she had a mind and
heart above, and beyond, those of others of her own age.”²⁷

Carnegie and Louise went riding often that spring of 1880, then separated with the warm weather, Carnegie to
Cresson, Louise with her mother and siblings to the Catskills and then on to her aunt and uncle’s farm in
Oyster Bay, New York. In the fall, they renewed their friendship. On New Year’s Day 1881, he sent her flowers
with a note on his calling card: “Happy New Year, To My Fair Equestrienne 1881.” By early 1881, their mothers
had also become acquainted with one another. On February 7, Louise noted in her diary that Mrs. Carnegie had
come to take “mama and Harry and Stella to drive and Mr. C. came for me to ride. Splendid time.” Three days
later, Carnegie and his mother took Louise and her mother “to Booth’s to see Salvini in ‘Macbeth.’ Had a
splendid time.” Soon afterwards, Margaret Carnegie introduced Louise to Tom’s wife, Lucy, who was visiting New
York. In March, Andrew left a calling card for Mrs. Whitfield requesting permission for Louise “to go with us
to the races at 12:20 today.”²⁸

By the spring of 1881, Andrew and Louise, with their mothers’ acquiescence, if not approval, had been seeing
one another for almost fifteen months. All that was missing was some declaration of a desire to marry. But
Carnegie said nothing. He was apparently not ready yet to settle down or attach himself to anyone other than
his mother, who demanded very little of him. He had his steelworks in Pittsburgh to watch over, albeit from a
distance; his literary career, which was just beginning to blossom; and extensive travel plans.

In February, while spending more and more time with Louise, Carnegie began to lay plans for an 800-mile
“coaching” excursion through Great Britain.[*][3] His guests were to include Davey McCargo, his friend and
fellow messenger boy from Allegheny City; his partner Harry Phipps; his secretary, Gardie McCandless; and
Alexander King and his wife, Aggie. His old friend Vandy could not come along, but Vandy’s brother Benjie took
his place. Alice French of Davenport, Iowa, a family friend (and future published author) accepted his
invitation. So did Jennie Johns, the woman Carnegie referred to in the published version of his travelogue as
the “Prima Donna.” Jennie received her invitation on Valentine’s Day, which, according to Carnegie, “caused
her young heart to flutter. What a pretty reply came!…‘I am the happiest girl alive.’”²⁹

Andrew wanted Louise to join the party and may have invited the Kings, old family friends of the Whitfields,
with this in mind. He intended to formally request Mrs. Whitfield’s permission, but asked Louise “to speak to
Mama” first. In her diary, Louise recorded Mama’s answer: “She says I cannot possibly go. So unhappy.” A few
days later came a second entry in the diary on the same subject: “I cannot become reconciled to my
disappointment. Mr. C. has invited me to go on his…trip, but Mother says it is not proper for me to go.”³⁰

Carnegie tried one last time to secure Mrs. Whitfield’s permission. There were other single women going on the
coaching trip and several suitable chaperones, including the Kings. But instead of going to Mrs. Whitfield
himself, he dispatched his mother with a formal invitation. He should have known better than to trust Mag
Carnegie with such an errand. After issuing the invitation, she “pointed out the inconveniences of such an
expedition for a girl of 23. ‘If she was my daughter’ said the old lady, ‘I wouldna let her go.’” Though it
was, in the end, Mrs. Whitfield who made the final decision, Louise never forgave her future mother-in-law for
interfering.³¹

The truth—as Louise would later explain to Burton Hendrick—was that Mag Carnegie had decided on her own that
Louise was too young and frivolous to make a suitable match for her son. “She would not have objected to
Andrew’s marrying, provided he had selected someone nearer his own age, and one whom [she] regarded as more
sedate. In fact she had herself picked out a wife—Mary Clark,” a Hartford woman, who was a friend of Mag and
of Lucy Carnegie. We know little about Mary, other than that she was one of Carnegie’s Central Park riding
companions and had traveled with Mag to Pittsburgh in 1884 and lost her trunk, which Carnegie was delegated to
find. She was also close enough to the family for David Stewart to include her when he sent his “regards” to
Andrew and his mother in 1884. Decades later, after Mag’s death and his own marriage, Carnegie provided Mary
Clark with a pension of $4,800 a year. Because he did not want her to know the source, he forwarded her funds
to Lucy Carnegie to distribute to her. Only in 1913 did Mary discover where her pension came from. From that
point until her death soon afterwards, Carnegie paid her directly.³²

Louise was distraught at the thought of being left behind in New York and worried that this might be the end
of their courtship. “I am so unhappy about the trip. I want to go so much and yet I see it is impossible,” she
wrote in her diary on April 16. On April 18, she consented to go riding with Carnegie; then, on April 27, she
sent word, via a household servant, that she would not “ride this afternoon.” The thought of riding with him
in the park, then saying good-bye as Carnegie prepared to sail to England, may have been too much for her. By
May 7, she had changed her mind and went riding again, all the way to Morrisania in the Bronx. When Carnegie
invited her to attend a concert with him that evening, she refused.³³

On May 31, the night before his departure, Carnegie addressed an envelope to Miss Whitfield, with a pressed
clover blossom, a carnation, a red rose, and an invitation to a farewell dinner at the Windsor Hotel. Louise
preserved the envelope and its contents as a reminder of the trip that would not be—and the man who had left
her behind. The dinner was everything she had feared. Mag Carnegie presided; several of the traveling party
were in attendance; the major topic of conversation was the trip to come: “Was very sorry I went,” Louise
recorded the next day, “but did not know how to get out of it.”³⁴

Louise spent the summer with her mother in the Catskills and at Oyster Bay instead of traveling through
England and Scotland with Carnegie and his guests. She did not hear from Carnegie for more than a month. When
he wrote, he seemed oblivious to the pain he was causing. “Well, my dear Friend,” he wrote from the Queens
Hotel in Reading, “I have waited until I could tell you whether the ‘Gay Charioteers’ were a success or not,
and now I can say that no estimate of the pleasure derivable from coaching which I made was half high enough….
Our party are so enthusiastic, so happy, so good, that it does seem almost too much like paradise…. Not one
mishap, nor an ache, nor a pain so far. Our luncheons by the way side are just idealistic…. It is all I
pictured it, and more…. Not one shower of rain so far.” He closed with an apology for not having properly said
good-bye. “I was so sorry at reaching the Parlor only a few minutes after you had left; please excuse me. I
was detained. Kindest regards to Mamma. May you enjoy your summer!” Almost as postscript or afterthought, he
added beneath his signature: “Please let me hear from you, care J. S. Morgan & Co. London.”³⁵

 

CARNEGIE’S ACCOUNT of his coaching trip presents him as he wanted to be regarded now: a carefree man of
leisure, not a grim businessman; a sporting man and writer; a loyal son and generous friend; the jolliest, yet
most gentlemanly, of ladies’ men. Although he did not acknowledge it in his book, he paid everyone’s expenses
and made all the decisions on the itinerary. This was his trip, from beginning to end.

The party sailed on a luxury liner, the Bothnia, on June 1. In his letter to the Cunard agents confirming the
reservations for eleven adults, a nurse, and three children (the children were not going on the coaching
trip), he requested that his party be given “the end seats at the table opposite the Captain’s.” The “eldest
child is not five yet, so I presume you will take them and nurse as one adult.”³⁶

On June 11 the ship landed at Liverpool and the Carnegie entourage was greeted “by kind friends on the quay.”
George Pullman and his wife, who had sailed with the party, placed a private railway car at everyone’s
disposal for the trip into London. “We began our traveling upon the other side under unexpectedly favorable
conditions.”³⁷

Carnegie and his guests spent six days in London at the Westminster Hotel, observed the House of Commons in
session, “heard a performance of the ‘Messiah’ in [the] Albert Hall,” and visited prominent friends for lunch.
They then took the train to Brighton, where they met their coach and horses; Perry, their coachman; and Joe,
their footman. As there was no space on the coach for their trunks, they were to be “forwarded every week to
the point where we are to spend the succeeding Sunday, so that every Saturday evening we replenish our
wardrobe, and at the Sunday dinner appear in full dress.”³⁸

The party stayed at the finest inns and the most luxurious hotels. “Several people of note in the neighborhood
dropped into the inn, as a rule, to see the American coaching party, whose arrival in the village had made as
great a stir as if it were the advance show-wagon of Barnum’s menagerie.” Every morning, before they departed,
usually at nine-thirty, Alice French saw to it that the “two coaching hampers, very complete affairs” they had
purchased in London, were “filled…with the best the country could afford.” They took their luncheon in the
open air, “near an inn” where the horses could be watered. The luncheon place having been chosen the night
before, all that was left was to select the finest “piece of the velvety lawn” upon which to lay the “armfuls
of rugs” they carried with them. When Joe and Perry had laid the rugs, they departed briefly to put up the
horses and fetch “mugs of foaming ale, bottles of Devonshire cider, lemonade, and pitchers of fresh creamy
milk” to accompany the lunch. Then the party returned to their coach to complete their journey to the next
town. If overtaken by thirst along the way, they would stop again at a local inn for ale and refreshments.
When they came upon a particularly gorgeous brook or field of flowers, they would leave the carriage for a
stroll.³⁹

In her diary of the trip, Alice French noted that when the party “crossed the border” into Scotland, they left
the carriage and “walked to site of old blacksmith shop,” where they met an “intelligent small boy…. Mr. C.
gave him some money & a card with his address bidding him learn Burns & Scott and become a mechanic & he would
give him a place.” On yet another walk, this one in Sanquhar, with only Carnegie and Gardie McCandless along,
they engaged “a trio of hedge cutters” in conversation, who informed them, among other things, that “America’s
a deal soight better place than this.”⁴⁰

Arriving at twilight at the inn where they would spend the night, Gardie McCandless, deputized as “general
manager” for the trip, “examined the rooms and assigned them; Joe and Perry handed over the bags to the
servants; the party went direct to their general sitting-room, and, in a few minutes were taken to their
rooms, where all was ready for them. The two American flags were placed upon the mantel of the sitting-room,
in which there was always a piano, and we sat down to dinner a happy band.” As darkness does not fall in
northern England and Scotland until late in the summer night, the “Gay Charioteers” (as Carnegie referred to
the group) had several hours after dinner to tour the location, after which they returned to their sitting
room for “an hour of musical entertainment.” As Gardie saw to all the arrangements, Carnegie’s only function,
as he acknowledged in his travelogue, was to reign as “king in a constitutional monarchy.” Like Queen
Victoria, he was not “allowed to do anything.” This, he was delighted to report, left him plenty of time to
serve as “scribe.”⁴¹

Throughout his book, Carnegie takes time out from his observations of the landscape and the people he meets to
remind the reader of the importance of leisure. “Your always busy man accomplishes little; the great doer is
he who has plenty of leisure…Moral: Don’t worry yourself over work, hold yourself in reserve, and sure as
fate, ‘it will all come right in the wash.’” Speaking to his own situation, that of a man retired in the prime
of his career, Carnegie indulged in an orgy of self-congratulation. It was the height of foolishness, he had
found, to delay gratification and put off retirement until one was too old to enjoy it. “Sound wisdom that
school-boy displayed who did not ‘believe in putting away from tomorrow the cake he could eat-to-day.’…Among
the saddest of all spectacles to me is that of an elderly man occupying his last years grasping for more
dollars.” Americans, Carnegie declared, were of all the world’s peoples the most victimized by a work ethic
gone mad. Two years earlier, he recalled, he and Vandy, on returning from their trip round the world, had
observed to one another “that the Americans were the saddest-looking race we had seen. Life is so terribly
earnest here. Ambition spurs us all on, from him who handles the spade to him who employs thousands. We know
no rest…. In this world we must learn not to lay up our treasures, but to enjoy them day by day as we travel
the path we never return to.” Americans, Carnegie was convinced, worked harder than was necessary and much
harder than the British. “No toilers, rich or poor, like the Americans!” he remarked, ignoring the fact that
it was manufacturers like him who set the work hours and that just eighteen months earlier Captain Jones, with
his approval, had threatened havoc on local clergymen who suggested that the steelworks be shuttered on
Sundays.⁴²

There is something charmingly subversive in Carnegie’s attempt to disrupt the American success narrative by
preaching the virtues of idleness, leisure, and immediate gratification. From Cotton Mather to Benjamin
Franklin to the McGuffey Readers and biographies of great Americans, the point had been hammered home to
American boys that industry, diligence, perseverance, frugality, and sobriety were godly and pragmatic virtues
without which no man could succeed. Carnegie, however, instead of praising Americans for their work ethic,
disparaged their efforts as inhuman and counterproductive. “I hope Americans will find some day more time for
play, like their wiser brethren upon the other side.”⁴³

Though Carnegie paints himself into the center of every scene in his travelogue, his mother is usually by his
side. In the published work he referred to her, only half ironically, as “Queen Dowager, Head of the Clan (no
Salic Law in our family).” She was given the place of honor atop the coach alongside Perry, with the right to
choose who would sit next to her until she discovered there was more fun to be had elsewhere and had her seat
moved inside so that she could, for the rest of the journey, be guaranteed “an audience of no less than six
for her stories and old ballads. Her tongue went from morning till night, if I do say it, and her end of the
coach was always in for its share of any frolic stirring.”⁴⁴

The highlight of the tour was the entry into Dunfermline on July 27. Carnegie had asked his mother to lay the
“Memorial Stone of the Free Library” and she had been practicing her speech, teased along by her son, who
worried aloud that it would be a long one, knowing that it would not. The town had declared a holiday to
welcome its benefactor and his mother. Carnegie, Alice French wrote in her journal, appeared uneasy at having
“to play the part of a popular hero even for a day.” He would soon get used to the role. As the cheers rumbled
through the streets of Dunfermline and the Abbey bells tolled in his honor, he was able to find strength, as
he later put it, “in the knowledge that the spark which had set fire to their hearts was the Queen Dowager’s
return and her share in the day’s proceedings. Grand woman, she has deserved all that was done in her honor on
that.” Excised from the published edition of the book was the observation that followed: “What she has done
for her two boys is incredible…what she has done for herself is more incredible still, for she is the centre
from which radiates, in small as in great things, the clear rays of unimpeachable truth and honor. Mother’s
statements from ‘I shall be glad to see you,’ uttered to an acquaintance, up to the most serious things of
life, fall as if preceded with ‘Thus saith the Lord,’ for they are always true.”⁴⁵

Another telling passage excised from the Scribner’s edition, no doubt by Carnegie, concerned Provost
Mathieson’s remarks at the banquet honoring the Carnegies in Dunfermline. Having already heaped abundant
praise on him, the provost remarked that “the only flaw in Mr. Carnegie’s character is that he wanted a wife.
(Laughter and cheers.) I attribute that very much to the fact of his having a mother. (Laughter.) His mother
has taken good care over him, and has showed that she does not want to hand him over to the tender mercies of
some half-cousin, or any of the half-dozen young ladies who are with him today. (Laughter.)”⁴⁶

In these two passages—and the fact that they were among the very few cut from the travelogue when it was
published commercially—we can see that Carnegie was of two minds about his mother’s indomitable presence. To
claim that she had taught herself to speak with the authority of “the Lord” and that others looked upon her as
Andrew’s surrogate wife was to acknowledge the reach of her influence and the double-edged effect it had had
on his life. No matter how hard he might try to escape her pull, he was inevitably and irresistibly lured back
within her orbit. The privately published edition of Our Coaching Trip was dedicated, as perhaps it should
have been, to “My Brother and trusty associates who toiled at home that I might realize the happiest dream of
my life.” The dedication in the Scribner edition read: “To My Favorite Heroine, My Mother.”

 

THE “Gay Charioteers” were back in New York by August 24, nearly two months after they had departed. Carnegie
was by now convinced that the pen would be his path to influence and fame (fortune he already had). “If any
man wants bona fide substantial power and influence in this world, he must handle the pen—that’s flat. Truly,
it is a nobler weapon than the sword, and a much nobler one than the tongue, both of which have nearly had
their day.”⁴⁷

Carnegie spent more time revising and polishing the manuscript than he had his round-the-world travelogue. Our
Coaching Trip was published privately in March 1882. Two years later, Charles Scribner’s Sons brought out a
commercial edition entitled An American Four-in-Hand in Britain.

Carnegie peppered the published work with political commentary. Thirty years earlier, he had debated his
cousin Dod on whether the British or American political system was more conducive to human happiness and
progress. He now returned to the subject. While his praise of American republicanism was, if anything, more
effusive than it had ever been, he was far less harsh on the British system of governance than he had been as
an eighteen-year-old. America was as yet, he had to admit, the only home for men who long “not only to be free
but to be equal…. But England will soon march forward: she is not going to rest behind very long…. England is
at work in earnest, and what she does, she does well. I prophesy that young England will give young America a
hard race for supremacy.”⁴⁸

Carnegie had appointed himself ambassador extraordinaire from each nation to the other, a role he believed he
was uniquely qualified to take on. “The man who knows from personal experience the leading characteristics of
the people upon both sides of the ferry is invariably a warm and sincere friend. The two peoples have only to
become acquainted to become enthusiastic over each other’s qualities.” It would be his task from this point
until the end of his life to make them better acquainted.⁴⁹

[1]: footnote11.html
[2]: footnote12.html
[3]: footnote13.html

## ELEVEN

## Making a Name, 1881–1883

BEGINNING IN 1880, with a report of his gift to Dunfermline, the name of Andrew Carnegie began to appear with
some regularity in the newspapers. When Ferdinand-Marie de Lesseps, the builder of the Panama Canal, was fêted
at a banquet at Delmonico’s, Carnegie was listed as one of the two hundred dignitaries who subscribed and
attended. His name appeared again in December 1880 as one of “a party of about 25 gentlemen, representing some
of the largest business houses in New-York,” who accompanied former President Grant on a ceremonial visit to
Paterson, New Jersey. Three months later, he was part of another “notable gathering in Delmonico’s” that
raised $300,000 for a future New York World’s Fair. Carnegie’s pledge of $5,000 was among the most generous
donations listed. Carnegie closed out the year by contributing $1,000 to the Manhattan Eye and Ear Hospital
and by sponsoring a roast turkey, vegetables, pies, and ice cream Christmas dinner for 250 homeless boys at
the East Side Boys’ Lodging House and school. “At the close of the festival the boys were presented with warm
flannel shirts and shoes…. Special prizes were given to boys who had punctually attended night school during
the past two months.”¹

He continued to spend a good deal of time with Louise. On returning to New York after his tour, Carnegie had
attempted to resume the relationship as if there had been no jarring interruption and Louise had permitted him
to do so. She accepted his invitations to the races at Jerome Park and to go riding. Side by side, they rode
through Central Park, and sometimes farther north on Bloomingdale Road (now Broadway above Fifty-ninth Street)
into northern Manhattan, or via the High Bridge into the Bronx. In the evenings, they read together in her
parlor, and, with her mother along, sat in his private box at the theater. In the spring, they were both
guests, along with his mother, at a wedding reception at 574 Fifth Avenue. On New Year’s Day, he addressed his
calling card, as he had the year before, to “My Fair Equestrienne,” but added: “And many such to follow” after
the “Happy New Year” greeting.²

He seldom visited Pittsburgh anymore, though he kept in touch with his partners by telegram and post.
Carnegie’s business had suffered not at all from his lengthy absences, in large part because every other
partner remained active. When William Shinn resigned as general superintendent in 1879, he declared his
intention to retain his stock in the firm. Carnegie informed him that he had to give up his ownership stake.
There were to be no absentee partners at E.T. All, except for Carnegie himself, were expected to work full
time for the company. “Surely you don’t want your colleagues to do all the work & you sit down only to share
ingloriously in their triumphs. No, no, if you go, go. Sell out & try another party. We want no drones in the
E.T. if we can help it.”³

With Shinn’s departure, preceded by David McCandless’s death, Tom Carnegie assumed a larger role in the
management of the company, as did Harry Phipps. Neither was, perhaps, as important to the overall operation of
the steel mill as Captain Bill Jones: When in the fall of 1880, Jones asked the Carnegie brothers for more
money “to provide for the rainy day,” he was told by Andrew “to say what you want & don’t put it low either.”
Jones refrained from naming a salary, but informed Carnegie that he knew it “to be a fact that Bethlehem Co.
are now paying their Gen Supt. $15,000 per annum, and formerly paid him $20,000. I am egotist enough to say
that I can walk right around him on all points connected with a Work of this kind.” Though we don’t know what
the final offer was, it was enough to keep Jones in Carnegie’s employ for the rest of his life.⁴

By the early 1880s, the E.T. works had exploded in revenues and profitability to the point where it dwarfed
the other Carnegie properties. Railroad construction nationwide, which had shrunk to less than 2,400 miles a
year during the 1870s, ballooned to 6,700 miles in 1880, 9,800 in 1881, and 11,569 in 1882. Concurrent with
the boom came the abrupt and irreversible shift from iron to steel rails. In 1871, only 5 percent of rails
manufactured domestically were made of steel; by 1875, when Edgar Thomson came on line, that percentage had
increased to 37 percent; by 1879, to 62 percent; and by 1883, to 95 percent.⁵

When, in later years, Carnegie argued that it was the “community,” not the “individual,” who was the source of
all wealth, he was doing so from experience. He and his partners had not created the conditions for the boom
in railroad construction that made them so miraculously wealthy in the early 1880s. But they rode the boom as
expertly and more effortlessly than they had the depression that preceded it. Receipts, which had languished
through the mid-1870s, pyramided as steel prices stabilized, while production costs decreased with the
addition of new labor-saving machinery. Profits at the Carnegie companies exploded from half a million dollars
in 1879 to over $2 million in 1882, tracking rather precisely the increase in new track laid.⁶

As E. T. grew in size and profits, Tom Carnegie and Harry Phipps found themselves devoting more time to the
steel concern and much less to the Lucy furnaces and the Union Iron Mills. To give both men a larger ownership
stake in the steel company commensurate with their added responsibilities, Tom requested and Andrew agreed to
consolidate all their enterprises into a new corporation, Carnegie Brothers & Company, Ltd. The new firm,
which was organized on April 1, 1881, was as closely held as the old ones had been. Carnegie, who had entered
the steel business with a 37 percent interest in E.T. and then bought out several of his partners’ shares,
ended up after the consolidation with 54.5 percent of the stock in the new company. Tom Carnegie and Harry
Phipps emerged with 17.6 percent each in stock; David Stewart, John Scott, and Gardie McCandless with smaller
shares; John Vandevort received 1 percent; and Cousin Dod, who had recently emigrated, 0.6 percent.⁷

 

IN 1881, the year Carnegie Brothers was organized, Tom Carnegie and Harry Phipps entered into an agreement
with the man who would within less than a decade succeed them both as Carnegie’s chief lieutenant. Faced with
the mounting problem of securing a steady, expandable, and relatively inexpensive supply of high-grade coke
for their new blast furnaces at Edgar Thomson and the Lucy furnaces in Lawrenceville, Phipps and Tom Carnegie
approached Henry Clay Frick, the owner of a large and growing empire of coke fields and ovens.

Frick, at the time in his early thirties, had entered the coke business ten years earlier, in 1871. With money
borrowed from relatives and investors, including his friend Andrew Mellon, the son of the Pittsburgh banker,
Frick steadily expanded his operation. By 1880, the H. C. Frick Coke Company controlled about 150 acres of
land and operated fifty beehive coke ovens, each about 11 to 12 feet in diameter, 6 to 7 feet high, in which
bituminous coal was cooked into coke. As the need for coke to feed Pittsburgh’s furnaces expanded, so did the
business. By early 1882, his company operated over one thousand ovens at nine different coke works, all in the
Connellsville region.⁸

Frick, the native-born son of German and Swiss ancestors who had emigrated to the United States in the late
eighteenth century, was, like Carnegie, a little man and a self-made millionaire. He was fourteen years
younger than Carnegie, but looked younger still. In 1880, he had still not grown a full beard, but sported a
walrus-like mustache. He rarely smiled or joked, but seemed to glower instead. He most certainly did not sing
or tell stories at the dinner table, like his future partner.

The deal that Tom Carnegie offered Frick was beneficial for both the coke and the steel companies. Frick
needed new capital to expand his holdings—which the Carnegies supplied—in return for a regular and inexpensive
supply of high-grade coke. The Carnegies purchased a little more than 11 percent of H. C. Frick Coke Company
stock. Two years later, they would increase their stake to 50 percent; by 1888, Andrew Carnegie and Carnegie
Steel would own 74 percent of the stock in the Frick company; Frick only 21 percent.⁹

The deal was sealed with a toast at the Windsor Hotel. Frick and his bride, Adelaide Childs, the daughter of
Pittsburgh businessman Asa Childs, had come to New York to celebrate their honeymoon in December 1881 and
accepted Carnegie’s invitation to a formal dinner with him and his mother. After dinner, Andrew raised a glass
to salute his new partner in the coke business.

Wildly exaggerating the extent of his investment in Frick’s company, Carnegie immediately wrote Robert
Garrett, vice president of the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad, to brag about the “purchase of one half of Frick &
Co.’s coke works. This with our own ovens makes us by far the largest manfr. of the article.” The route from
Connellsville to Pittsburgh on which Frick’s coke would travel was served by both the B&O and the Pennsylvania
Railroad. Carnegie threatened Garrett that if the B&O did not lower its rates to match the Pennsylvania’s, he
would ship the vast quantities of H. C. Frick coke he now controlled exclusively by the Pennsylvania
Railroad.¹⁰

 

IN EARLY 1881, Carnegie made his first American library gift, for a reading room at the Edgar Thomson works at
Braddock. The idea to fund a library for his steelworkers had come from Captain Jones. Jones had been engaged
in a dispute with local clergymen or, as he referred to them, “our bigoted and sanctimonious cusses,” who
demanded that he shut down the steelworks for the Sabbath. He responded by threatening the clergymen that if
they even tried to “interfere with these works, I will retaliate by promptly discharging any workman who
belongs to their Churches and thereby get rid of the poorest and most worthless portion of our employees. If
they don’t want to work when I want them, I shall take good care that they don’t work when they want to.”¹¹

In April 1880, Jones was approached by a Reverend C. DeLong of the United Brethren Church in Braddock, who,
instead of berating him for not observing the Sabbath, asked for assistance “in procuring a library for use of
the Sunday School connected with his church.” Jones offered to do what he could to assist the reverend,
explaining to Carnegie that the minister was “full of faith, but minus money. I told him I knew a gentleman in
New York that possessed D——d little faith, but had lots of money, and was liberal in matters of this kind.”¹²

Carnegie had not attended any church for years. The last one he had been in was the Swedenborgian chapel in
Pittsburgh, which he had left behind when he moved to Altoona. He had no desire to help out any denominational
church, even one with a reverend who came recommended by Captain Jones. Still, he was intrigued by the idea of
opening a reading room for his steelworkers at Braddock. “I fully approve of the Library idea,” Jones wrote in
November 1880, in response to Carnegie’s proposal to set aside space at the steel mill for a library, “but
think we can wait awhile until we get all the main improvements completed about the Works.” In January 1881,
Carnegie forwarded to Jones “by Adams Express” an encyclopedia “for the Library at the Works.” The following
spring, according to a local history of Braddock, Carnegie announced “his purpose of establishing a free
library at Braddock for the benefit of his workmen.”¹³

In establishing a library or reading room for his workmen, Carnegie was anticipating what would, in the early
twentieth century, be characterized as corporate “welfare work.” According to the labor historian Daniel
Nelson, “libraries, restaurants, club houses, and other social or recreational facilities,” built and paid for
by employers, “appeared in increasing numbers after 1875.” In 1879, two years before the E.T. library was
established, the Philadelphia manufacturers who owned Cambria Iron built a library for their employees in
Johnstown (which Carnegie, after the flood of 1889, would help rebuild). Such efforts were, Nelson insists,
“seldom purely philanthropic gestures. Employers who financed libraries…looked upon their expenditures as
investments in a more efficient as well as a more conservative working class.”¹⁴

In November 1881, a year after deciding to fund a reading room at E. T.,[*][1] Carnegie, in a letter to Mayor
Robert W. Lyon of Pittsburgh, offered to build a public library for Pittsburgh. He attached the same
conditions to this gift as he had to his Dunfermline benefaction. “I beg to offer to the City of Pittsburgh a
Free Library upon which I will expend Two hundred & fifty thousand dollars if the City will accept it when
completed and agree for its proper use and maintenance not less than Fifteen thousand dollars per year. I have
named the lowest sum required properly to carry out the work in view.”¹⁵

The grant for the Pittsburgh public library was turned down by the Pittsburgh City Councils. Because there was
no law in Pennsylvania similar to the British Library Act, the city officials believed they lacked the
authority to apply public monies for the use of a public library. Carnegie would not make another such offer
for a public library until 1886. He would instead, over the next five years, donate additional monies for his
library at E. T. and build two more “reading rooms” for his employees at the Union Iron Mills and Keystone
Bridge works.¹⁶

 

E.T.’S MONOPOLY on steel production in the Pittsburgh region did not last long. As orders rolled in for steel
instead of iron rails—and profits increased—the owners of the city’s most successful iron mills gathered
together to organize their own cooperative venture in steelmaking, the Pittsburgh Bessemer Steel Company, and
buy a plot of land at Homestead, Pennsylvania, a mile west of Braddock on the other side of the river. In
August 1881, Pittsburgh Bessemer rolled its first rails at Homestead.

William Clark, the owner of the Solar Iron Works, was named general manager of the new steel plant. Clark
believed that because the plant was located outside the city he could, with impunity, defy the union and set
wage rates below the going rate. The skilled workers—who performed much the same work at Homestead, heating,
reheating, rolling, molding, and shaping structural steel, as they had in Pittsburgh—retaliated with
slowdowns, shutdowns, and walkouts. On January 1, 1882, in a pigheaded attempt to eliminate future conflicts
with labor at Homestead, William Clark decreed that all skilled employees sign ironclad contracts that pledged
them never to strike, never to join the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers, and to resign if
they were already members. When a majority of workers refused to sign, Clark shut down the mill and recruited
scabs to replace them. The Amalgamated responded by organizing its own defense forces to prevent any scabs
from entering Homestead and taking union jobs. By March 1882, after two months of battles, the mill remained
closed. With the company beginning to default on outstanding orders and unable to take new ones, Clark
admitted defeat, agreed to the union’s demands, resigned his position, and left Homestead forever.¹⁷

The Amalgamated’s success at the Pittsburgh Bessemer plant at Homestead emboldened it to try again to organize
Carnegie’s mill across the river. Captain Jones believed he had matters well under control. “I now feel sure
that the Union will not get a foothold here,” he wrote Carnegie in February. “I will ask the Company to agree
to loan such good men as I may select, say from $600 to $800 this year to assist them in building homes. This
is an effective plan to keep out the Union. Every good man that wants to build, encourage. You should
calculate on a reasonable investment in that direction. Give them the money on fair interest. Another thing I
merely suggest to you is to erect a decent Hotel. No one here has the enterprise. It is badly needed. Give
this a thought.”¹⁸

Jones badly underestimated the attraction of the Amalgamated for the skilled workers at Edgar Thomson. His and
Carnegie’s attempt to buy off the skilled metalworkers with a reading room and the offer of cheap mortgages
for selected favorites was not going to persuade them to remain non-union forever. In April, days after its
victory at Homestead and no doubt energized by it, the Amalgamated proudly announced that it had organized a
lodge at the E.T. works. The captain’s response was to resign his position. He had always, he claimed, gone
out of his way to look after “his” workers, to make sure they were well paid and protected; he had even
reduced their workday from the twelve hours that had been standard in the iron mills to eight hours at E.T.
How dare they betray his trust and confidence by joining the Amalgamated?¹⁹

Carnegie, at the time in Cresson completing the revisions on Our Coaching Trip, took the train into Pittsburgh
to persuade Jones to stay on the job. Carnegie’s experience at the Union Iron Mills had convinced him that it
was possible to do business with the Amalgamated. For the past six or seven years, ever since the 1874–75
lockout of the puddlers had been settled, he and his partners at the Union Iron Mills had gotten on well with
the Amalgamated leaders, whom Carnegie regarded as thoroughly professional and, more important, quite
conservative. To assure Jones that this was the case, he arranged for him to meet some of the Amalgamated
officers. As William Martin, one of the officials at the meeting, would later report, Carnegie, after
introducing Jones, “stated the ‘important business.’ It was nothing more nor less than that Mr. Jones had
conceived the idea that the Amalgamated Association was going to greatly interfere at Braddock; that it was
the intention to bring wages up…etc., and he had sent for us so as to have an understanding. He (Carnegie)
believed the Amalgamated Association was a good institution, it was highly spoken of by the managers” at the
Pittsburgh iron mills. The union officials assured Jones “in plain English that he need have no fears.
Whatever was done by the Amalgamated Association at Braddock the firm would be consulted, and the question
would be discussed pro and con, etc…. The interview did not last fifteen minutes, but on the strength of it
the Amalgamated Association was recognized at Braddock.”²⁰

Carnegie’s intervention won him the immediate respect of the Amalgamated and a reputation as a friend of
labor. Edgar Thomson became the only steelworks in the state to permit a union within its gates. That spring,
when the Pittsburgh iron puddlers, following on the success of the Homestead workers, demanded a higher wage
scale, the Carnegie-owned Union Iron Mills alone among the thirty-six iron rolling mills in Pittsburgh agreed
to their demands.²¹

Carnegie’s acceptance of the Amalgamated’s terms in his Pittsburgh iron mills—and his acquiescence at the
organization of a new lodge at Edgar Thomson—must have infuriated his competitors. It certainly frightened
Captain Jones, who feared that such accommodation would be interpreted as a sign of weakness. In November
1882, as Jones opened negotiations with the Amalgamated for a new contract in which he was going to demand a
reduction in wage rates to match a fall in the price of steel rails, he warned Carnegie to stand tough: “There
is one thing I wish to urge on you, that is, if necessary to enforce a proper reduction, we must fight. Don’t
let us make, or ask for anything we are not prepared to force. The time has arrived for positive action, and
when we say to these men, that we ask for a 20% reduction that we mean it, and mean to have it. Avoid a fight
if possible, but if we have to fight, let us fight for something tangible.”²²

The E. T. workers accepted the wage reduction, hoping perhaps that increased output would compensate for the
decreased rates, and frightened that the alternative to accepting a wage cut was to lose their jobs entirely.
“We are still getting along finely,” the “special correspondent” at Edgar Thomson reported in the National
Labor Tribune on March 31 and then repeated, in almost the same words, on April 14 and April 28.²³

 

THE FALL in rail prices, which Jones and Carnegie insisted necessitated a decrease in wage rates, occurred in
the autumn of 1882. Carnegie’s partners proposed that Edgar Thomson cease bidding on new contracts until
prices went back up. Carnegie was enraged. With his characteristic exaggeration and doomsday prophecies, he
declared that his partners were putting the steelworks at risk by inviting Chicago and St. Louis mills to take
away work that belonged to them.

And all for what, the hope (a wild one) that by some unprobable change in affairs we may net a dollar or two
more per ton…I wash my hands now of all responsibility. I show you a large profit & what is far more important
looking at lasting results—a safe & steady business for our works and I enter my protest against this new
doctrine of taking risks…I say it would pay us better to run full for almost nothing than to act in this way &
give our competitors work to which they are not entitled when our respective costs are considered. I hope if
any one has reasons to urge against this policy he will be good enough to try to formulate them in writing,
the effort I believe will soon convince him that he has but a vague and unreasonable hope that a miracle will
come to relieve him.”²⁴

Carnegie, who did most of his business by post, had honed his letterwriting style to a sharp edge. In his
private correspondence, he was warm and delightfully witty; in his business letters—to partners and
competitors alike—he was tough, imperious, often verging on the abusive. To avoid the disastrous consequences
of pricing wars, the Pennsylvania steel firms met every year in Philadelphia to set minimum prices for their
products. When in the spring of 1882 Carnegie was informed that Edward Townsend, of Cambria Iron, had secretly
accepted a large contract by bidding $5 a ton under the minimum price he had previously agreed upon, Carnegie
was incensed and demanded, by letter, that Townsend divide the order with the Edgar Thomson steelworks.

Carnegie’s letter was a small masterpiece of controlled invective. He charged Townsend not only with breaking
a business agreement but with betraying the trust of a longtime colleague who had done nothing to deserve such
treatment. “Consider it all over & try to think whether you have done to your colleague as you would like to
be done by.” He hoped that Townsend would accept his proposal to divide the order. If he did not, Carnegie
asked that the matter be submitted to arbitration.²⁵

More comfortable negotiating in person, Townsend suggested the dispute could be quickly resolved in a
face-to-face meeting. Carnegie refused to back down. “I have always been glad to talk over matters with
you…but feeling that I have reason to consider myself unfairly dealt with by you for the first time in all our
transactions, I do not think any good can come from verbal communications until I am told by an unprejudiced
arbiter that I am mistaken. While trying to advance our mutual interests by holding up the prices of Rails
here to figures approved by you [intimating that he could have undersold Townsend had he wished to], I little
expected to be stabbed in the back by the hand whose duty it was to co-operate with me.”²⁶

Townsend responded briefly and to the point that he was “surprised and pained” by Carnegie’s angry eloquence,
believed his language had been “unwarranted,” and begged him to “withdraw such offensive expressions” so that
they could rationally discuss their differences. Carnegie backed off and agreed to withdraw his charges, and
Townsend agreed to split the new contract fifty-fifty. Neither man wanted to damage a mutually beneficial
pooling agreement and enter into needless price competition.²⁷

 

CARNEGIE’S COURTSHIP of Louise remained active through the early 1880s, but was continually interrupted—not by
Louise, who never ventured far from home and seemed keen to accept his invitations, but by Carnegie, who like
a hyperactive child could not remain in one place for long.

In the fall of 1882, after his spring and summer vacation in Britain and his fall retreat to the cottage at
Cresson, he arranged to take a group of Scottish friends on an all-expenses paid railroad tour of the West.
Once again, Louise was left behind.

The party of eighteen traveled by train to Chicago, where they boarded the “special car” of Alexander
Mitchell, the Scottish expatriate president of the Milwaukee & St. Paul Railroad. “The conductor said his
instructions were to go where we wished, stop and start on any train desired, and when we were done with him
he was to return with his car to Milwaukee. We spent days in that car, visited St. Paul in the North, and
Davenport in the West, and did not traverse one mile of line which that Scotch boy had not built.” Their
return route took them through Grafton, Virginia, Baltimore, Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, and then back to
New York. The trip cost Carnegie more than $6,000.²⁸

He returned to New York—and Louise—in mid-November 1882, having been absent since June. He had taken a bit of
a risk in abandoning her for such a stretch. Louise was not married and Andrew Carnegie was not her only
suitor, a fact he often joked about, perhaps to ward off his own anxiety.

“Am off tomorrow eve for Pittsburgh,” he wrote on the envelope in which he enclosed his 1883 New Year’s Day
calling card. “Do you think you could stand an hour’s drive this P.M.? I’ll be over this eve if you are home.
Are you to be, or are you off with some young swell?”

“My dear L.W.,” read another such penciled note. “You are such a belle nowadays, one has to ask when you are
at home? Tonight, or tomorrow night—when is it?…You were pretty at Mrs. Whitney’s. Many said so—all thought
so, and so did Yours, [signed] A. C.”²⁹

Louise, who turned twenty-five in the spring of 1882, was a bit old to be unmarried by the standards of the
day, but so was Andrew, now approaching his fiftieth birthday. With each passing year, his bachelor status was
becoming more and more of an anomaly. While nearly 20 percent of New York’s male population aged 35–44 was
unmarried, according to 1890 figures compiled by Howard Chudacoff, the percentage of bachelors in Andrew’s age
cohort, 45–64, was just half that.³⁰

Louise and Andrew had been seeing one another for more than two years, but there was still no sign from Andrew
that he might be considering marriage. All around her, Louise’s friends were getting engaged or married. From
London, that June, Carnegie wrote to tell Louise that he had met her friend, “Miss Taylor,” on the ship
crossing the Atlantic and that she had “promised to ride with me in New York. She is very nice, I think, but
as she is engaged you need not think you are going to be let off in any way from your duties as my Chief
Equestrienne. I don’t think Engaged Ladies very desirable companions.” The note, addressed, as always, “Well,
My Dear Friend,” was signed: “Sincerely, your friend always.”³¹

Through the winter season of 1883, the two continued to see one another and write notes back and forth like
teenagers. “Enjoyed the eve with Aggie and Alex,” Carnegie wrote her early in 1883, after an evening spent
with their mutual friends, the Kings. “Mary Clark was along. It wasn’t anything like as nice as Saturday—not
to be compared at all, at all! I think I’ll not try another girl. No use; shall go back to you.”³²

That spring, for the fourth consecutive year since they had begun seeing one another, Andrew left New York and
Louise for Britain. While he was socializing with men like Prime Minister Gladstone, Fortnightly Review editor
John Morley, Matthew Arnold, and Herbert Spencer, Louise spent the summer at Tremper House in Phoenicia, a
Catskills resort, and then in Oyster Bay, with her mother, her sister Stella, and brother Harry, now nine. Her
communications with her “friend” in Europe were warmer and more intimate than ever.

“Oh, how glad your letter made me!” she wrote in July, after receiving a letter from London. “For I was really
afraid this year you would forget all about writing. But you didn’t forget after all, and so made a certain
individual very happy. I carried it off all by myself, to the loveliest little nook in the woods, and had such
a good time reading of all your gay doings. What a delightful time you must be having in the society of such
congenial people! But I hope you won’t get to like them too well!” Her friend was adding fame to his fortune,
and though she worried that this might make her less attractive in his eyes, she was delighted for him
nonetheless. “Rumors are constantly reaching us of the stir you are creating, and on this side everybody is
talking about your book…. We are all very proud of you, and love to think that you are our friend.” She was
enjoying her summer in the Catskills, but missed him and their long rides on horseback.

The drives are very fine, and I am looking forward to some nice rides, but I am afraid that will depend upon
whether any nice gentlemen come here, whom I shall have confidence enough in to ask to escort me…. As pleasant
as the summer is, the fall is pleasanter, when we are all gathered together in NY once more, and I almost hope
that Scotland may not be quite so kind as usual, in order that you may hasten your return home…. I only
received your letter four days ago, and here I am answering it right away. Am I not good? But how can I help
it, when you are always so good to me?…Au revoir, mon ami. May all your undertaking prosper! May you make
hosts of friends, but may you never forget your stay-at-home friend, too, who misses you sadly.³³

When, two weeks later, Edwin Arnold, their favorite author, gave Carnegie the manuscript of The Light of Asia,
Louise wrote to say that she rejoiced with him “in the possession of your treasure. How much you must prize
it, and yet how much more must you value the friendship that prompted such a gift—from such a man! May I hope
to have a glimpse of it some time in the Fall?…Need I say how glad I shall be to welcome you home once more? I
think not, for you must know it already…. So now, Good night, my friend…. Hoping your voyage may be a pleasant
and speedy one, and that you may return safe and sound.”³⁴

Carnegie returned safe and sound to New York a few weeks later, but instead of visiting Louise in Oyster Bay,
he traveled to Cresson where his mother was staying. In mid-September, he returned to New York to be greeted
by a “welcome home” letter from Louise: “Would that I might accompany this little note, and be in reality the
first one to greet you on your return to America, but rest assured, in thought I am certainly with you. Well
you see we are still at Oyster Bay, but by the time this reaches you, we shall be on our way home too…. It is
good of you to say you will come to see me so soon; I do so hope nothing will prevent your coming…. Thank you
so much for your nice letters—and for the many and kind thoughts you have for me. They have been a great
happiness to me. But I am forgetting that I am to see you soon, or, rather, I cannot realize that it can be
true. I hope you are well, and that these storms we have had have not reached you on the ocean. Au revoir,
then, until we meet face to face.” As a postscript, she added that she had “just this minute” received his
last letter from Cresson “and its contents fill me with delight. Has your previous knowledge of me taught you
no better than to imagine my friendship a ‘slight and passing one.’ We shall indeed see, My Friend. This past
week has seemed like a year. Will Monday never come?”³⁵

When the two dear friends met again, Carnegie—according to Louise’s biographers—finally declared his love for
Louise and his intention to marry her. She fainted. Carnegie returned by train to Cresson and sent roses.
Louise telegrammed, then wrote her “dearest one” to thank him and apologize for having fainted. “I am feeling
more like myself this morning…I am of a very nervous temperament anyway, and although perfectly strong and
well, cannot stand much excitement, which accounts for my suddenly breaking down as I did the other day. I
hope I did not frighten you very much…. I am looking nicely now, and as soon as I can get a little more used
to my new happiness I shall be all right. You know they say a sudden joy affects like grief or pain—so you
will bear with me, dear, for my heart, small and insignificant as it is, is yours and yours alone.” The note
was signed: “Very lovingly yours, Louise.”³⁶

Whatever had been decided between the two, their lives did not appreciably change. Margaret Carnegie, now in
her seventies, was not well and required more looking after than ever. Her son was not about to introduce a
new person into the household, especially one his mother did not believe he should marry. Louise and Carnegie
went their own ways when they returned to New York City for the winter season. They saw each other regularly,
but not much more than in previous years.

[1]: footnote14.html

## TWELVE

## Mr. Spencer and Mr. Arnold, 1882–1884

WITH THE PUBLICATION of An American Four-in-Hand in Britain, which was well reviewed and enjoyed good sales,
Carnegie moved a step closer to his goal of being as well known as a writer and intellectual as he was as a
businessman. He was elected a member of the Nineteenth Century Club in early 1883. The club, founded by
Courtlandt Palmer, whom Carnegie had met at Madame Botta’s salon, was, the New York Times reported on January
10, “a new departure in polite society…. The idea was to have a radical club, ‘not too radical,’” according to
Palmer, “‘but just radical enough.’”

Palmer, though a professed freethinker and radical, was every inch an old New York gentleman. He held the
meetings of the club in his Gramercy Park residence, “his wife receiving as if at any private soirée, and the
guests appearing in evening dress.” In a lecture later published in London, Palmer acknowledged that, in an
effort “to preclude the intrusion of bores and bigots into the discussion,” he invited “none but speakers of
known capacity and courtesy.” When his guests were seated—and the ladies escorted to their places by a special
committee enlisted for this task—Palmer introduced the main speaker, who lectured for an hour. After a
five-minute recess, Palmer returned to introduce the “disputants,” who were given an hour to comment on the
lecture. The speaker then returned for a fifteen-minute rebuttal. “At the conclusion of the formal exercises
adjournment to the dining room for light refreshments became the order of the evening, and after an additional
hour thus spent amid good cheer and general conversation the gathering would disperse.”¹

Palmer invited the nation’s best-known men of letters to speak to his club: President Charles Eliot Norton of
Harvard and the Reverend Dr. James McCosh, president of Princeton (then known as the University of New
Jersey), spoke on “The Place Religions Should Have in a College”; the Reverend Noah Porter, ex-president of
Yale, on “Evolution”; Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes on “Emerson”; Henry George on “the Irish Question”; Julia Ward
Howe on “Woman Suffrage”; Elizabeth Cady Stanton on “the Influence of Christianity upon Womanhood”; and Thomas
Wentworth Higginson on “The Aristocracy of the Dollar.” It was during this last address that Carnegie made his
debut as a speaker, having been invited by Palmer to be one of the disputants. “This was,” Carnegie recalled
in his Autobiography, “my introduction to a New York audience.”²

With the self-assurance of a man born into his wealth, Higginson had spent an hour criticizing the new
“aristocracy of the dollar” for its poor manners, selfishness, and lack of self-respect. Carnegie, who, with
the evening’s other disputants, had been given a copy of the lecture in advance, turned his attention to the
“aristocracy of birth,” which Higginson appeared to hold as his ideal. The Old World’s kings, princes, dukes,
and lords, he explained with a barbed humor that would have made his Scottish uncles proud, had never been
known for their manners, intelligence, fecundity, or good looks. “Let any visitor see the House of Lords when
it is filled, which will only be for one of two reasons, either when the lords can, in the character of
national legislators, legislate for themselves, or when they can reject a measure beneficial to the masses.
Upon such an occasion one would really think, as he watches the peers pass, or rather hobble in, that every
reformatory, asylum, or home for incurables in Britain, had been asked to send up to Westminster fair
specimens of its inmates. The peers are not a fine-looking body of men.”³

As for the United States, Carnegie denied the existence of any such thing as an “aristocracy of the dollar.”
In no American city, certainly not Boston, Philadelphia, or New York, did men of wealth “hold front rank in
the circles of our recognized best.” If there was an American aristocracy, Carnegie asserted, it was an
“aristocracy of intellect,” not “an aristocracy of the dollar.”⁴

Carnegie thought so much of his response to Higginson that he had it privately printed in pamphlet form, with
the subtitle “My First Speech in New York Somewhere in the Early Eighties.” This was the beginning of a
lifelong practice of spending his own money to have his speeches and articles reprinted in pamphlet form.

Having proved himself a witty and provocative respondent, Carnegie was invited back several times. When, early
in 1884, the subject of debate at the club was “the objects and limits of science,” he took the rather radical
position—even for this group—of dismissing religion as playing any role in the governance of mankind. His
remarks were cited in the February 21 New York Times and picked up by several other papers.

Simultaneously with making his mark in New York, Carnegie was forging his way into London’s intellectual
circles. In February 1882, he made his debut in print in the most prestigious of English journals, the
Fortnightly Review, founded in 1865 by Anthony Trollope, and edited from 1866 on by John Morley. On returning
to New York from his 1881 coaching trip in England, a British friend suggested he write an “account [of] what
your dozen of Americans guests thought of us.” His observations were precisely of the sort that John Morley
was delighted to publish in the Fortnightly Review, which had, under his leadership, become the leading
Liberal journal of opinion. His friends, Carnegie observed, had been astounded to discover that the British
“people were in a ferment, satisfied with nothing, but agitating for drastic changes in almost every
institution.” The only solution to the dissatisfaction in Britain was thoroughgoing reform of church, state,
and society, precisely what Liberals like Morley were already agitating for.⁵

Morley, though the same age and height as Carnegie, had little else in common with him other than politics. He
was intrigued, nonetheless, by the Scottish American millionaire. The two men began at once a conversation
that would last the rest of Carnegie’s life. Morley introduced him round London’s literary and Liberal
circles. It was through Morley’s good graces that Carnegie, in 1882, met both Prime Minister Gladstone and the
man who would become his intellectual hero, Herbert Spencer.

Spencer was, at the time, the English-speaking world’s best-known and best-selling philosopher. He published
his first book, Social Statics, in 1851, and from that point on issued a steady stream of closely argued but
remarkably readable articles and books on what he called his “synthetic philosophy,” an all-encompassing
philosophical system, based loosely on recent findings in biology and psychology. By the 1860s, Spencer’s work
had begun appearing in the United States, due largely to the efforts of his chief disciple, Edward Livingston
Youmans. The American philosopher and historian John Fiske read Spencer for the first time in 1862 while a
student at Harvard. “My soul is on fire,” he wrote to his mother. Carl Schurz, the future senator from Ohio,
read Spencer’s Social Statics in his Civil War tent “by the light of a tallow-candle.” The Atlantic Monthly,
in 1864, proclaimed Spencer “a power in the world,” and especially in America, “for here sooner than elsewhere
the mass feel as utility what a few recognize as truth.”⁶

“In the three decades after the Civil War,” Richard Hofstadter has written, “it was impossible to be active in
any field of intellectual work without mastering Spencer.” Even Mrs. Lightfoot Lee, the heroine of Henry
Adams’s novel Democracy (1880), had talked of him “for an entire evening with a very literary transcendental
commission-merchant.”⁷

Spencer was tall, gaunt, and balding. He looked a bit like a villain from a Dickens novel—and acted like one.
He had little use for well-wishers, critics, journalists, waiters, cabmen, or new acquaintances; he seldom
engaged in conversation since he believed talk “fatigued him and diminished his power for work”; he dined
alone, when possible, and when not possible, put on specially designed ear-pads to blot out frivolous chatter;
he seldom made jokes, but had opinions to offer on everything.⁸

Spencer’s friends and admirers invited him to visit the United States, but the English philosopher had, with
age, grown increasingly insomniac, hypochondriacal, and resistant to any change that might interfere with his
work. Having successfully survived a trip to Egypt the year before and wanting very much to see North America
before he died, which he considered a possibility at any moment, he finally consented to tour the continent in
the summer of 1882. His oldest friend, Edward Lott, agreed to come along and serve as a “buffer” between him
and anyone who dared to approach unbidden. “What he dreaded most,” according to his private secretary and
later biographer, David Duncan, “was ‘the bother of having to see so many people.’” He agreed to attend a
public dinner in his honor to be held in New York City, but only because, as he wrote Youmans, “to decline
would be awkward; and as I propose to limit myself a good deal in the way of social intercourse and
receptions, I must, I conclude, yield to some arrangement which shall replace more detailed entertainments.”⁹

The ocean passage was uneventful, except that having secured a berth in the middle of the ship, he was kept
awake all night “by the shrieks of the fog-whistle, which was just over my head.” He was clearly in no mood to
converse with voluble Scottish-born American industrialists; but Carnegie, having determined to make his
acquaintance, was irresistible. He had booked passage on Spencer’s ship, and approached the philosopher while
they were on the tender at Liverpool that ferried passengers and provisions to the ocean liner and handed him
a letter of introduction from John Morley. He then arranged to be seated at Spencer’s table, where, Spencer
recalled in his autobiography, he “pressed me to visit him at Cresson, a place on the Alleghenies…used as a
summer refuge by over-heated Americans. I eventually yielded to the pressure.”¹⁰

Spencer, who wrote in some detail about his visit to America, had little to say of his trip to Pittsburgh and
Cresson, and none of it positive. Though he had resolved to stop only at hotels so as to avoid having to
engage in unnecessary conversation and take too many meals with his hosts, “the repulsiveness of Pittsburgh”
induced him to accept an invitation to stay overnight with Thomas Carnegie in Homewood. After a whirlwind tour
of the Edgar Thomson steel mill, he and Mr. Lott were transported east to Cresson “by special carriage, which
to my great comfort contained a sleeping compartment.” They stayed only a day at Carnegie’s cottage before
setting out on their travels again, this time to Harrisburg, which Spencer found a “not-very-interesting
town,” then to Washington, where “the waiters, negro and half-caste, were considerably surprised by my
disregard of their dictations” and he was considerably annoyed at the “passion of the Americans for iced
water.” Then on to Baltimore, where he spent five days at the Montebello residence of John Garrett, the
president of the B&O.¹¹

The highlight of the tour, at least for Spencer’s American admirers, was the special dinner held in his honor
at Delmonico’s in New York, which was reported at length in the next morning’s newspapers. Spencer, obsessed
with the fear that he might break down entirely, begged William M. Evarts, the former secretary of state who
presided over the event and sat next to him, “to limit his conversation with me as much as possible, and to
expect very meager responses.”¹²

The guests who honored Spencer that evening included prominent men from business, politics, the arts, and the
academy. Carnegie, though he was not one of the official organizers, attended, as did journalists E. L. Godkin
and Charles A. Dana; the industrialist Cyrus Field; current and future U.S. senators Carl Schurz, Chauncey
Depew, and Elihu Root; New York City Mayor—and former iron maker—Abram Hewitt; Congressman Perry Belmont;
Albert Bierstadt, the artist; Charles Francis Adams, Henry’s father and former ambassador to Great Britain;
sociologists William Graham Sumner and Lester Ward; and two of the country’s most influential preachers, Henry
Ward Beecher and Lyman Abbott.¹³

Spencer’s trip marks the beginning of Carnegie’s infatuation or obsession with the English philosopher. For
the rest of Spencer’s life (despite his fears, he would live to the ripe old age of eighty-three), Carnegie
referred to him in his writings and lectures, sought him out when he visited London, and showered him with
letters and gifts, including a grand piano. Spencer replied to every letter and every gift, but insisted that
he was too busy or too ill for a visit. On January 11, 1883, in response to a letter from Carnegie hoping to
see him that summer in London, Spencer wrote, almost warmly, that he indeed recalled Mr. Carnegie. Although he
encouraged Carnegie to “look me up forthwith after your arrival,” he held out only a small hope that they
might get together. “A journey to Queen’s Gardens [Spencer’s home] may prove bootless; for I am very apt to be
out. If in the morning I am able to work, I am away from the house at my study; and in the afternoon I usually
go into town. But the Athenaeum Club is my constant haunt in the later part of the day; and you are almost
certain to find me there after 4 or 5 o’clock.”¹⁴

A year later, Carnegie wrote again: “The Cable tells us you are about to sail for Australia—That this is
necessary for your recovery. This is sad news for me and I must write and express my feelings—I have lived
much with you since we met—Have read your works and have that satisfaction in life which comes only from the
informed mind.—In one great department I have learnt from you my teacher. I rejoice that you are about to take
a long sea voyage but do go on a sailing ship—I wish I were to be your Companion…. Perhaps you will come home
this way—How many would be glad if you did so…. It fills the mouth to say Bon Voyage, My Master, I wish we
shall meet ere long.” Above the signature and salutation, Carnegie had written: “to you reverence.”¹⁵

Carnegie was only slightly exaggerating when he claimed in the Autobiography that it was only with Spencer’s
help that he finally “got rid of theology and the supernatural [and] found the truth of evolution.” Having
discarded the basic tenets of Calvinist orthodoxy—the doctrines of original sin and infant damnation—and then
left the Swedenborgians, he tried hard as a young man to hold on to some kernel of religious belief. He wanted
desperately to believe that there was some moral order to the universe, but refused to put his faith in a
divine being whose existence and omnipotence he found entirely unreasonable. “At this period of my life I was
all at sea. No creed, no system, reached me. All was chaos. I had outgrown the old and had found no
substitute.” Why did some individuals and societies succeed, while others failed? Was there any connection
between good deeds on earth, material rewards, and eternal salvation? Was there an afterlife? The law of
evolution provided a systematic way of answering such questions and explaining, without recourse to the
supernatural, the “sublime truth of the upward ascent of man.” It provided a scientific basis for a belief in
human progress.¹⁶

Spencer’s synthetic philosophy was founded on the proposition that continuous motion and change were constants
in nature and history. Molecules evolved into complex organisms; nebulae into planets; microscopic
intrauterine germs into human bodies; families into tribes; and tribes into complex societies. With increasing
heterogeneity came enhanced integration. Complex organisms succeeded simple ones; disorganization and anarchy
gave way to organization and coordination. Primitive societies were, for example, ruled haphazardly by
solitary chieftains; advanced civilized societies were coordinated more effectively by a series “of regulative
classes—governmental, administrative, military, ecclesiastical, legal, etc.” The apogee of human achievement
was industrial society, with its complex division of labor among individuals, towns, regions, nations, and
continents; its “commercial process by which a million’s worth of commodities is distributed daily”; its
varieties of multiform national governments, each “aided by its subordinate local governments and their
officers, down to the police in the streets.”¹⁷

What counted most for Carnegie was not simply that Spencer had decreed that evolutionary progress was
inevitable and industrial society an improvement on its forbears, but that this progress was moral as well as
material. There was, for Spencer, a discernable order to the course of human events and the structure of human
societies, study of which would reveal the existence of moral laws that were “like the other laws of the
universe—sure, inflexible, ever active, and having no exceptions.” Societies that obeyed these moral laws
would prosper; those that disregarded them were doomed to failure. The social edifice that lacks “rectitude in
its component parts [and] is not built on upright principles…will assuredly tumble to pieces. As well might we
seek to light a fire with ice, feed cattle on stones, hang our hats on cobwebs, or otherwise disregard the
physical laws of the world, as go contrary to its equally imperative ethical laws.”

“The enslavement of the negroes serves for a good example.” Acting from the precepts of a political economy
that did not coincide with moral laws, the slave masters had sought for themselves “a mine of wealth” by
replacing free with slave labor. “Their golden visions have been far from realized however. Slave countries
are comparatively poverty-stricken all over the world…. West-Indian history has been a history of distress and
complainings…. The southern states of America are far behind their northern neighbors in prosperity.”¹⁸

The natural world and human society were governed by “beneficent necessity.” Turning Thomas Malthus on his
head even more radically than Darwin would seven years later, Spencer argued in 1852 that population growth
led not to accelerating destitution, but to “greater production of the necessities of life.” “From the
beginning pressure of population has been the proximate cause of progress…. It forced men into the social
state; made social organization inevitable; and had developed the social sentiments…it is daily pressing us
into closer contact and more mutually dependent relationships.”¹⁹

As societies grow in size, they become more heterogeneous, more differentiated, more specialized, more social,
more cooperative, more integrated, and ever more capable of adapting to new situations.

Progress, therefore, is not an accident, but a necessity. Instead of civilization being artificial, it is a
part of nature; all of a piece with the development of the embryo or the unfolding of a flower…. As surely as
the same creature assumes the different forms of cart-house and race-horse, according as its habits demand
strength or speed; as surely as a blacksmith’s arm grows large, and the skin of a labourer’s hand thick…so
surely must the human faculties be moulded into complete fitness for the social state; so surely must the
things we call evil and immorality disappear; so surely must man become perfect.²⁰

Spencer offered Carnegie and his generation an intellectual foundation for their optimism, their sense that
history was a record of forward progress, by arguing that material progress went hand-in-hand with moral
progress, that industrialization was a higher state of civilization than that which had preceded it, and that
the future would be even rosier than the present. In his Autobiography, Carnegie recalled that after reading
Spencer, “‘All is well since all grows better’ became my motto, my true source of comfort. Man was not created
with an instinct for his own degradation, but from the lower he had risen to the higher forms. Nor is there
any conceivable end to his march to perfection. His face is turned to the light; he stands in the sun and
looks upward.” Henry Adams, born in February 1838 a little more than two years after Carnegie, spoke for their
generation when he wrote in his own autobiography, that “for the young men whose lives were cast in the
generation between 1867 and 1900, Law should be Evolution from lower to higher, aggregation of the atom in the
mass, concentration of multiplicity in unity, compulsion of anarchy in order.”²¹

Whether they read Spencer for themselves, as Carnegie had, or absorbed his teachings secondhand, his
evolutionary philosophy provided the Gilded Age multimillionaires with a framework for rationalizing and
justifying their outsized material success. In the Spencerian universe, Carnegie and his fellow millionaires
were agents of progress who were contributing to the forward march of history into the industrial epoch.
Carnegie was not exaggerating when he proclaimed himself a disciple of Spencer and referred to him, in almost
idolatrous terms, as his master, his teacher, one of “our greatest benefactors,” and the “great thinker of our
age.”²²

 

SPENCER WAS THE prize specimen in Carnegie’s collection of writers and intellectuals. His next conquest,
Matthew Arnold, was every bit as impressive. Carnegie met Arnold at a June 1883 dinner party in London given
by Dolly Thompson, the wife of the owner of the Pall Mall Gazette, the evening newspaper that John Morley had
edited since leaving the Fortnightly Review the year before. Carnegie invited Arnold to dine with him. Arnold
graciously accepted: “Would Tuesday in next week suit you? If so, I will dine with you on that day with great
pleasure, whether in hotel, palace, or cottage.”²³

If Herbert Spencer was the English-speaking world’s greatest living philosopher, Matthew Arnold was surely its
best-known man of letters. Poet, cultural critic, social commentator, and, most recently, the author of
several books on the Bible and modern Protestantism, Arnold had become so well known that, when he finally
consented to undertake a lecture tour of the United States, he was represented by Richard D’Oyly Carte,
Gilbert and Sullivan’s producer and the manager-owner of the Savoy Theatre, and Major James B. Pond, America’s
premier lecture agent and promoter.

When Carnegie discovered that Arnold was contemplating a lecture tour of the States, largely to pay off debts
incurred in sending his son to Oxford (from which he was asked to leave without a degree) and to Australia
(where he failed to make his fortune), he volunteered his services as host. His offer was accepted.²⁴

In late October 1883, Arnold, with his wife and daughter, arrived in New York. “We expected a two or three
hours wait with our baggage, but Mr. Carnegie met us with his Secretary, took all trouble off our hands, and
bore us away up to the Windsor Hotel in a carriage,” Arnold wrote his sister. He was something of a celebrity
in London, but never envisaged the fanfare with which he was greeted in New York. “The blaring publicity of
this place is beyond all that I have an idea of,” he wrote on arrival. “My managers are anxious I should not
refuse to see people—the press people above all…but there are so many of them that from 8½ a.m. to 10 p.m. the
knocking at one’s door and the bringing in of cards is incessant…. The interviewers have made life terrible.”
It would have been far worse had not Carnegie had his secretary reserve “a parlor and two bed rooms” for the
Arnolds at the Windsor Hotel and arrange for them to be seated at his table for dinner.²⁵

Carnegie, having invited the Arnolds to be his guests at the Windsor, intended to make the most of their
presence. On October 30, Andrew and his mother hosted a reception for them at the Windsor Hotel. When Mrs.
Youmans, whom Carnegie had met with her husband during Spencer’s tour, asked how she should dress for the
affair, she was told by his secretary that “Mr. Carnegie says he supposes most of the guests will come in full
dress on Saturday evening, but thinks the ladies know best.”²⁶

The New York Times, on October 28, listed among the guests whom Mr. Carnegie had presented to Mr. Arnold, E.
L. Godkin, editor of The Nation and the Evening Post; the industrialist Cyrus Field; Mr. and Mrs. August
Belmont; Leopold Damrosch, conductor of the Oratorio Society and New York Symphony Society; and a smattering
of churchmen, including Rabbi Gottheil of Temple Emmanuel and the Hindu reformer, Babu Protap Chundr
Mozoomdar. The Astors and the Vanderbilts had been invited but stayed away. They did not, in general,
patronize newly arrived industrialists who lived in hotels.²⁷

On November 4, the week after the event, the New York Times ran a second item, a satire about a “‘reception’
at a public house by a rich ironmaster.”

“‘Who the deuce is Mr. Andrew Carnegie?’ asked a character named Mahlstick,[*][1] disdainfully, holding out at
arm’s length an invitation card. ‘And why should he invite me to meet Matthew Arnold, whom he possibly does
not know? And if I go to meet, to be introduced to, Mr. Matthew Arnold, who is to introduce me to Andrew
Carnegie?’”

“In this free-and-easy land it is the privilege of every man to consider himself acquainted with every other
man whose acquaintance is temporarily desirable,” the Times columnist answered. “If people who are in society
or who hope to be—with money—invite nobody to their parties but those whom they know they might fare hardly at
times.”

Three days later, Andrew and his mother accompanied the Arnolds to Chickering Hall for Arnold’s first lecture.
The 1,250-seat theater had been completely sold out—at one dollar a ticket. Unfortunately, Arnold, who had
never before lectured to so many in so large a hall, was inaudible beyond the first few rows. In this age
before electricity, microphones, or amplification of any sort, it took a special kind of voice—and training—to
project into a large auditorium. The only sounds echoing through Chickering Hall that evening were audience
members screaming at Arnold to speak louder and, when he did not, making their way to the exit. When the
Arnolds and Carnegies returned to their hotel, Andrew warned his friend that to succeed as a lecturer he had
to place himself under the tutelage of an elocutionist.²⁸

From this point on, the Arnolds and the Carnegies would remain great friends, and visit one another whenever
they had the chance. Carnegie’s attraction to Arnold was genuine—and vice versa. Arnold, the Oxford-educated
son of the headmaster of Rugby, like Carnegie, the unschooled son of a Dunfermline handloom weaver, had an
omnivorous intellectual curiosity, and was a brilliant conversationalist. Both men respected American
political institutions; feared and abhorred the Philistine insularity of the English-speaking middle classes;
were sympathetic to and curious about non-Western cultures and religions; regarded much of organized religion
as “clap-trap”; disdained British aristocracy for its inbred dullness; adored the poetry of Robert Burns; and
believed fervently that literature, art, and culture “mattered,” especially in “the mechanical and material
civilization” they inhabited. For Carnegie, who sought to improve his mind wherever he might be, Arnold was
the ideal companion, teacher, and friend. Carnegie would deeply grieve the premature death of his “dear, good
and great friend” in 1888.²⁹

[1]: footnote15.html

## THIRTEEN

## “The Star-spangled Scotchman,” 1884

CARNEGIE AND Louise Whitfield had, by the fall of 1883, entered into an informal engagement. They were
committed to marriage, but had set no date and they had made no announcements. Carnegie was waiting for his
mother to regain her health so that he could break the news of his engagement to her, or conversely, though he
would not have put it so bluntly, he was waiting for her to die. She did neither and the engagement remained
in a strange sort of limbo.

Carnegie tried to include Louise in his activities, but because their engagement remained secret, there were
limits placed on the frequency with which they could meet. Louise remained at Carnegie’s mercy, never knowing
when or if he was going to call, or where he would be the following week. She was not invited to the reception
for Matthew Arnold, though she did, with her mother, hear one of his New York lectures. She was excluded from
the Nineteenth Century Club meetings until Carnegie in April 1884 asked his secretary to request that
Courtlandt Palmer add her name to the guest list. As single women did not go out, even to lectures, by
themselves—and as he could not escort Louise without inviting talk—he asked that the Reverend and Mrs. Eaton
also be added to the list so that they could accompany Louise to meetings.¹

While the relationship with Louise remained chaste and, except when they were on horseback, chaperoned, there
were other women whom Carnegie visited unchaperoned. On March 30, 1883, to cite but one example, he received a
specially delivered message at the Windsor from Charles Mackie, his private secretary—“Telegram from Everett
House signed Carrie reads: ‘please call this afternoon between four and six, am alone.’” Four months later, in
August 1883, a Miss Vincent wrote asking Mackie to call on her at once. Mackie, who may or may not have
visited her as she requested, responded a week later that he was “unable to assist you in any way and…you will
therefore have to wait till Mr. Carnegie’s return. As requested, I will treat your letter as confidential.” We
unfortunately don’t know who either Carrie or Miss Vincent were, but the way the messages from them were
handled suggests that there was something about the relationships that had to remain hidden.²

The months following their informal engagement were not easy ones for Louise or Andrew. Each, it appeared,
harbored significant doubts about marriage. The fragments from Louise’s diary that are cited by her authorized
biographers demonstrate her mounting ambivalence about leaving her mother and younger siblings. Had Carnegie
been willing to settle down at once, Louise’s decision might have been an easier one. But Carnegie showed no
inclination, even at age fifty, to give up his wandering ways or spend more than half the year in New York.
Louise, for her part, was not sure she wanted to be away from her family for extended periods.

In late April 1884, as Carnegie prepared to leave as usual for England and Scotland for the warm weather
months, Louise “took the last sad step” and broke off their engagement. They would continue to see one another
in New York City, and, when separated by an ocean, to correspond. But talk of marriage was put on hold,
indefinitely, perhaps permanently.

Carnegie wrote Louise from Britain that June—as he did each June—describing in detail his adventures,
expressing his hope that her summer was going to turn out to be “a happy one,” and giving her avuncular advice
about good literature. He was off on yet another coaching trip, this one studded with celebrities, as he
gleefully informed her. William Black, who had acquired a transatlantic reputation for his widely read
fictional account of a coaching journey, was along for the ride, as was Matthew Arnold and his daughters, and
“Mr. Edwin A. Abbey, who illustrates for Harper’s. How delightful it all has been!” The prime minister was
unable to join them, but had sent along a son and daughter instead. Edwin Arnold, Louise and Andrew’s favorite
author, joined the party for part of the way, as did John Champlin, his editor (who would publish his own
book-length account of the coaching tour), and Samuel Storey, a radical MP.³

The tour was a grand success, Carnegie, “bronzed and tanned by wind and weather,” enthusiastically reported in
an interview with the Pall Mall Gazette on his return to London. “‘If I were not an ironmaster, I would be a
gypsy,’ said Mr. Carnegie, although he added sotto voce that ‘a small reserve at one’s bankers’ would be
pleasant to fall back upon.’”⁴

The coaching party included “three American girls—a very pretty colony they formed: one of them with a
picturesque hat, whose sweep of brim and feathers ferociously set the wrong way formed one of the most
conspicuous objects in our subsequent travels.” Black did not mention Carnegie by name in his Harper’s New
Monthly Magazine article, but described his host as “a shrewd and able Scotchman, who went to America a good
many years ago, and achieved a fair enough competence there, which he modestly attributes, not to his own
brains and business capacity, but to the excellence of republican institutions, toward which he is
proportionately and warmly grateful…. The Star-spangled Scotchman, as we have got to calling him, is abundant
and even eager with all his information, and hath a pretty gift of eloquence, moreover; so that through the
agency of his eulogies and paeans and grateful hymns of praise we have come to construct in our imagination a
very fine America indeed—a land of purity and peace, of sweetness and light, of incorruptibility and
harmonious aim, where the office-seeker is not, and the Wall Street lion and lamb lie down together, and
Tammany Hall is but a dream of the envious foreigner.”⁵

Carnegie was, truth be told, becoming a bit insufferable on the subject of the backwardness of British social
and political institutions. Unable to remain on the sidelines in what he considered to be the ongoing battle
between feudalism and democracy in Great Britain, he had, the year before, put his money where his mouth had
always been and invested in a newspaper syndicate with the North Country radical MP, journalist, and publisher
Samuel Storey. It had always been Carnegie’s dream to own a newspaper—he had mentioned it in his 1868 note to
himself. Now, with Storey’s assistance, he had become part owner of nearly twenty of them, an informal chain
extending from Newcastle, Storey’s constituency, through Birmingham, the center of radical agitation, to
London.

Carnegie had entered the newspaper business because he thought he could make money at the same time as he
promoted the republican cause in Britain. His notion was that by importing a bit of American dazzle to the
still rather staid English weekly, he could increase circulation, reduce costs, and attract a new constituency
of workingmen to his newspapers—and the “radical” program.

In aligning himself with Storey, Carnegie had taken a perch on the far left wing of the Liberal Party. The
centerpiece of the radical agenda in Britain in 1883 was the extension of the franchise. The Reform Act of
1867 had more than doubled the electorate and given the vote to male heads of households, but it had not
extended the vote to all men, regardless of income, status in the household, or location. Carnegie hoped that
this issue would be the central focus of his weeklies. “I believe in the triumph of the Radical element,” he
wrote Storey on January 3, 1883, at the beginning of their partnership. “The extended franchise is the lever
we need to accomplish our ends, ergo:—Go for that; other things can wait. I hope you are to be found in the
front charging solidly for that one thing—extended franchise.” Though he was not a newspaper man and
acknowledged as much, Carnegie offered suggestions on every aspect of the business. The London Echo, their
prize possession, was, he feared, “not well printed. Seems to me that white paper would eventually make it
more popular. Nothing should be omitted to give it circulation.” Carnegie was convinced that success was
assured. He planned, in fact, to shift his full attention from steel to newspapers, as soon as he could. “I am
going out of business,” he confessed to Samuel Storey, “but it takes a little more time than I bargained
for—that’s all. Then I want more papers, so look about you for another at Portsmouth. I’ll have ready cash
some day you know!”⁶

As might have been expected, the entry of a Scottish-American ironmaster into the still rather closed world of
English journalism was not warmly received by either the newspaper or the political establishment. His and
Storey’s objective was, his critics charged, nothing more than a “gigantic conspiracy to ‘nobble’ the press.”
(The term was usually applied to racehorses. To nobble a racehorse was to drug it; the word also referred to
stealing, swindling, and cheating.) Readers of the Storey-Carnegie papers were warned that they were not going
to get honest Liberal opinions, but rather “a mere reprint of instruction from headquarters in Birmingham or
London, or from the writing-room of a prosperous ironmonger living in Pittsburg, Penn.”⁷

To his British critics, Carnegie embodied the worst of Yankee traits. He was brash, loud, overbearing,
self-righteous, and contemptuous of ancient British institutions. Having made clear his disdain for the
monarchy, he had now taken to expressing his contempt for a Parliament that refused to take up the question of
political reform. Asked by an American reporter who visited him at Cresson whether it was true that he “wished
to stand for Parliament,” he responded that he would not “care much to enter Parliament even if I were a
British citizen. The press is the true source of power in Britain, as in America. The time of Parliament is
consumed discussing trifling affairs…. Members of Parliament sit merely to carry out the plans dictated by the
press, the true exponent of the wishes of the people.” He could exercise more power over the course of British
affairs as a press lord than as a member of Commons.⁸

Carnegie’s ungentlemanly habit of speaking his mind to reporters about what he unfailingly referred to as
Britain’s “antiquated institutions and abuses” did not sit well even with those who agreed with his agenda.
The next year, upon applying for membership in the Reform Club, he would get twenty blackballs, more than
enough for rejection. “I am afraid he will be annoyed,” Matthew Arnold wrote his daughter, “as an active
political club, like the Reform, is just the sort of place he would enjoy.”⁹

Despite Carnegie’s enthusiasm and the rapidity with which he bought newspapers and tried to organize them into
a syndicate, the business never took off. His Pittsburgh enterprises had succeeded because he had carefully
chosen competent business partners he could trust. Samuel Storey was more an agitator than a businessman and
unwilling to dedicate himself to presiding over Carnegie’s newspaper trust. (He was also the only Carnegie
partner who was a tall man. All the rest of them—Phipps, Tom Carnegie, Frick—were almost as small as he was.)
Without a Phipps or Captain Jones or Tom to watch over it, Carnegie’s newspaper venture never had a chance. By
1885, he was ready to declare the experiment a failure and sell his shares in the business.

His British critics had charged that he had become a press baron because he intended to enter British
politics. And, indeed, he had begun to think along these lines. He came by such aspirations naturally: his
uncles Morrison had been successful local politicians. Why should he not follow in their footsteps?

Throughout the early 1880s, he made contacts and formed friendships with leading Liberals, including the
party’s grand old man, William Ewarts Gladstone, and Lord Rosebery, the dashing, rich, and eloquent young
Scottish lord whom everyone was sure would one day ascend to the prime minister’s office. Carnegie’s need to
be always in the company of the wise and powerful was overwhelming. He cared little for the size of a man’s
pocketbook, much more for the quality of his mind and the extent of his political influence. He was drawn to
Rosebery, as he had been to Morley and would be to Gladstone, because he was both learned and influential.
Rosebery’s family estates were in Edinburgh and Carnegie invited him to attend the opening of his Dunfermline
library, which Rosebery declined, with regret. In August 1883, learning that Rosebery planned to visit
America, he offered his services as tour guide, as he had to Herbert Spencer and Matthew Arnold.

The question is how can I be of service to you and lady Rosebery upon the other side. I do not know your
plans, but if you can give me a week or so of your time, I should like to take a special [private railway] car
and show Pennsylvania to you. Eastern Pennsylvania you have the…anthracite deposits and colleries—our own
Western Pennsylvania, the natural oil wells, our iron, Coal, Steel Rail mills and at Pittsburgh the dirtiest
place on earth. I think you and Lady Rosebery could really spend a novel week in the [private railway] car, we
take a cook…and can either sleep in it, or go to Hotels when there are to be had. If you know how great the
pleasure would be to me if I can give you a pleasure. One thing I should guarantee to keep you to yourselves
and not bore you with uninteresting people. If we kept to the car we should avoid all occasion for Company.

At the end of their Pennsylvania tour, Carnegie hoped Lord and Lady Rosebery would accompany him to Cresson,
where he would put them up at the nearby Mountain House.¹⁰

They accepted his invitation. Their tour was a success. Rosebery and Carnegie got along so famously that
Rosebery offered to put Carnegie up for the seat in Commons from Edinburgh. Carnegie was intrigued, but had to
say no. “Referring to the Edinburgh idea,” he wrote Rosebery, “much as this stirs my ambition I must still
decide that it will not do to enter upon it until I see more clearly the result of matters in America. I may
have to give attention to affairs for a year, and besides all this you know I must be governed by my mother’s
condition—she has no one but me. Please let matters rest for the present—I am greatly indebted for the
interest you take in the matter, and perhaps ere the necessity arises for deciding I may be free to act.”¹¹

Six months later, when he was again invited to stand for Commons from Edinburgh, he responded as he had to
Rosebery that, while flattered by the invitation, he was “compelled…to say, that as at present situated, I am
not yet prepared to enter public life and devote myself wholly to the advocacy, and support of those radical
reforms which I have so much at heart. If, however, it ever happens, in some future day, that, after a full
and frank exposition of my political convictions, before the advanced Liberals, they select me as their
stand-bearer [sic], and elect me, then I shall have found the one position which I would not exchange for any
other upon Earth, for believe me, I should much rather rise, in the House of Commons, to speak in Edinburgh’s
name for some great reform than to play at ‘King of Great Britain.’”¹²

It was through Morley and Rosebery that Carnegie came into closer contact with Prime Minister Gladstone.
Carnegie, given to a sort of hero worship, was smitten at their first meeting.

No two men could have been more dissimilar. Gladstone, the son of a wealthy Tory manufacturer, had been
educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford. Carnegie, the son of an impoverished linen weaver, had ended his
formal eduaction at the age of twelve. Carnegie was small, barrel-chested, with a full mane of white hair and
white beard; Gladstone was tall, gaunt, bald, and clean-shaven. He was also somber, pious, a devout Christian,
and an outspoken critic of Herbert Spencer. Like all Carnegie’s new friends, he was an enthusiastic
conversationalist who could talk at breakfast, luncheon, and far into the night on any subject. Gladstone
brilliantly gave voice to Carnegie’s still nascent political views. He was for Home Rule in Ireland, tolerance
for religious and national minorities inside and outside Great Britain, international arbitration, and, as far
as any prime minister might be, a fierce opponent of British chauvinism and militarism.

Gladstone’s influence over his younger Scots-American admirer extended beyond the political realm to the
ethical. Carnegie did not regard being a millionaire as a particular badge of honor, but neither had he been
ashamed of his status—until, that is, he listened to Gladstone, in one of his thundering lecture sermons,
excoriate what he regarded as a new and decidedly inferior species of American millionaire. In January 1885,
Carnegie wrote Gladstone from the Windsor Hotel enclosing with his letter £200 for Gladstone’s “two
charities.” He then made the rather startling confession that “after this year, I expect never to make or
rather save another dollar…. I remember well Mr. Gladstone’s words anent our American millionaires. ‘The
desire to hoard’ (said he, shaking that finger of his)—is the lowest form of intellectual degradation.”
Carnegie reported to Gladstone that when he told Herbert Spencer about their exchanges, Spencer remarked that
“‘Mr. G. should have said “Moral” degradation, the motive is moral.’ Well,” Carnegie concluded, “whichever it
is, I intend to avoid it.”¹³

This letter was written almost four and a half years before the publication of the “Gospel of Wealth” essays,
in which Carnegie pledged to give away his fortune and urged other millionaires to do the same.

The sons of fathers with resources, Gladstone, Morley, and Arnold disdained those who devoted their lives to
accumulation. From this point on, Carnegie would dedicate himself, as they had done, to public service and
higher literary pursuits. He would not run from the opportunity to make money, but neither would he let it
absorb the larger part of his energies. On April 27, 1884, he made his first headlines as a philanthropist
when he donated $50,000 for the building and equipping of teaching laboratories for medical students at
Bellevue Hospital. The New York Times article announcing the gift singled him out as “one of those, too few in
number, who, like the late Peter Cooper, desired to enjoy in their life-time the good which they do to
others.”

The following March, in 1885, Carnegie was the key speaker at the Bellevue Hospital Medical College graduation
at the Metropolitan Opera House. “When he stepped to the front of the stage,” the New York Times reported,
“the entire graduating class rose and gave him three sonorous cheers.” Carnegie’s speech to the graduates was
the first in a series he would give over the next several decades on similar occasions. He began by indirectly
calling attention to himself in telling the graduates how fortunate they were to have been born without
fortunes. Being born poor—he would emphasize in this speech and countless more to follow—was a virtue, not a
deficit, as it forced the young man to be self-sufficient at an early age. “You should be grateful to a kind
Providence for fathers who have not burdened you with riches…. By bequeathing the necessity to work the poor
man leaves a richer heritage to his son than the millionaire can possibly give. Poverty at the beginning of
life is a positive blessing.” He then congratulated them on their choice of profession and urged them to
extend their reach from the “bodily ailments” to the “subtler realm of mind” and prepare themselves to be “the
sage counselor, the confidential friend and physician to the moral and mental faculties as well as to the
body.”¹⁴

 

CARNEGIE had planned to spend the summer of 1884 in England and Scotland; but, worried about his mother’s
failing health, he returned to the United States in mid-July. “Yes, My Friend,” he wrote Louise upon arriving
at Cresson,

I am upon this side and the receipt of your bright letter this morning has made me happier than anything that
has occurred since my arrival here…. Did you see Miss Arnold [Matthew’s daughter] is engaged to a New York
lawyer? Her younger sister is the cleverer, but she isn’t pretty. Too bad clever young ladies are rarely
beautiful. There are exceptions; I think of one. I spent a night at the Windsor—walked past your home to see
it all closed, but boasting a…new awning over the door. Not a soul in town I knew, or cared to see that night,
except I did want to find you, and you were gone, too. Just as well—better, no doubt, I said, and walked back
to the Hotel. I have avoided the sad point till the last. Mother is not doing well. She was better for a few
days, but this week there seems to be a relapse. She hasn’t been out of bed for two days, and I have the heart
taken out of me whenever I fail to keep that subject out of mind. Your letter this morning gave me a respite,
and I was bright and happy for a while. I hope you will write to me now and then.¹⁵

Their letters that summer were warm and flirtatious. A few months’ separation may have convinced both that
they had been hasty in ending their courtship. They tried to imagine a life together, each desirous of but
reluctant to make a commitment.

“Sometimes it is the best discipline to compel one’s self not to give way and write,” Andrew wrote her later
in the summer.

I have been trying it. Dangerous ground, this, for me. I wish you were here, many a time…. We drive or ride
every day. It is hot this P.M. and we four drive at five. Why doesn’t Mother write you, and why couldn’t you
come if she did? I ask, but this is absurd. You have your duties to keep you with your Mother always. Pity it
is not different, for I’m sure you would enjoy Cresson. So sorry you are anxious to return to town. I am just
the reverse. The mountains for me! Still, I must be in NY about September 1st or a little later, and that the
pretty housekeeper [Louise] will be at 35 W. 48th does make the prospect less deplorable. Mother goes to Tom’s
September 15th from here, and I’ll be alone in NY for a time. Until your circle returns, perhaps you will take
pity upon me and tell me I can visit you often and be welcome…. [Mother] sends regards to you and says Mrs.
Whitfield is so fortunate in having a good, kind capable daughter. I think so, too, and we both conclude by
saying kind things about you, and I see you, oh, how clearly, in all your grace and beauty!¹⁶

Louise and Carnegie returned to New York in the fall, not quite knowing what to expect. Their first few
meetings were awkward. Instead of running into his arms and professing that she truly loved him, Louise
confessed her fears about married life. Carnegie, upset with himself for anticipating that the doubts she had
harbored in the spring would have vanished by the fall, was unable to comfort her as she needed to be
comforted. With his own anxieties about marriage fully present, he was incapable of making hers go away.
Frightened now that an attractive younger woman could never truly love a strange-looking, pear-shaped man,
several inches shorter and twenty years older, he gave up and called off any attempt at reconciliation.

“Excuse me tonight. I am not in the right mood to see you,” he wrote that autumn, in what he expected would be
their last communication for some time.

Twice you have longed for me when absent. Twice my presence has brought you only dead sea fruit. No further
proof necessary to prove we are only made to be friends. I know this now quite as well as you do, or better,
and accept it, but a little more time should elapse before we start anew as friends. I shall be away and so
busy next week. Upon my return I shall call and begin a friend’s part. By that time you will feel a sense of
relief and be free and happy. Believe me, when the man comes whom alone you should marry, your nature will
thaw and burst into flame. You never can be more than friend to me, as you know. Don’t try.

P.S. We cannot say the true word to each other. I refuse to believe it when you are close beside me. You can’t
bear to say plainly what you feel. You have been good and honest and brave enough to do so several times, but
how painful to you! There is no justification for annoying you so. In my heart I understand. I write these
words as the only means of conveying the truth.¹⁷

In a painfully eloquent letter, Louise forcefully denied that Carnegie’s presence in her life had “brought me
only dead sea fruit,” as he had so bitterly claimed. “One thing I do know, that your presence has made me glow
with life and happiness as nothing else has ever done before.” Further than this she was not prepared to
venture. She had tried to be honest with him and confess her apprehensions about married life, but that had
gotten them nowhere, as each partner’s doubts, once articulated, only reinforced the other’s. She would not
take the blame for their failed courtship, nor would she allow him to define their future. She had given him
the opportunity to wash away her hesitancies, but he had failed.

“You tell me doubts are natural,” she almost berated him,

—and the minute a doubt comes, (which was only a foolish, morbid fear arising from reading something I did not
understand, and which I relied upon you to explain away), instead of letting me lean on your better
understanding, you magnify the doubt and we are both landed in the ditch again.

I do not wish to marry. I am far too happy as I am to wish to enter upon the cares and responsibilities of
married life without being fully assured that my choice is the right one—you know this as well as I—I only
want you to know that I understand what you mean by “not trying.”

Neither do I want you to be my friend on my account. I care too much for you to enjoy a friendship on unequal
terms, but I have felt lately that you were more truly my friend than ever before. You have lost confidence in
me—I do not wonder at it. I knew it must be so. All right, I’ll bear it calmly, and maybe some day we will
understand it all. At any rate it has done me good, and I am a better woman for having known you.¹⁸

Louise had written on a Sunday evening. The next morning, she dispatched another note to Carnegie. “I really
thought you would come last evening. Not that you would painfully pull yourself into the right mood and come,
but that relying on your true affection and friendship for me, it would give you pleasure to come…. I am
contented with whatever lot falls to me—but I will not be misjudged. My nature is very slow, but facts cannot
be disputed, and I don’t care who knows that the serene happiness of the past two months has been caused by
your presence.”¹⁹

Louise was at her wits’ end. Not only had Andrew not called, but she had learned (we don’t know from whom)
that he had invited the famed actress Ellen Terry, who was starring in Much Ado About Nothing, to go riding
with him. Carnegie acknowledged as much, but insisted that the engagement had been canceled because the
actress was “ill and can’t drive this PM. I only asked her in a desire to get someone out of the ordinary. You
had to be banished somehow. Now will you go with me at half past two, and let us have a talk? Perhaps this is
all wrong, but I do so wish to talk with you.”²⁰

Carnegie sent the note to the Whitfield residence, via John, his valet, with the instructions to “Get Reply.”
Louise agreed to see him. They met that afternoon. By the time they had parted, the doubts, hesitancies, and
anxieties had magically lifted, and their engagement was renewed. The next morning, Carnegie left on his
business trip, sped along by the kind of letter from Louise he had always dreamed of receiving: “The peace and
glory of this day surpasses anything I have ever known” Louise had written. “I have reached the haven at
least—the calm after the storm. I am so glad you feel this, too. How dreadful it must have been for you
before! But that time is all over now.”²¹

Their letters over the next few days were near ecstatic, their relief palpable that they had now, after almost
five years, vanquished all doubts and fully committed themselves to one another. Carnegie, the industrialist,
man of letters, and man of the world, was almost beside himself with happiness.

“Well my Dear One,” he wrote from Pittsburgh on November 21,

Is it really true that you are at last sure as the rock, that your destiny has come? I can scarcely rest in
this assurance. I read and re-read it and tremble lest it isn’t certain for all time. But it will come so and
must be so, I say to myself; she is slow to yield, but sure and steadfast. Oh, my beloved one, I shall be so
tender, so true to you and keep you from all harm, and more than that, make your life broad and deep and
fruitful; only trust in me…. I shall see you Monday eve, take you to my heart, and you will nestle there more
closely than ever, will you not, Darling? I am so happy you are happy. I am content, rested, happy, sure, and
look into the future with you as the most glorious possible. It is all right, Darling, with you in the nest at
home. Your mate will ever long to fly to that home and live with you forever and ever.²²

The next day’s letter was even more joyful. He had never imagined that Louise would feel for him the same
love—and physical attraction—he had always felt for her. But it had happened, at last.

You now begin to feel what I have told you. The right feeling for the Man, when it comes, drives all else into
comparative insignificance. It is the mainspring of our life. I was right—you will not be cold any more, but
glowing, and the heat comes from the sacred fire which comes to man and woman when the two meet and combine
into one greater life. I, too, am happy, and seek silence like you. Awe stricken, somewhat, with the splendor
of the picture presented to my gaze. Your lovely being! And all Mine! Just think of it! That I may prove
worthy of you, Louise, is my prayer. Your favor, presence, counsel, love will do everything for me.²³

Louise’s letters were rather subdued in comparison: “Have just received your note. How good of you to think of
me in your hurry! Your flying around the country in this way doesn’t seem quite so dreadful to me when I know
where you are, and that you have time to give me a thought. Don’t rush around too rapidly. You do enough to
kill two ordinary men. Remember you are mortal, and that you have given me the right to be interested in the
welfare of this mortal.” She was preparing herself, as best she could, for their future together, trying with
all her being to banish any doubts she might still have harbored. “I have made an important discovery: there
is nothing like interesting work to drive morbid fears and ghosts out of one’s head. I never was made to be a
fine lady and sit with folded hands and be waited on. I must work—with head and hands and heart—all three—in
order to be happy, and in you I have a glorious exemplification of that fact.”²⁴

As committed as Louise and Andrew were to marriage, there remained two insurmountable obstacles in their way:
their mothers, both elderly, both infirm, both excessively devoted to and dependent on their eldest child. Had
there been only one surviving mother, she could easily have been folded into a new household. But it was
impossible to imagine a situation in which the four could cohabit peacefully under the same roof. Though
neither Louise nor Andrew acknowledged it in writing, both understood that their wedding plans would probably
have to be put off until one or the other of the mothers passed away.

Louise told her mother about their engagement and reported back to Andrew that Mrs. Whitfield had approved.
“She is so unselfish and so happy, too.” Carnegie said nothing to his mother.²⁵

## FOURTEEN

## Booms and Busts, 1883–1885

WITH SUCCESS following success at Edgar Thomson, Carnegie became more confident, as the years passed, in his
and his partners’ capacity to navigate the unruly seas of an ever-changing market. The ups and downs of the
business cycle were inescapable facts of life in nineteenth-century America—and he accepted this. While he had
no doubt but that the American economy would proceed in an upward spiral over the long term, he was well aware
that cyclical depressions were always just around the corner. The wise businessman was the one who prepared
for bust in boom times, and vice versa.

The laying of new track, which had proceeded at record levels in 1881 and 1882, slowed in 1883 and 1884 and
hit its low for the decade in 1885. Because the business downturn, though relatively minor, came unexpectedly
in the midst of a period of rapid expansion, hundreds of companies which had gone deeply into debt in the
expectation that the boom would continue failed. Between 1883 and 1886, twenty-two national banks collapsed.
In Pittsburgh, several of the largest iron manufacturers went bankrupt.¹

The Pittsburgh Bessemer Steel Company, which had never quite gotten back on track after the disastrous strike
of early 1882, did not survive the recession. Its owners, unable to meet their obligations to creditors, sold
their Homestead plant to Carnegie and his partners. Anticipating that the market for steel rails, though
strong, would have to slacken eventually, Carnegie decided to retool the Homestead mills to produce steel
plates and structural shapes. He was, again, a step ahead of the business curve. Over the next seven years,
from 1883 to 1890, while rail production would increase by 61.7 percent, the manufacture of structural steel
products would expand by 807.8 percent.²

The price of steel rails continued to decline through the autumn of 1883, leading to demands by some
manufacturers for drastic wage cuts. Carnegie alone, it appeared, had no intention of provoking a strike among
his workers. He had established a reputation as a friend of labor and it had stood him well. While competing
Pittsburgh firms had had to close down—in 1879 and 1882—because of wage disputes, he had kept his furnaces and
mills running full. In 1879, the Union Iron Mills had been among the first firms to settle with the boilers
and reopen their plant after a brief lockout. In 1882, Carnegie and his partners had again broken ranks with
their fellow manufacturers and agreed to the wage rates demanded by the Amalgamated. “Carnegie Brothers,” the
New York Times reported on June 1, 1882, “give as a reason for signing that they are crowded with orders which
must be filled at all hazards.”³

In the long and short runs, especially when business was good, it made more sense, Carnegie and his partners
had decided, to give the unions what they wanted than risk a lockout or strike and the resultant loss of
orders. “We have unions in Pittsburgh,” Carnegie explained to the reporter from the New York Tribune in a
September 24, 1883, interview “but no mill east of us will tolerate them. We have always held that in this
free country our men have a right to belong to any union they please. And up to the present hour our relations
with the trades-unions have been satisfactory. I believe the trades-union is of great benefit to the men, and
it has certainly developed many more able men. As a rule, the more intelligent labor is the less difficult it
is to deal with it, if capital only asks for what is fair and just.” Carnegie reported that two of the
country’s twelve steel mills had had to stop production because of “disputes with their men,” but prophesied
that such would never be the case at his works because he understood, where his competitors did not, that
“labor is all that the working man has to sell, and he cannot be expected to take kindly to reductions of
wages, even, when such are necessary in order that he may have any work at all. I think the wages paid at the
mills on the seaboard of the United States to-day are about as low as men can be expected to take.” Asked if
he thought his workers would strike, Carnegie confidently predicted they would not. “The situation is much too
serious. Unless the market improves our men will readily see that it is a question of work at some price or no
work at all. They will therefore be ready to meet any reasonable demand made by their employers.”

Carnegie, as was his practice, was basing his predictions of labor peace on very little firsthand evidence.
His belief that there would not be “any trouble” at his mills and that the workers would accept a new contract
with moderate wage cuts was wishful thinking. Or at least Captain Jones and Tom Carnegie believed so. “I feel
that our men should readily agree to a reduction,” Jones wrote Carnegie on November 2, “but for fear they
might kick I feel like cautioning you to be ready for such an emergency.”⁴

Tom Carnegie agreed with Jones. The situation in Pittsburgh was, he feared, grim and growing grimmer. On
November 8, 1883, six weeks after his brother’s interview, Tom was quoted in a front-page New York Times
article as predicting that if prices for rails did not soon stabilize, he would “have to close his works and
throw 5,000 men out of employment.” Andrew disagreed, though not in print. He remained convinced that the
company could ride out the storm without layoffs by running full and selling rails at whatever price the
market would bear.

Carnegie, realizing that some sort of wage reduction would be necessary, called a special meeting of his
partners “to consider the labor question intelligently” and asked Captain Jones to prepare, in advance of the
meeting, a statement of:

[image]

On December 4, Carnegie took the train to Pittsburgh to meet with his partners and Jones. They agreed to
reduce wage rates by 13 percent for skilled workers when the current annual contract expired on December 31.
On Saturday, December 11, two weeks before Christmas, the Amalgamated lodges and the Knights of Labor
assemblies convened to consider the firm’s offer. “After much animated discussion,” the National Labor Tribune
reported on December 12, “the proposition was accepted.” There was little sentiment for a strike just before
Christmas.

The Pittsburgh newspapers, including the National Labor Tribune, hailed the peaceable resolution of the
conflict as a hopeful sign of things to come. “It is pleasing to know that the affairs at the Edgar Thomson
mill have been arranged so that the works will continue in operation,” the NLT editorialized, “though the cut
in wages is pretty heavy and about the same percentage as the cut in the price of rails. However there is a
good deal gained in the method by which the amicable arrangement was reached. Time was—and it was not long
ago—when wages reductions were made arbitrarily. No reason was volunteered, and none given if asked…. Now this
is all changed…. The Edgar Thomson management offered to show by undoubted figures [the ones Carnegie had
asked Jones to assemble], giving recent operations, that at $35 [a ton for steel rails] the old wages could
not be paid…. All that is needed to reconcile whatever conflict there is between capital and labor is a fair
article of justice on both sides.” This hopeful, congratulatory editorial on the front page of the NLT
represented the views of the Amalgamated leadership. On page four, which was devoted to news from the lodges,
the local correspondent from the Edgar Thomson mills at Braddock reminded readers that the steelworks had now
reduced wages five years in succession and would continue to do so—until all skilled workers joined and
supported the union.

Carnegie Brothers, after reducing wages at Edgar Thomson by an average of 13 percent, moved on to reduce them
at their new plant at Homestead by 17 percent. Once again, the National Labor Tribune refused to criticize the
company. “Several conferences were held and the matter was finally adjusted in a compromise. We are glad this
trouble is settled for another year. It is the best that could be done under existing circumstances,” the
paper editorialized on January 19, 1884.

A week later, on January 26, the NLT ran another positive item about Carnegie, still considering him a friend
of labor. “At the reading room of the Union Iron mills…can be found a very interesting volume by the senior
partner, Mr. Andrew Carnegie, entitled American Four-in-Hand. It is dedicated to the employees in the
following language by the author: ‘No copy of my book has gone forth from me with such heartfelt, cordial good
wishes as this I send to the reading room of our own employees of the Union Iron mills. I hail this movement
upon the part of our men as the dawn of a better day, when labor will share directly in the profits of
capital.’ Mr. Carnegie,” the article concluded, “has always had a warm place in the hearts of his employees;
and such sentiments as the above will tend to still further cement the harmony that exists between that
gentleman and his workman.”

Rather than castigating Carnegie for reducing wages, the editors of the National Labor Tribune applauded his
open management style, in large part perhaps because it stood in such vivid contrast to the almost monarchical
posture of other Pittsburgh manufacturers. Instead of issuing decrees, Carnegie explained the rationale behind
his actions. He claimed to be in the same boat as his employees, a creature dependent on market forces, unable
to resist the inexorable downward movement of prices and costs.

Carnegie did not adopt this stance because it allowed him to evade responsibility for his actions, which it
did, nor because it was a handy negotiating tactic, which it was, but because it accorded with the tenets of
Spencerian evolution in which he had become a true believer. His success as a businessman, he believed,
depended on his adherence to the laws of the marketplace, which, because they were embedded in a larger
evolutionary schema, were as moral as they were inexorable. The path of evolutionary progress he was following
would be strewn with hardships and sacrifice; but these were unavoidable in the short term if mankind was
going to benefit over the long term. It was unfortunate that American steelworkers had to work for declining
wages; it was unfortunate, as well, that there was no safety net to catch the unemployed, the maimed, and the
unemployable. But it would have been sheer folly to interfere with the workings of what Spencer had termed
“beneficent necessity” by violating the laws of the marketplace and paying workers more—in wages or
benefits—than was called for.

“It seems hard that an unskillfulness which with all his efforts he cannot overcome, should entail hunger upon
the artisan,” Herbert Spencer had written, almost as if he were advising Carnegie not to give in to the
demands of employees. “It seems hard that a labourer incapacitated by sickness from competing with his
stronger fellows, should have to bear the resulting privations. It seems hard that widows and orphans should
be left to struggle for life or death. Nevertheless, when regarded not separately, but in connection with the
interests of universal humanity, these harsh fatalities are seen to be full of the highest beneficence.”⁶

Carnegie and his workers were caught in what Spencer called an “unhappy…. state of transition” to a new age of
industrialization. Their moral responsibility was not to flee or complain about it, but to understand and
adapt. “The process must be undergone, and the sufferings must be endured. No power on earth, no
cunningly-devised laws of statements, no world-rectifying schemes of the humane, no communist panaceas, no
reforms that men ever did broach or ever will broach, can diminish them one jot…. Every attempt at
mitigation…eventuates in exacerbation of it.”⁷

It is entirely possible that Carnegie would have reduced the wages of his employees had he never encountered
Spencer or read Social Statics. He did not need Spencer to teach him how to be a capitalist. He had done quite
well before he read him. Where Spencer was indispensable was in providing Carnegie with a moral imperative for
his actions.

Carnegie’s success as a businessman, writer, and speaker owed a great deal to his ability to associate his own
interests with those of his employees and the larger public. His reading of Spencer had reinforced his growing
faith that he and his fellow industrialists were agents of progress. This belief in the righteousness of his
pursuits fueled his outrage at those who got in his way, which was the way of progress and prosperity.

From the mid-1880s, the chief villain was his old employer, the Pennsylvania Railroad, which controlled much
of the freight traffic in and out of Pittsburgh. When, in early 1884, the Pennsylvania raised the rates for
shipping coke to the Edgar Thomson works, Carnegie exploded with indignation. He would accept the increase in
rates, he wrote Frank Thomson, the railroad’s vice president, in a “personal and confidential letter,” but
only if the same increase were levied on the coke traffic of every other steel manufacturer. This was not
going to happen—and he knew it. The Pennsylvania was charging him higher prices to ship his coke to Pittsburgh
because there was no freight to move in the opposite direction. To cover the costs of moving empty cars back
to Connellsville, it had raised the freight rates to Pittsburgh. With a stranglehold on three quarters of the
coke traffic to Pittsburgh and no real competition, the Pennsylvania could charge whatever it chose to.

While Carnegie fully understood the business logic behind the Pennsylvania’s “discriminatory” practices, he
cried foul nonetheless and threatened to wreak havoc if the railroad did not do right by his and other
Pittsburgh firms. “We do not agree to be singled out & discriminated against,” he wrote Thomson. “Every manfr.
in Pittsburgh & in the West will rise in indignation. It is infamous & I give you due notice you can’t impose
upon us.” Though he added that he did not mean “this as a threatening notice,” it was clearly intended as
such. Carnegie warned that his next appeal would be “to Mr. Roberts [the railroad’s president], failing here,
we appeal to the Directors, failing here, we send a circular to every shareholder & failing here we make our
appeal to the great public whose opinion no corporation these days can successfully withstand.”⁸

As it became apparent that his threats were falling on deaf ears, Carnegie broadened the field of those he
spoke for to include the “hundreds of poor men” who worked in western Pennsylvania’s coal mines and coke
furnaces and who, he claimed, awaited the decision of the railroad on rate rollbacks, “for on that depends
whether they are to be permanently displaced or not.” When the Pennsylvania official in charge of setting the
rates requested a personal meeting, Carnegie turned him down. “It is not my business to meet you and other
gentlemen you name. We want you to decide…now…. It is barbarous for you to keep these poor people idlein
uncertainty.”⁹

It was in vain. The Pennsylvania executives knew that Carnegie had no choice but to transport coke on their
tracks and that he would pay whatever he had to for the privilege. There was no alternative route to and from
southern Pennsylvania. But that was about to change. Carnegie’s New York City neighbor William Henry
Vanderbilt, a chief stockholder in the New York Central, had decided to invest $5 million to build a competing
railroad, the South Pennsylvania, from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh, through the southern coke regions, to
retaliate for what he believed was the Pennsylvania’s intention to build a competing road, the West Shore,
between New York City and Buffalo.¹⁰

In February 1894, Carnegie wrote Hamilton Twombly, a Vanderbilt in-law, and promised to raise $2 million as
soon as Vanderbilt pledged his $5 million. As in the old days when he had doubled and tripled his interests by
taking on multiple roles in new companies, Carnegie demanded, as a condition for his investment, that his iron
and steel companies be granted a “preference” in bidding on the contracts for steel rails and iron bridges. He
also requested that he be given the commission to sell the new company’s bonds in Europe. “I believe I can
sell the whole issue of these bonds in Europe and if you will get me the right to sell the syndicate bonds…I
will go to London at my own expense and undertake the sale of the whole $20 million of bonds.”¹¹

As the railroad giants moved forward with their plans to invade their rivals’ territories, investors, fearing
the inevitable rate wars that would result from competition on two of the most profitable routes in the
nation, sent the price of railroad stocks and bonds lower. Pierpont Morgan, with the value of his and his
father Junius’s sizable holdings in New York Central stock declining steadily, decided to intervene.

In July 1885, Morgan boarded his yacht, the Corsair, in New York Harbor, with Chauncey Depew, the president of
the New York Central, alongside him, then crossed the Hudson to Jersey City to pick up George Roberts,
president of the Pennsylvania Railroad, and Frank Thomson, his vice president. During a nine-hour cruise north
from Jersey City to Garrison, south to Sandy Hook, then north and south again, they hammered out a deal. The
Morgan interests would buy the West Shore Railroad from the Pennsylvania and a majority interest in the South
Pennsylvania from Vanderbilt. They would then lease the West Shore to the New York Central and sell the South
Pennsylvania to the Pennsylvania, thereby solidifying each road’s monopoly in its home state.¹²

The Corsair compact had an immediate impact on the price of railroad securities and on Morgan’s reputation as
banker and power broker. The major losers were the Pittsburgh manufacturers who had invested in the South
Pennsylvania Railroad, which, though almost 60 percent completed, was to be turned over to the Pennsylvania
and surely scuttled.

Carnegie was in Europe at the time and not a party to the negotiations. No one quite knew where he stood or
what he would do on his return. Vanderbilt had promised to sell his stock in the South Pennsylvania. Would
Carnegie follow his lead? Or would he join those who were attempting to maintain the South Pennsylvania as a
viable alternative to the Pennsylvania?

George Roberts sent an emissary to Tom Carnegie, who was vacationing at Cresson, with a promise to pay the
Carnegies “cost and interest” if they would turn over all their stock in the South Pennsylvania. Tom contacted
Andrew, who agreed to sell his stock, knowing that by his action he was sounding the death knell of the South
Pennsylvania. Nothing, apparently, was put in writing. Questioned by a New York Times reporter in late August
as to what he was going to do, Carnegie uncharacteristically but politely refused to comment.¹³

In September, the Pennsylvania legislature, under increasing pressure from Pittsburgh manufacturers, sought
and received an “antitrust” injunction preventing the Pennsylvania from buying up its potential rival’s stock.
Work on the South Pennsylvania had, in the meantime, ceased while the injunction wound its way through the
courts.

Carnegie said nothing about his own arrangement with the Pennsylvania Railroad. It would have been impolitic,
to put it mildly, for him to have made public his conclusion that, in this instance at least, it made more
sense to ally himself with the Pennsylvania than to fight it. “My partners and myself have no desire to enter
into a dispute with your Company,” he wrote President Roberts. “On the contrary, all our interests tend to
strengthen the desire which we have to co-operate harmoniously with it. I think our interests should be made
mutual, therefore I prefer to stand upon the fact that your Company promised us cost and interest for our
investment, if we used it so as to give you control of the South Penn. There is no legal obstacle to prevent
the Company from paying us what it agreed to pay. It is simply a matter of dollars, and the PRR is quite able,
and should be quite willing, to fulfill its honorable obligations to us.”¹⁴

## FIFTEEN

## The “Millionaire Socialist,” 1885–1886

“AMILLIONAIRE SOCIALIST. MR. ANDREW CARNEGIE PROCLAIMS IN FAVOR OF SOCIALISTIC DOCTRINES.” So read the
headline of the January 2, 1885 front-page story in the New York Times, occasioned by Carnegie’s remarks “in
favor of Socialism” at the December meeting of the Nineteenth Century Club. One of the guests at that meeting
was John Swinton, the publisher of a rather obscure radical weekly named Swinton’s. Swinton invited Carnegie
to sit for an interview and again he spoke positively of socialism.

Carnegie’s name had been appearing with some regularity in the papers, not in this context, but as a guest of
honor at prominent weddings, a pallbearer at funerals, speaker at dinners given by the St. Andrew’s Society
and the New York City Burns Society, and a donor to cultural and medical organizations—he was on the board of
directors of the Oratorio Society, the American School of Opera, and the Bellevue Hospital Medical College,
and a dues-paying member of the Choral Club, the Gentlemen’s Glee Club, and the Symphonic Society. Although he
had not been elected to the city’s most prestigious men’s clubs—the Knickerbocker, the Calumet, the
Metropolitan, or the New York Yacht Club—he was a member in good standing of the Republican Union League Club,
once the home of bankers and merchants, which had begun accepting millionaire manufacturers as members.¹

His pronouncements on socialism had to have come as a shock to those who knew him in New York as a wealthy
Pittsburgh iron maker. It was impossible to imagine his contemporaries in business or finance—Rockefeller,
Morgan, Vanderbilt, Gould—speaking out as he had. “The open confession of Socialism of Mr. Andrew Carnegie,
who is at the head of the most extensive iron and steel manufacturing plants in America,” the National Labor
Tribune wrote in its lead story on January 10, 1885, “is serving for ‘a nine days’ wonder’ for press and
public.”

In a series of interviews, later published in the New York Times, the New York Tribune, the Pittsburgh Leader,
and elsewhere, Carnegie expanded on his surprisingly radical views. Asked about inherited wealth, he replied
in almost the same words he would use four years later in his “Gospel of Wealth” essays. “I believe the day is
coming when a man who leaves more than a million at his death, except for public uses, will be regarded as not
having properly administered that for which he was only the trust.” Asked about the labor situation in the
iron and steel industries, he delivered what sounded very much like a rationale for a strike. “Labor is all
that the working man has to sell, and he cannot be expected to take kindly to reductions of wages, even when
such are necessary in order that he may have any work at all.”²

In the January 2 interview with a New York Times reporter, he declared plainly that “to an evolutionist and a
student of history it is plain that workingmen must rise in the future as they have in the past. Once they
were all serfs, and just as sure as they have obtained the advantages they possess to-day just so sure are
they to improve still further.”

“But are you a Socialist?” the reporter asked.

Carnegie did not answer directly. “I believe socialism is the grandest theory ever presented, and I am sure
some day it will rule the world. Then we will have obtained the millennium…. That is the state we are drifting
into. Then men will be content to work for the general welfare and share their riches with their neighbors.”

“‘Are you prepared now to divide your wealth’ [he] was asked, and Mr. Carnegie smiled. ‘No, not at present,
but I do not spend much on myself. I give away every year seven or eight times as much as I spend for personal
comforts and pleasures. Working people have my full sympathy, and I always extend a helping hand. I am a
workingman and in my young days worked in a cotton mill and ran an engine…. Speaking of the present position
of the workingman, I believe co-operation is his hope.’”

The reporter, still hoping to trap Carnegie, pushed forward with what he must have hoped would be the coup de
grâce.

“Still, Mr. Carnegie, you have closed down the Edgar Thomson Works, and some people will wonder how you can
hold such principles and throw your employees into idleness.” (The reporter was referring to the fact that
Carnegie and his partners had closed down the mill at Christmastime and announced that they would not reopen
it until the workers agreed to a substantial wage reduction.)

“The workmen are to blame for that,” Carnegie answered.

“In what respect?” answered the reporter, thoroughly disoriented.

“They allow other Bessemer mills to work at less wages than we pay. There is the Pennsylvania Steel Mill at
Harrisburg, where they can make and sell steel rails at $27 a ton. We cannot do it, and must close rather than
manufacture rails to sell at less than cost.”

Carnegie had neatly turned the situation upside down and pinned the labor difficulties in his Pittsburgh
plants squarely on the shoulders of the unionized workmen who had “allowed” competing steel manufacturers to
pay their men less than they were paid. He closed the interview by delivering his own coup de grâce, affirming
his support for the steelworkers’ union and challenging it to organize the competition. “I am a firm friend of
the Amalgamated Association, and no one ever heard of my having trouble with them.”

It was one thing to speak well of socialism before what John Swinton had described as a “select audience of
full-dress millionaires of both sexes” at the Nineteenth Century Club; it was another to repeat those views
and then declare oneself a “firm friend” of the Amalgamated in interviews with the daily newspapers.

Carnegie never bothered to explain what he meant by socialism. The National Labor Tribune in Pittsburgh
claimed, on his behalf, that his ideas were not associated with “Herr [Johann] Most’s destructive [anarchist]
theories,” but closer to the “socialism described by Fourier and his kind.” Carnegie was not advocating
violence or a political overthrow of the state. He was arguing instead for workers’ control and ownership of
workshops and factories, but in the future, not now.

Try as the editors of the National Labor Tribune might, neither they nor anyone else could account for the
startling disconnect between what he was saying to the press in New York and what his company was doing in
Pittsburgh. “The working people in and about Pittsburgh for the past two days,” the New York Times reported on
January 4, “have been trying their best to reconcile the Socialistic views expressed by Mr. Andrew Carnegie
with the practices enforced in the industrial establishments in which he is the leading spirit.” One possible
explanation was that the demands for large wage reductions had come from his Pittsburgh partners and that
Carnegie was trying to minimize or eliminate them. The National Labor Tribune, the voice of the Amalgamated
Association in Pittsburgh, continued to give him the benefit of the doubt in this regard. “He has been
sufficiently practical in his radicalism and fair in his dealings hitherto, to be entitled to have his present
acts and expressions regarded generously. He has, perhaps, been as unselfish as can be expected of human
nature, and decidedly much more so than wealthy men in similar positions usually are, but the workingmen who
wait for relief from the unselfishness which Mr. Carnegie’s socialism implies, may as well start out with
intent to wait until that epoch he referred to—the millennium.”³

The NLT had not been nearly as charitable to Tom Carnegie three weeks earlier when, citing a Pittsburgh Times
article, it informed its readers that the younger Carnegie brother had joined with a group of American and
European yachtsmen to build a “winter rendezvous and club…on Cumberland Island, Georgia. The club house will
cost about $50,000” ($10 million today). The NLT remarked sarcastically that no one had yet ascertained
“whether it is the intention of that gentleman…to have the men pay, through reductions in their wages, part or
all of the $50,000 club house.”⁴

In past years, the Amalgamated had approved contracts with provisions for wage reductions. What was different
now was that Carnegie and his partners at Edgar Thomson had decided not only to cut wage rates, but to
increase the workday from eight to twelve hours, thereby eliminating an entire shift of workingmen. In the
heating furnaces where labor-saving machinery was going to be introduced, twelve men would be kept on to do
the work formerly assigned to sixty-three; fifty-one jobs would be cut on the rail mill train; sixty-two
chargers and helpers eliminated at the blooming and rail mills. In all, it was estimated that more than three
hundred jobs or close to 20 percent of the total skilled workforce would be let go. “Where these men are to
find other employment in times like the present is a conundrum,” the NLT concluded on February 7, 1885.

Captain Jones, who had been charged with finding a way to reduce labor costs, was worried, as he was every
year when it came time to negotiate a new agreement, that Carnegie lacked the backbone to follow through. “I
fully agree with you that we must get cost down,” he wrote Carnegie in December 1884. “Now stick to that & no
lowering of the flag. If we can’t get down to hard pan now, we are done for…. We certainly must cut close in
our rates for next year, and all we have to do is keep a stiff upper lip.”⁵

Jones recognized that while the Amalgamated might be willing to accept another round of wage rate reductions,
it was not going to allow the workday to be increased to twelve hours—and a shift of workers
eliminated—without a fight. There was probably no issue on which factory owners and workers were in greater
disagreement than on the number of hours that should make up a working day. That issue had arisen in the 1830s
and 1840s when gas lighting was introduced, making it possible to extend the workday beyond daylight hours.
From the 1850s on, the eight-hour day was at the top of the list of demands made by workingmen’s
organizations. Shortening the workday from ten or twelve hours to eight would, it was argued, create jobs for
more workers and exert upward pressure on wages. But more important, it would make it possible for workingmen
to live as humans rather than as beasts of burden. “To know ‘nothing but work, eat and sleep,’ was to strip a
man of his humanity, to make him ‘little better than a horse,’” Daniel Rodgers quotes a Pennsylvania
workingman as arguing. How could a man improve himself, spend time with his family, read the newspaper, become
a worthy citizen, if he was forced to work twelve hours a day?⁶

Captain Jones had closed down the plant for maintenance and the installation of new machinery in mid-December
of 1884, as he did most years. But this time, he waited until February to reopen it, and then only to those
who agreed to work for twelve hours a day and accept a reduced rate per ton. There was talk of a strike, but
no more than talk. After a six-week unpaid furlough, it would have been very difficult to organize one. The
men returned to work on the company’s terms. The Amalgamated leaders, having failed to protect the skilled
workers from the worst of all fates—the return of the twelve-hour day—disbanded their lodges at Edgar Thomson,
leaving behind a few poorly organized Knights of Labor assemblies.

With hundreds of workers displaced and those who remained working twelve-hour shifts, the NLT reported that
the reopened mill seethed with palpable discontent. Upon returning to the job and “hearing the company’s
terms, one man quit at once…and there are dozens of other good men who will only remain until the winter is
over,” before looking for other work. Many of those who had wanted to strike had decided not to because they
lived in houses purchased with company mortgages; they were “compelled to accept lower wages, and perhaps go
to work as ‘non-union’ men, rather than sacrifice their little homes.”⁷

The installation of the twelve-hour workday had a profound effect on the workforce, turning once proud
artisans into animals, too debilitated by exhaustion to live like men. In Out of This Furnace, his 1941 novel
about three generations of Slovak steelworkers, Thomas Bell, who grew up in Braddock, described the daily
routine of one workman, Kracha, who

worked from six to six, seven days a week, one week on day turn, one week on night…. At the end of each
day-turn week came the long turn of twenty-four hours, when he went into the mill Sunday morning at six and
worked continuously until Monday morning. Then home to wash, eat and sleep until five that afternoon, when he
got up and returned to the mill to begin his night-turn week. The long turn was bad but this first night turn
coming on its heels was worse. Tempers flared easily; men fought over a shovel or a look and it was fatally
easy to be careless, to blunder…. Night-turn weeks were periods of mental fog; he went back and forth to the
mill in half a daze which lasted until the end of his turn Sunday morning, when he was given twenty-four hours
to himself. Sometimes he went to early mass; other times he went directly home and rolled in bed. When he rose
late that afternoon there was little time to do anything. Usually he got drunk. Only whisky could pierce the
shell of his weariness, warm him, make him think well of himself and his world again.⁸

The slump in steel rail demand and prices that the Carnegie brothers and Captain Jones claimed had compelled
them to increase the workday to twelve hours and eliminate a shift of workers did not last forever. By the
winter of 1885–86, steel rail prices were up almost 40 percent, to $35 a ton. “Mr. Andrew Carnegie, of the
great rail manufacturing firm of Carnegie Brothers, of Pittsburgh…talked freely regarding the cheerful outlook
for the coming year,” the New York Times reported on January 4, 1886. Asked if, with the rise in steel prices,
his firm was going to increase wage rates, he gleefully answered in the affirmative. “We announced an increase
of 10 per cent. to our skilled workmen before they asked for it. The new scale of wages, I have just been
informed by telegraph, has been accepted by all our employees in the rail mills.”⁹

A master at putting the best possible spin on any story, Carnegie neglected to add that while the employees in
the rail mills had accepted his offer of a pay increase, the blast furnace men had threatened to walk out if
the workday was not reduced to eight hours. When Captain Jones declined to even discuss the possibility, they
went out on strike. Without a steady supply of pig iron from the furnaces, production was crippled. Jones had
only two choices: to accede to the furnace men’s demands and return the plant to three turns, or try to
replace them with scabs. He chose the latter course, a decision that immediately backfired when the men in the
other departments at Edgar Thomson refused, as the NLT reported on January 16, “to work the metal turned out
by the workmen who took the places of those on strike. The spirit of unionism is not yet dead at Braddock.”
Jones, still refusing to negotiate, shut down the plant, hoping that the workers would, as in previous years,
return to work. But they did not. By early April, with steel prices still high and orders going unfilled, he
had no choice but to reinstitute the eight-hour day.¹⁰

“The entire force employed at the Edgar Thomson steel works,” the NLT reported on April 3, “went to work on
the three-turn system this week. Three turns of eight hours each will now be the rule in the rolling, blooming
and converting mills, and as a result, three hundred additional workmen will find full employment. So much for
the glorious eight-hour system.”

What is most significant about these annual skirmishes over wage reductions and the extended workday was
Carnegie’s absence from the field of battle. Though he consulted with and approved every step Jones took, it
was the captain, not Carnegie, who was held responsible for instituting the twelve-hour day during the slump
in 1885 and then refusing to negotiate a return to eight hours in the boom that followed in 1886.

The skilled workers and day laborers who had suffered through a succession of wage cuts in the mid-1880s did
not have their wages restored with the return of high prices to the steel business. Only at the Keystone
Bridge works, which had suffered perhaps the largest wage reduction of any Carnegie company in January 1885,
did the revival of business bring with it a tangible, unexpected benefit. In October of that year, the
Pittsburgh Commercial reported in a story picked up by the New York Times that “Mr. Andrew Carnegie had made a
magnificent present to the workmen at the Keystone Bridge Works…. It is a house and a lot worth $25,000 or
$30,000 to be used as a public library and meeting place for the men, and a cash donation of $1,000 toward
buying books for the library. The gift was a complete surprise to the employees.” That same month, Carnegie
also donated $50,000 for a new public library at Braddock to replace the workers’ reading room he had earlier
funded.¹¹

 

IT WAS IN 1885 that Andrew Carnegie embarked on a new writing project in New York City. He had, so he tells us
in his Autobiography, often marveled at “how little the best-informed foreigner, or even Briton, knew of
America, and how distorted that little was. It was prodigious what these eminent Englishmen did not then know
about the Republic.” He intended to remedy that deficiency by providing them with an easily digestible
compendium of information culled from the 1880 census and Scribner’s Statistical Atlas—to be entitled
Triumphant Democracy. It would be organized, analyzed, and interpreted to demonstrate the superiority of
republican institutions to monarchical ones.¹²

His new book, he knew, would so clearly manifest his allegiances to the republic that he would never be able
to go “home” again as anything but a dyed-in-the-wool American. His disillusion with British governance,
institutions, and imperial ambitions had been exacerbated in late 1884 by Prime Minister Gladstone’s decision
to send the British army into the Sudan to rescue General Charles Gordon, who was under siege in Khartoum.
Carnegie was adamantly opposed to such military interventions, as he made clear whenever given the
opportunity. Buttressing his antiwar and anti-colonial instincts with the logic of Spencerian evolution,
Carnegie believed that civilization was evolving from monarchic militarism to republican pacifism.
Wars—especially colonial ones—were caused by the reckless, at times savage adventurism of “strong military
classes” that were bred by and supportive of monarchical institutions.¹³

In March 1885, answering a request that he stand for election to the House of Commons, this time at
Birmingham, he insisted that were he to do so, he would have to denounce “as infamous” the campaign against
Sudan. Burton Hendrick claims that Carnegie’s differences with Gladstone and the Liberals on foreign policy,
real as they were, had little to do with his ultimate decision not to take a hand in British politics. The
real reason he did not stand for Parliament was that he was “not a British subject, but an American
citizen.”¹⁴

Hendrick got the story exactly backwards. Carnegie was not barred from serving in the House of Commons because
he was a U.S. citizen. On the contrary, he became an American citizen in the spring of 1885 only after
abandoning any thought of becoming a British MP. The timing of his application for citizenship is significant.
On Thursday, May 28, 1885, just before leaving for Cresson to work on his new book, Carnegie formally filed
for citizenship. It was granted, as of August 26, by the District Court of the United States for the Southern
District of New York. Andrew Carnegie was at the time six months shy of his fiftieth birthday and committed
now to the land of Triumphant Democracy.¹⁵

 

“ROUND THE WORLD and then American Four-in-Hand,” Carnegie recalled in his Autobiography, “gave me not the
slightest effort, but the preparation of Triumphant Democracy was altogether another matter. It required
steady, laborious work. Figures had to be examined and arranged, but as I went forward the study became
fascinating. For some months I seemed to have my head filled with statistics.”¹⁶

He was assisted by James Bridge, Herbert Spencer’s former assistant, who had arrived in New York in the fall
of 1884. As instructed by Spencer, Bridge had presented himself—with a letter of introduction—to E. L.
Youmans, Spencer’s chief disciple in the New World and the editor of Popular Science Monthly. Youmans, who had
no work for Bridge, suggested that he call on Andrew Carnegie, which he did. “Mr. Carnegie received me and my
Spencer letter with a characteristic burst of friendliness,” Bridge wrote later. “I was just the man he was
looking for, he said; he was about to write a history of the material development of the United States during
the preceding fifty years, and I was to go forthwith to Mr. John Denison Champlin, at Scribners in Broadway
near Grace Church, who would take me to the Astor Library in Lafayette Place, and show me just what researches
I should make for use in the forthcoming book—not yet started! It was like a fairy story, for I was to fix my
own salary!”¹⁷

For Carnegie, who adored everything about the writing life except the solitude, the appearance of Bridge was a
godsend. With Bridge at his side, the task of writing a full-length book became much more pleasant. Carnegie
wrote in pencil “with a pad on his lap while seated with one leg tucked under him.” When he finished a passage
he was especially proud of, “he read it aloud with sparkling eyes and declamatory voice.” If Bridge found
fault, they debated the issue; Carnegie won most of the arguments.¹⁸

Abandoning Louise in New York yet again, Carnegie decamped to Cresson in the spring of 1885 with Bridge, his
mother, and their entourage of servants—coachman, groom, maid, cook, and nurse for Mrs. Carnegie. The
Carnegies now lived in the spacious cottage that he had built for himself and his mother a decade earlier.
Carnegie had at the time complained about the price of construction to his friend George Bitner, a Pittsburgh
builder. Bitner looked at the bills and reminded him that his cottage cost more than his neighbors’, including
the one built by the Chalfant family, because it was much larger and more ornate. “The foundation is higher
and the building is five feet deeper and two feet higher.” Carnegie had insisted on a “stucco cornice in all
the first floor…two more mullion windows to the floor, with veranda and canopy, inside shutters…four rooms on
second floor. You have more and better washstands, and your painting on first floor is all zinc finish.”¹⁹

The wooden cottage was not a typical millionaire’s summer mansion. It lacked central heating, cooking
facilities, a dining room, servant’s quarters, and anything resembling a ballroom, but it was comfortable and
large enough for Andrew and his mother and quite grand by Cresson standards. Guests were put up in the nearby
hotel.

Carnegie intended to spend the spring at Cresson, completing his book, and looking after his mother, who
remained ill.

Bridge, having worked for the dour Mr. Spencer, was astounded by his new boss’s wit and sparkle. The cottage
was filled that spring and summer with guests whom Carnegie entertained when he was not working on his book.
“Carnegie gave a flat contradiction to the silly saying that Scotchmen are devoid of humor,” Bridge wrote.
“With him life itself was a jest and a jewel, and every one of its many facets sparkled into ripples of light
and laughter. Once while absorbed in the study of Scribners’ chart of the industrial progress of the United
States…I was startled as a book came hurtling through the air, striking the wall above my head.”

“‘Let’s leave these statistics—these dry bones, and get out into the sunshine.’

“A moment later Carnegie had joyously herded everybody…on to the porch and away into the woods.”

When one of Carnegie’s guests—a distinguished lawyer soon to become a railway president—“essayed to climb a
tree” and failed, he challenged Bridge to “attempt the feat, offering to buy me a new suit of clothes if I
spoiled those I was wearing. But Carnegie vetoed the contest, declaring he could not risk the neck of his
literary assistant until Triumphant Democracy was finished and in the printers’ hands!”²⁰

Carnegie and Bridge worked during the day, with time out for “rides over the mountains [and] tramps along the
trails.” At night, in front of the fireplace, they sang Scottish ballads, conversed, and quipped, Carnegie
always leading the way with anecdotes about the famous men and women he had met, or recitations, from memory,
of lines from Burns or scenes from Shakespeare, his voice changing “as he passed from one character to
another.” “Mr. Carnegie was the mainspring of all our activities, as he was the fascinating center of every
circle he entered.” If he was actively pining for Louise, it wasn’t apparent to Bridge.²¹

Carnegie shared the spotlight with one person only, his mother. Although in appearance she was every bit as
dour as Mr. Spencer, she too, Bridge discovered, had a rather remarkable sense of humor, a strangely majestic
bearing, and a regal sense of entitlement. “The old lady,” Bridge recalled, “came into the library at Cresson
one day when we were both busy, and began asking trivial questions while she fumbled the papers on the table.
Andrew was visibly disturbed, but he carefully concealed it from her. After a while the old lady started for
the door, saying as she went: ‘Well, Andree, I’ll go now. I only came in to bother ye.’ ‘But mother,’ he
replied, ‘you didn’t succeed’; and placing his arm about her poor old shoulders, he led her gently out of the
room.”²²

Carnegie had expected to remain at Cresson all summer. Margaret, he feared, was too ill to be left alone.
Louise was summering with her family at the Stags Head Inn in the Catskills. They had both—she less happily
than he—accepted the fact that they would be separated for at least four months. In late June, Carnegie wrote
to inform Louise of a sudden change in plans. He was going to sail to England with Mr. and Mrs. Phipps and his
cousin, Dod. “Mother really asked me to go,” he explained to Louise. “I had not thought of doing so, but
really, Mother is better…and really my newspaper business demands my presence for a week or two in London.
Then two weeks in Scotland is all I have.” He would return on August 22 “and see you very soon thereafter. I
shall think of you every day and every night and hope you are so happy, but at times feeling that someone
absent would be so welcome.”²³

Louise was shocked by the sudden turn of events. “It was rather of a thunderbolt,” she wrote back, “but I am
glad, oh, so glad for your sake, that you are going! It will do you a world of good in every way.” She thanked
him for sending along the copy of the address he had just delivered at the Curry Commercial College in
Pittsburgh and reminded him that he had promised to send a photograph. “I do really want it so much, and I
feel you are so much further away in England than at Cresson. I shall follow you every step of the way.”²⁴

Try as she might, Louise could not help but feel abandoned by Andrew’s sudden departure, and deceived as well.
He had left New York early that year so that he could care for his mother and complete his book; but at the
first opportunity, he had flitted away to England and his English friends who, it appeared, were more
important to him than anything else, herself included. His letters from England only confirmed her fears that
he preferred the company of London society to hers.

“Here we are in the whirl,” he wrote from the Metropole Hotel in London on July 23. “My parlor overlooks the
Thames and the pretty gardens on the Embankment…. Rather lonely some mornings, at breakfast in my room alone,
but I like it in some ways. So quiet (bachelordom has its advantages). Miss Mother much in such big rooms.
Wish a certain young, beautiful lady were only here to brighten them up with her smiles and silvery laugh, but
she is having fine hours with many admirers, no doubt, and a photograph.” Totally oblivious to the effect his
letter might have had on Louise, left behind in the Catskills, Carnegie went on to list all the celebrities he
had visited and who had visited him, the dinners held in his honor, the great men clamoring for his attention.
“Can’t tell you my numerous visits, but of course, I have been at Gladstones’, Lord Rosebery’s, Morley’s, etc.
A great dinner to me at Colin Hunter’s, R. A.[*][1] Miss Mary Anderson [one of Britain’s most renowned
actresses] there…didn’t get home last night at all, for it was early morning. I spent last Sunday with the
Howards, Clapham Hall, and next I go to the Arnolds. Of course, Mr. Arnold and Herbert Spencer have been with
me here to lunch, etc…. Made a speech at the Arbitration League yesterday before a lot of well-known people.
Success! Got the cheers. Have declined to speak as a partisan several times: won’t mix in public politics.” He
was on his way to Scotland to scout out future country homes for the two of them. “Half of Scotland said to be
for sale. I am deluged with plans of Estates which I am supposed to be likely to buy. Am going to have a peep
at one of two while north—but truly, you should be along to select.”²⁵

Carnegie returned to New York City in late August, but spent only a few days there before taking the train to
Cresson, where he would remain through September and October, working with Bridge on his book, with his
mother, feeling better now, in the next room.

Separated from Louise, he was revisited again by doubts about the wisdom of marriage and required almost daily
reassurances that she truly, unconditionally loved him. He received, instead, distant, lukewarm, almost coldly
indifferent letters. Louise was plainly angry with him for staying away so long. The summer had come to an
end, and everyone, it appeared, had returned to town except Andrew. Hurt by his absence, but unwilling to make
any demands or suggest that he should return to her, Louise expressed her melancholy with a studied aloofness.
Carnegie, reading her letters as carefully as any scholar ever examined any text, felt the coldness—and was
frightened, as he should have been. Instead of laying the matter to rest by returning to her in New York, he
remained in Cresson and responded in kind. When Louise remarked that his letters had become “indifferent,” he
acknowledged that this was truly the case, but blamed her for it.

“You are right in some degree about [the] indifferent letter the last time I wrote,” he wrote her from Cresson
in mid-September,

for truly I have been feeling while abroad that your letters proved to me that my absence made but little
difference to you. They told me of your external acts, your jaunts and all that—but ah, Louise, they told not
of any longing, any loneliness! Cold and formal, they felt, and I went back to the state of doubt. No use, no
use. “You are only a friend, and can be naught else.” Why deceive yourself longer? Stop, and allow so nice a
woman to find what she cannot be happy without—one who will stir the depths that lie there yet unfathomed.
Your letters were less affectionate than those of even two years ago—far less so. You are so true a woman that
you dissemble not—you cannot. Well do I know that every letter is a truthful embodiment of your real
feelings—even the address means much from you. You are truth itself—clear as crystal—and I’m certain this year
you have felt I was less essential to your life than you did. Is this not so? You never spoke of my visiting
you in any of your letters. I could not resist the feeling that absence had this summer proved to you that you
only liked me up to a certain point, and were perfectly reconciled to have “good times” with others, and hoped
and expected to have them. I have not met any one—nor are my feelings changed except as the result of the
seeming hopelessness of ever gaining your whole heart.²⁶

Louise responded at once. “What a silly goose you are!” The problem between them was that he was so “high
minded and honorable,” he could not understand her “littleness.” She confessed to him, for the first time
apparently, “the truth of the summer”: she had felt abandoned, betrayed, and troubled by her future husband’s
need to be always elsewhere, surrounded by the fine and mighty, while she, Louise Whitfield, was left by
herself at a family resort in the Catskills. “When you went abroad, I wrote to you, trying to be as cheerful
as possible, for the lonelier I felt, the more I tried not to show it. A young lady at [Gilbertsville, where
she was staying] also had friends on the ‘Etruria’ [the ship on which Carnegie returned], and we both looked
for letters. Hers came, mine did not, and my heart turned to stone. Your letters also spoke only of external
acts—to be sure you wished me with you. Who wouldn’t wish their friends with them when they are happy? But I
said, ‘How long would he stay with me here, in this dreary place?’ That is the test.”

Having sufficiently chastised him for his thoughtlessness, Louise assured Carnegie that she had no intention
of breaking off their engagement a second time. She was no longer the silly girl she had been; the doubts of
the past two years were vanquished. “The old life has no longer any charms for me, and the ‘good times’ with
others are thoroughly revolting to me. You have made yourself thoroughly essential to my life—my highest and
best life, but to keep me in that belief I must be assured by actions, more than by words, although I want
those, too—that I am equally essential to yours. I know I have done nothing but check and repulse you, but
until you tell me plainly that you have met some one you care for more than you do me, I shall cling to you,
for, Andrew, I do love you, and my only chance of happiness in life is in being with you and making you
happy.” Louise knew her man well and had found a reservoir of strength to draw on. She had toyed with his
affections—but only a bit, and only to punish him for his inattentions. “I like to have you get discouraged a
little, for that shows me you do need me a little,—that gives me something to do, and to keep in a healthy
state of mind I must have action.”²⁷

Carnegie thanked her for her “welcome letter,” but he needed more from her. His insecurities were legion. It
is difficult to reconcile our portrait of the self-confident industrialist and author with the frightened
little man who, unable to believe anyone could truly love him as he was, demanded constant reassurance. He
feared, he wrote Louise, that he was still “not clear out of doubt yet.” His love for her was so strong it
should have made her “joyously happy” and swept away all other sentiments. He implicitly criticized her again
for being “cold” and unable to love him the way she should have. Exercising his authority as the man in the
relationship—both older and wiser than she could ever be—he lectured her on the nature of “true love…. Even to
the coldest temperaments it brings warmth and a glow of rosy joy. I have tried to produce that, and my failure
seems sure, but I’ll be at your side some evening next week and we shall see.”²⁸

Louise, perhaps moved, if only in part, by pity for the little man who needed so much from her, now gave him
what he wanted. “Yes, dear,” she wrote him on October 2, “I am yours, yours, all yours, for you have thrown
the mantle of your great love around me, and I am no more cold and trembling, but warm and strong.”²⁹

Her love letter, which parroted back to him what he so wanted to hear, was tonic to the troubled man’s soul.
“Well, My Own Sweet Darling, you have written me a true love letter. The fountain has burst and flows at last.
And you are truly warm and strong and now know that all I have told you real love was, is true, and more than
true. I am so happy.” Unable any longer to sustain the emotional level of their previous letters, he reverted
to more mundane chatter, informing her that his mother “keeps well…but has her ups and downs,” and that he had
“sent today for Boxes, Symphony and Oratorio meetings—also have Box for Popular Concerts. Then there’s the
Grand German Opera (you remember Die Walkure). We shall have happy days in New York, My Own, and our lives
shall shadow forth what is to be some day.”³⁰

Strangely, he did not follow up his letters with a visit to New York. There was his book to finish in Cresson
and business in Pittsburgh. “I gave our Rail Mill men [at Braddock] fifty thousands dollars Friday, for
Library, etc. Hurrah!…I have been so busy. We have consolidated some of our Works and Interests into one
[Carnegie, Phipps, & Co.], and this has taken my time and thoughts. A new firm organized, but I have had quiet
moments and always the hour before sleep your lovely form and voice and oh! Such a lovely rippling smile come
dancing in upon me to give me such exquisite happiness.”³¹

Carnegie battled his demons and insecurities in silence. He was a master at compartmentalizing his life,
building barriers between Carnegie the lovesick suitor, Carnegie the powerful industrialist, and Carnegie the
man of letters, disciple of Herbert Spencer, and confidant of Matthew Arnold. His distress at the ups and
downs of his courtship was kept secret from everyone, lest word leak to his mother, now seventy-five, who he
hoped would live her last years in peace instead of anguish at her son having chosen the wrong wife. He
suffered quietly and alone, and kept busy, impossibly busy.

Carnegie dedicated himself anew to his self-appointed role as ambassador extraordinaire from the New World to
the Old. While he had, through much of the 1880s, paid more attention to Westminster than to Washington, he
had not neglected to cultivate connections with the nation’s most powerful Republicans. His closest
acquaintance in Washington was probably James G. Blaine of Maine, who had run for the presidency in 1880 only
to withdraw at the last moment in favor of James Garfield. Garfield repaid the favor when he was elected by
naming Blaine his secretary of state.³²

Carnegie and Blaine dined together often in New York and Washington. Carnegie enjoyed the fact that Blaine,
arguably the most powerful Republican in the nation, was interested in him. Blaine, for his part, was
intrigued by Carnegie, who was not only a witty conversationalist but a wealthy Republican and a political
power in Pennsylvania. Carnegie may also have been a source of investment advice for Blaine, who, it was later
remarked by no less an authority than the Dictionary of American Biography, had become “wealthy without any
visible means of income.”³³

Blaine had been a candidate for the Republican nomination twice before finally securing it in 1884. Writing to
Morley in October, Carnegie was full of enthusiasm for what he hoped would be a new stage in Anglo-American
relations. “The dawn has come, phantoms must depart. I think Blaine will be elected. You [will] have a new
Minister from Washington, I know this…next Minister will be in sympathy with you and Chamberlain. I am to have
a voice in his selection. Blaine is an…admirer of England.”³⁴

Carnegie was determined to use his connections at the highest level of the Liberal Party in Britain and the
Republican in America to bring the two nations into greater harmony. When, in the spring of 1885, Gladstone
paid tribute to George Washington in a speech in Parliament, Carnegie wrote to say that he was having
Tiffany’s in New York cut and fashion a walking stick for Gladstone from a honey locust which George
Washington had planted at Mount Vernon. “By and by it will reach you. I hope that you will be long spared to
use it, and that you will like to carry it with you, and that it will serve to turn your thoughts at times to
your ‘kin beyond the sea’—to this giant child of dear old England…The present ‘Uncrowned king’ of the
Motherland leaning upon a staff from a tree planted by the first ‘uncrowned King’ of the Childland suggests
strange thoughts.”³⁵

Ten weeks later, Carnegie, now in London, wrote Gladstone again. Since his offer of the walking stick,
Gladstone had resigned as prime minister and retired to his country estate. Carnegie, ever adaptable, found a
way to take advantage of Gladstone’s defeat to carry forward his own plans. Carnegie entreated him to “take
this rare opportunity to visit your Kin beyond the Sea. Come with me early in August.” The Carnegies and
Gladstones would together cross the ocean in one of the “immense new Cunarders” and travel by “special car to
Niagara, Chicago, Cincinnati, Pittsburgh, Washington, etc…. It can be done in about a month. You would return
early in October, at furthest, having rendered to the two Nations a great political service. In their union
lies the truest hope for the progress of the World—they have taught the world Arbitration…. I write this that
it may demand your grave conscientious consideration, depend upon it, Mr. Gladstone, you can in no other way
so greatly serve man as in doing what I here suggest.”³⁶

From this point on, Carnegie would continue to shower Gladstone with suggestions as to how he might best serve
Britain by adopting American political institutions. Whatever the problem, it could, Carnegie believed, be
solved by following the American example. When Gladstone took up the cause of Irish Home Rule, which was to
result in his greatest political defeat, Carnegie suggested that he “refer to the rights of States in the
American Union as being the proper position for Ireland. Such a measure will strengthen the bonds of union
between Ireland and Great Britain; for America has proved through the federal system that the present
self-government of the parts produces the strongest government of the whole.”³⁷

It was, of course, enormously presumptuous of the fifty-one-year-old Scottish-American industrialist to be
telling the seventy-seven-year-old prime minister how he might solve the Irish problem. But Carnegie proceeded
to offer his unsolicited advice nonetheless.

Triumphant Democracy, its writing delayed by Carnegie’s trip to England in the summer of 1885, was completed
in the late fall and published by Scribner’s the following spring. In gratitude for the assistance of James
Bridge and John Champlin, Carnegie assigned them his royalties and warmly acknowledged their help—and that of
Scribner’s Statistical Atlas— in his preface. Though some would later question whether Carnegie, without
formal education of any sort, could have been the author of the book that bore his name, it should have been
apparent to anyone who read Triumphant Democracy that it could only have been written by the “Stars-pangled
Scotchman.” No one else dared write with such exuberance, such unbridled optimism, and so many superlatives.

Like his intellectual hero and model, Herbert Spencer, Carnegie began with his conclusion—that America had
triumphed materially, culturally, and socially because of its republican institutions—and then assembled
evidence to support it. Thomas Huxley’s comment on Spencer that “if he ever wrote a tragedy, its plot would be
the slaying of a beautiful deduction by an ugly fact” could just as easily have been applied to Carnegie.³⁸

From first page to last, the volume was suffused with a sunny optimism that drove its more critical readers to
distraction. In Carnegie’s land of milk and honey, there were no social, ethnic, racial, or class conflicts:
no ethnic discrimination, no battles over racial supremacy in the South, no political corruption in the
northern cities, no challenges from the under-classes at the polls or in the workplaces, no unionists, no
anarchists, no strikes, no agrarian agitation. The new nation had suffered growing pains, but was now
materially prosperous, socially mature, and politically stable. Even the infamously corrupt Tweed Ring existed
no more. “The leader,” Carnegie proudly reported, “was required to surrender his property, imprisoned in the
penitentiary, and died there. Others fled abroad and lived in hiding…. Since then the city government has been
comparatively pure.”³⁹

In his tribute to his new nation and its “Triumphant Democracy,” Carnegie concentrated his attention on
America’s ties to its motherland. Four fifths of Americans, he insisted, without providing any statistical
evidence, were British in “ancestry. The other fifth is principally German.” The German contribution to the
American racial mixture was special cause for celebration. The “generally diffused love of music which
characterizes America” came from the Germans, for “there is in the German a part of his nature ‘touched to
fine issues.’”⁴⁰

Unlike many of his contemporaries, Carnegie was neither prejudiced against nor fearful of any of the new
European immigrants. In his weighty corpus of private correspondence, letters to the editor, articles, essays,
speeches, and books, there are few, if any ethnic slurs, anti-Semitic anecdotes, or caustically disapproving
comments on “Romanists,” Celts, “Hunkies,” or Slavs. For him, there were no ungovernable races, no peoples who
could not benefit from becoming full members of the American republic.

Carnegie was so eager to establish American supremacy at every level—political, social, cultural, and
moral—that he overlooked any evidence that might get in the way of his conclusions. This tendency was most
striking in his discussion of “our fellow-citizens of African descent.” The problem of the Negro in America
had been solved by emancipation, he maintained. “Grave apprehensions were entertained that freedom suddenly
granted to these poor slaves would be abused…. It was asserted that the negro would not work save under the
lash of the overseer.” Nothing, he reported, could have been further from the truth. More cotton was being
produced after emancipation, and at less cost. “Under the reign of freedom the material resources of the South
have increased faster than ever before.” Here was empirical evidence that the Negro problem had been solved.⁴¹

Combining a positivist belief that empirical evidence revealed the unvarnished truth of existence with
Spencer’s faith in evolutionary progress, Carnegie assembled statistics—most of them from the 1880 census—to
demonstrate that the United States had succeeded Britain as the greatest nation in the world. America had the
highest literacy rate, the most readers and writers, the greatest numbers of newspapers, more libraries, more
books, and more tons of paper used for printing than Britain or any other nation. It spent more on education,
was more generous to its soldiers and sailors and widows and orphans, had the fewest paupers, the best public
credit rating, and the lowest national debt. Its women were “the most intelligent, entertaining and most
agreeable in the world”; its opera houses and theaters, because newer, were “much superior to those in
Europe”; its major periodicals, Harper’s magazine and the Century, “surpassed anything before known in the
history of periodical literature” in editing, printing, and engraving. There were still areas in which the
Americans were behind the British. English choirs were better, the voices smoother, the enunciation perfect.
The American voice was “thin to begin with—the effect of climate, I fear—and to this is added the abominable
practice of slurring over or cutting off troublesome syllables.” Americans were also behind Europeans in
“history and allegory” painting, though their equals in portraiture and their superiors in landscape.⁴²

The monarchy, Carnegie argued, was at the root of Britain’s failure to keep pace with America. “Monarchical
institutions emasculate even educated men, and the ignorant masses in greater degree.” British commoners
suffered twice: from the loss of privileges that noble birth conferred and from the inferiority complex that
accompanied the absence of those privileges. The British class system further debilitated the nation by
placing at the pinnacle of state and society “people who are exempt from honest labor and despise it.” In
Britain, “the dignity of labor has not only no place but…is actually looked down upon!” The result was that
British workers drank more, worked fewer hours, took more holidays, and were less well paid and less honored
than their American counterparts.⁴³

 

THOUGH THE BOOK was a ham-handed assault on all that was British, Carnegie expected to find an appreciative
audience in England and Scotland. In March 1886, he dispatched Bridge to London, armed “with advance sheets of
the book.” “I think, we should deluge Britain with T.D.,” he wrote Bridge from Cresson in April. “Suppose we
let radical clubs, reading rooms and coffee rooms know that copies will be sent (free or cheap edition) upon
application. I would send copy of first edition to every library, reading room, &c, free—cheap edition for any
who apply. Perhaps it would be best if you engage some young radical to attend to disposing of cheap edition
in various towns & give him discretion to distribute gratis to every club, &c, &c…Do put T.D. into hands of
people—want 25,000 copies at least to go there.”⁴⁴

Carnegie had written his book as an activist and reformer, in the expectation that on studying it, the British
would see the folly of retaining their monarchical institutions and the Americans the wisdom of honoring their
republican ones. He had imagined, quite incorrectly as it turned out, that his British Liberal and radical
comrades would applaud his effort. They did not. Even his closest friend in London, John Morley, who had
joined the Gladstone government in early 1886 as Irish secretary, found too many of Carnegie’s passages “a
trifle too republican for a middle aged monarchist like me: I mean too aggressively republican.”⁴⁵

The man whose opinion he valued most in the world, Herbert Spencer, was even more pointed in his critique of
Carnegie’s “political thesis.” While agreeing that the United States was in the vanguard of civilization and
had accomplished wonderful things in its brief existence as a nation, Spencer faulted Carnegie for attributing
such triumphs to the influence of republican institutions. “A large part, if not the greater part, of what you
ascribe to democracy,” he wrote Carnegie on May 18, “is, it seems to me, simply the result of social growth in
a region furnishing abundant space and material for it, and which would have gone on in a substantially
similar way under another form of government.” Having demolished Carnegie’s central thesis, Spencer went on to
criticize his assumption that material prosperity was

favorable to human life. Absorbed by his activities, and spurred on by his unrestricted ambitions, the
American is, to my thinking, a less happy being than the inhabitant of a country where the possibilities of
success are very much smaller; and where in the immense majority of cases, each has to be content with that
hum-drum career in which circumstances have placed him, and, abandoning hopes of any great advance, is led to
make the best of what satisfactions in life fall to his share. I believe on the whole that he gets more
pleasure out of life than the successful American, and that his children inherit greater capacities for
enjoyment. Great as may be hereafter the advantages of the enormous progress America makes, I hold that the
existing generations of Americans, and those to come for a long time hence, are and will be essentially
sacrificed.⁴⁶

American friends were more generous, though they too were bothered by his overexuberant optimism. George
Pullman, whose views of the American workingman were not nearly as benign as Carnegie’s, believed that the
publication of Triumphant Democracy had been “very timely,” because “owing to the excesses of our turbulent
population, so many are uttering doubts just now as to whether democracy has been a triumph in America.” Henry
George, from the opposite end of the political spectrum, found the book “extremely interesting and very
suggestive, although, as it seems to me, you have given only one side of the picture, ignoring the shadows. To
my mind, however, these come, not from too much, but from too little democracy.”⁴⁷

Carnegie retained the private letters and the published reviews, negative as well as positive. What mattered
most was that he be taken seriously as a thinker and author. On these grounds alone, Triumphant Democracy was
a triumph. It was widely reviewed and commented on, for the most part favorably in the American press,
critically in the British. Andrew Carnegie had at age fifty-one achieved a reputation as a man of letters; his
name and work were now recognized on two continents.

[1]: footnote16.html

## SIXTEEN

## Things Fall Apart, 1886–1887

HAVING FOUND an audience for his books and articles, Carnegie turned them out with regularity now. His voice
and perspective were unique—and he knew this. No other American businessman dared offer his thoughts to the
public and none, had he done so, would have been able to present them so clearly. His range of expertise was
breathtaking. There were few subjects on which he was not willing to give his views. He offered his solution
to the “Irish Question” in a letter to the Irish League of Pittsburgh published in the New York Times on
September 30, 1885. In January 1886, he published an article on British reform legislation in the North
American Review. But his specialty, the subject on which he wrote and spoke most now, was labor-management
relations.

His tone was neither preachy nor didactic; his prose forceful but not bullying; his suggestions often modest;
his outlook always optimistic. He instructed his readers, as a good Spencerian should, that current political
and social problems could only be understood within the context of larger evolutionary patterns. Labor, as he
explained patiently in “An Employer’s View of the Labor Question,” published in Forum in early 1886, had been
engaged in an ongoing struggle “during the past three hundred years, first against authority and then against
capital.” The “permanent relations to each other of labor and capital” were still evolving and this was bound
to produce some friction. Carnegie took it upon himself to suggest how that friction might be reduced.¹

As in his comments the year before in praise of socialism, he commended workers’ cooperatives as the solution
to labor-capital conflicts, while making it clear that he did not believe workingmen were at present capable
of running their own establishments. Proposals that differences between labor and management be settled by
arbitration were, he thought, on “firmer ground.” He agreed, on this point, with the Knights of Labor, who at
their first general assembly in Reading, Pennsylvania, in 1878, had called, as he did, for the “substitution
of arbitration for strikes.” If manufacturers were going to arbitrate their differences with their workingmen,
it was critical that the workingmen be responsibly represented. Carnegie was, on the whole, quite supportive
of both the Knights of Labor and the Amalgamated, which he claimed were led by responsible, conservative
unionists. It was high time, he maintained, abruptly breaking ranks with his fellow manufacturers, that
employers recognized the right of their employees to join labor organizations. “The right of the workingmen to
combine and to form trades-unions is no less sacred than the right of the manufacturer to enter into
associations and conferences with his fellows, and it must sooner or later be conceded.”

Carnegie’s position on trades unions was not, he insisted, derived from abstract political principles, but
from his own experience as an employer. In all his pro-union pronouncements from this period, he never
mentioned his Chartist forbears or the fact that his uncles and his father had been strike leaders in
Dunfermline in the 1840s. What happened in the past on the other side of the ocean had no bearing on the
present. Lockouts and strikes were to be avoided because they were bad for business—and bad for the
workingmen. The pragmatic business leader navigated around them by cementing a cordial relationship with
responsible union leaders. “My experience has been that trades-unions, upon the whole, are beneficial both to
labor and to capital. They certainly educate the workingmen, and give them a truer conception of the relations
of capital and labor than they could otherwise form.”²

An article by a millionaire industrialist in favor of labor unions and cooperatives was such an anomaly it was
bound to get attention—and it did. “An Employer’s View” was excerpted in several newspapers. At the meeting of
the Baptist Social Union at Delmonico’s on April 1, Deacon William Richardson, in opening the discussion on
“Strikes, Their Causes and How They May Be Prevented,” read aloud from it. The editors of the National Labor
Tribune who, since the institution of the twelve-hour day at Edgar Thomson in 1885, had begun to take a more
critical view of Carnegie’s pronouncements, devoted a full editorial to his article. Referring to Carnegie’s
aside that America lacked a “retired class of men of affairs” to serve as arbitrators in labor diputes because
“our vile practice is to keep on accumulating more dollars until we die,” the editors suggested that Carnegie
“take the initiative in stopping this ‘vile practice’…by giving to charity, or to your present employees, all
of your interests in your large manufacturing establishments!…To do as we suggest would be practicing what you
preach. Set an example…. Do this, Mr. Carnegie, and we will argue in favor of your being a proper person to
become ‘arbitrator.’ Fail in this, Mr. Carnegie, and we will oppose you as arbitrator on the ground that you
are not competent to distinguish the difference between enough and a feast.”³

 

CARNEGIE had written his Forum article in the midst of another busy winter season. New York was a
concertgoer’s paradise, with two dueling maestros, Leopold Damrosch and Theodore Thomas; three symphony
orchestras (the two major ones: the New York Symphony Society, to whose board Carnegie had been elected in
1885, and the New York Philharmonic Society, would not merge until 1928); and two grand opera companies, at
the Academy of Music downtown and the newly built Metropolitan Opera House uptown. Carnegie went out nearly
every evening.

During the day, when the weather was suitable, he went riding with Louise or attended the races at Jerome
Park. He kept up this pace until early March, when, claiming total exhaustion, he fled south to Dungeness, his
brother’s estate on Cumberland Island off the coast of Georgia.

It didn’t take long for him to regain his strength. “One week since we arrived here, and now I am to report
progress. I am truly much better,” he reassured Louise. “Have got rid of that half suffocated feeling which
troubled me in the city, and am much stronger than I was. I walk a great deal, a little at a time. The yacht
is my delight.”⁴

He remained in Dungeness, cared after by his sister-in-law Lucy, whom he adored, through the rest of the
month. Then, after a week in Pittsburgh, he retired to Cresson for the remainder of the spring and summer.
Again this year, because of his mother’s steadily failing health, he had decided to give up his trip abroad.
Unwilling any longer to remain separated from Louise for months at a time or to break the news to his mother
that he planned to marry her, Carnegie resorted to subterfuge to get Louise to Cresson. Alexander King, the
Scottish manufacturer who had introduced Carnegie to the Whitfield family, had leased a cottage just ten
minutes up the hill. Carnegie arranged for King and his wife Aggie to invite Louise and her mother and younger
sister to their cottage. Mrs. Whitfield, having been told of her daughter’s engagement, had no objections.
Margaret Carnegie, having taken to her bed, was too ill to object.

Carnegie’s major project that summer was to design a baronial house for himself. At age fifty, poised on the
threshold of marriage (though it was a broad threshold not easily crossed), he had decided that it was now
time to own a home of his own. All his life, he had lived either in his mother’s home or in leased rooms. He
bought five hundred acres from the corporation that owned and operated the Cresson resort and then, with the
assistance of Frederick Law Olmsted, the landscape architect who had designed Central Park with Calvert Vaux,
sited his future “castle” at the crest of the mountain. Matthew Arnold, who visited Cresson in July, was much
taken with its “unfailing spring of water” and absence of mosquitoes. Still, he wrote his sister, he thought
the “Scotch baronial house” that Carnegie was planning to build on his newly purchased mountainside better
suited for Scotland than Pennsylvania.⁵

Carnegie spent the spring, summer, and early fall of 1886 in the protective cocoon of the cottage while the
outside world was being rocked by an unprecedented wave of labor disturbances, political protests, work
stoppages, and strikes. “Eighteen-eighty-six,” as the historian Jeremy Brecher puts it, “was a year of
tumult…. The number of strikers in 1886 tripled compared with the average for the previous five years, and the
number of establishments struck nearly quadrupled.” Membership in the Knights of Labor, the nation’s leading
workingmen’s organization, grew from 111,395 in July of 1885 to 729,677 a year later.⁶

Carnegie had predicted in his Forum article a future of labor peace and harmony. On the date his article
appeared in print, April 1, 1886, the workers on Tom Scott’s Texas & Pacific Railroad, now owned by Jay Gould,
went on strike, the beginning of a massive walkout against the roads in Gould’s southwestern railway system.
Then, on May Day, in response to the call for a general strike for the eight-hour day, thousands of workers in
industrial cities across the nation left their jobs. Two days later, at a rally at Chicago, a dynamite bomb
ripped through Haymarket Square, killing a police officer and igniting a riot that resulted in several
civilians and policemen dead and scores wounded. The police arrested hundreds of labor activists and
anarchists. Within eighteen months, four of those accused of conspiracy in the bombing would be hanged; a
fifth would take his own life in prison.

The events of May 1886 brought out of the shadows the specter of the “general strike” that had arisen briefly
in 1877. The 1886 strikes for the eight-hour day were, if anything, more widespread and long-lasting. There
were loosely coordinated rallies and work stoppages in dozens of cities across the country, from Troy, New
York, to Pittsburgh, Baltimore, Grand Rapids, St. Louis, and Milwaukee. Carnegie, surveying the situation from
his sanctuary in Cresson, found the hysteria of the business classes more alarming than the protests
themselves. Capital had “been frightened almost into panic,” he wrote in a follow-up article entitled “Results
of the Labor Struggle” and published in August in Forum, “and many leaders of public opinion seemed to lose
self-command…. Our magazines, reviews, and newspapers have been filled with plans involving radical changes
considered necessary…for the restoration of proper relations between capital and labor.” Carnegie took it upon
himself to set the record straight, to talk sense to his fellow businessmen, to put the present strife within
a larger evolutionary scheme. There had been strikes, and many of them, but the republic and its institutions
were not in danger; there was no need to confine “the suffrage…to the educated” or hold “the masses…in
stricter bonds.” While acknowledging that a quarter million men had left their jobs to protest for the
eight-hour day, Carnegie insisted that the “eruption was not, in itself, a very serious matter, either in its
extent or in its consequences,” as that quarter million was but a fraction of the “more than twenty millions
of workers who earn their bread by the sweat of their brow.”⁷

Workingmen were, he declared, becoming more intelligent; union leaders more conservative. The sporadic
violence that had marked recent labor disputes was unfortunate and had been rightly condemned. But it was
important that the larger public, while condemning violence, also “give due consideration to the terrible
temptation to which the workingman on a strike is sometimes subjected. To expect that one dependent upon his
daily wage for the necessaries of life will stand by peaceably and see a new man employed in his stead, is to
expect much…. The employer of labor will find it much more to his interest, wherever possible, to allow his
works to remain idle and await the result of a dispute, than to employ the class of men that can be induced to
take the place of other men who have stopped work.”⁸

Carnegie had taken upon himself the mantle of impartial observer and wise man. He was above the fray,
interested not in promoting the interests of either labor or management, but in getting them both to see that
they had no choice but to work together. His innate optimism, reinforced by his reading of Spencer, convinced
him that the current battles of labor and management would soon be consigned to the dustbin of history. In the
meantime, he counseled caution and conciliation on both sides.

It is doubtful that anyone was listening. The manufacturers considered him something of a renegade—and not
entirely reliable. The labor leaders, for their part, put little stock in his words, but looked instead to his
actions as an employer. Still, they could not help but be impressed by the fact that he had, in his August
article, come out strongly against hiring “scabs” to replace workingmen on strike.

 

THROUGH most of the summer of 1886, Andrew Carnegie wrote about the labor situation, cared for his ailing
mother, entertained the visiting Arnold family, made plans for his “Scotch baronial house,” consulted with
Allegheny City officials on his gift of a library and concert hall, finished his second Forum article,
prepared for Louise’s visit to Cresson, and conferred regularly with his Pittsburgh partners. On July 21, he
collapsed from exhaustion again and summoned his personal doctor, Fred Dennis, from New York City to Cresson.
“Had a relapse,” he wrote Louise, who was in Oyster Bay with her family. “Only allowed milk, no solid food.
Dr. Dennis and assistant arrived today. Dr. D. says disease will develop in few days but attack will be mild,
since every symptom is favorable. His assistant remains. Mother poorly, of course…. Don’t be alarmed, but do
not expect to hear for few days.”⁹

The following day, he wrote again, preoccupied in his weakened state with his still precarious relationship to
his secret fiancée.

I have not written to you because it seems you and I have duties which keep us apart. Our parents are better,
and I have known what you said recently was true. To leave your mother—“You could not think of it”—nor could I
leave mine. You seemed interested a little in other suitors, just a little, I thought, and probably some one
might arise who would come into your household and make not only you happy but your mother and family also.
This would be the ideal way. Therefore I have stood away back, as it were, and resolved that it was best to
let you alone and free, but now when I hear [that you will be in Cresson on] the 29th I thrill with gladness
and await your coming, even if I do not see that we can go beyond our present relations at present…. Mother
seems really better; it is miraculous. I trust yours is also better. Everything does hang upon our Mothers
with both of us. Our duty is the same—to stick to them to the last. I feel this every day.¹⁰

Louise arrived, as promised, on July 29, and, though she stayed at the King cottage with her mother and
sister, she and Andrew were able to spend a good deal of time together. Her diaries, as her biographers
report, told “of joyful happenings: ‘AC walked home with me in the starlight…. Andrew brought me home all
alone—took long lovely walk. Such wonderful happiness.’ The day before she left for the city was ‘the happiest
day of my life.’”¹¹

The Whitfields returned to New York in September. Andrew wrote to tell Louise that Harry Phipps had thought
her wonderful and pretty. But she’s engaged, Carnegie responded, not saying to whom. No matter, said Phipps,
pursue her anyway.

Three days later, Carnegie wrote again, this time with bad news. His brother had been taken ill. “Was thought
dying, but is now better, but very weak. I am so concerned about him and especially about Lucy and the
children.”¹²

On October 3, Andrew reported that Tom was feeling better. He then returned to his favorite theme, his
feelings for Louise. “Your last love letter was best of all,” he wrote, and then, employing an erotic analogy
probably never used before or since, he told her that she was “like Pittsburgh Iron—it is very hard to heat at
first, but once hot, it is very, very hot indeed, and retains its heat extraordinarily! So it will be with
you, Darling.” He was, he gleefully informed her, on his way north. He had a meeting in Philadelphia on
Tuesday morning and would, he hoped, reach New York that evening. He tantalizingly hinted that he might lease
a house on Forty-eighth Street. “I dislike Hotels so much. What near neighbors we would be! Not near enough,
though, but that’s soon to be all right.”¹³

Because Margaret was too ill to be moved, Carnegie did not take the train north to New York after his meeting
in Philadelphia, but returned to Cresson. “I had a chill last night, and am now in bed, and the doctor
attending me,” he wrote Louise on October 16. “He says it’s the old malarial touch got at the Windsor, and
I’ll be all right soon. Don’t be alarmed. Nothing serious—sure!”¹⁴

The doctor was wrong: Carnegie had contracted typhoid fever. Only hours after writing Louise, he lapsed into a
near coma and was put to bed in the room at the top of the stairs, adjoining his mother’s. A local doctor and
nurse were called in at once and Dr. Dennis was summoned again from New York. In Pittsburgh, on almost the
same day Carnegie was stricken with typhoid, his brother Tom left his office early with what he thought was a
minor cold. Thomas Carnegie died of pneumonia a few days later.¹⁵

Carnegie’s cousin Dod, who was now a full partner in the Pittsburgh firms, took the train east to Cresson with
Harry Phipps and Andrew’s friend John Walker to break the news of Tom’s death. James Bridge, who had remained
in Cresson all summer and fall, was asked to prepare Carnegie for his visitors.

“George Lauder [Dod] has come up from Pittsburgh,” I said, “and Tom is very sick.”

“What’s the matter with him?” asked Andrew.

“He has got pneumonia.”

“Then he’ll never get over it! That’s the end of Tom! Oh this life, this life!” And with that he threw up his
hands and turned his face to the wall. Nothing more was said, and I tip-toed out of the room.¹⁶

Tom’s early death had come as no surprise to his brother or their partners. He had been a heavy drinker all
his life—and suffered for it. Margaret was not told of the death of her younger son. Andrew himself, according
to Dr. Dennis, had a relapse upon hearing the news. With both Andrew and his mother critically ill, the
cottage was turned into a hospital. Dr. Dennis and his chief assistant, Dr. Jasper Garmany, spent their days
and nights there, assisted by a full staff of nurses. The fireplaces were stoked to the maximum and rugs hung
against the windows to keep out the cold. Built as a summer vacation home, the cottage had no central
heating.¹⁷

James Bridge took on the role of press secretary, communicating by telegraph with both Louise and the New York
City and Pittsburgh newspapers, which reported almost daily on Carnegie’s illness, often on their front pages.
In late October, Charles Mackie forwarded to Cousin Dod in Pittsburgh Carnegie’s securities, collaterals,
notes, bills, and everything else in his vault, including “Life Membership Certificates, letters of thanks,
Resolutions, etc.” The expectation was that Carnegie would not survive the winter.¹⁸

Margaret Carnegie died on the morning of November 10. Andrew remained critically ill in the next room. The
news of his mother’s death was kept from him. James Bridge and Dr. Dennis directed that her casket be lowered
out the window of her bedroom. It was then placed on the back of a horse-drawn wagon, driven down the hill to
the train station, and put on a train for Pittsburgh, where Margaret would be buried alongside her son Tom.

For the next two weeks, Carnegie remained nearly comatose, so weak he was unable to move and barely able to
take nourishment. Louise remained in touch, but did not visit, perhaps because she was afraid to see Carnegie
in such a weakened state or because, still not officially engaged, it would not have been proper for her to
travel south to be with him.

On November 24, Carnegie raised his head, conversed briefly with Dr. Dennis, then picked up his pencil to
write Louise:

It is six weeks since the last word was written and that was to you as I was passing into the darkness. Today
as I see the great light once more my first word is to you…. I shall get to NY soon, stay with Dr. Dennis, but
here comes one last separation—I have to go to the South of France, so say the doctors, and if I do, and
attend to getting strength, my health will be more robust than ever. Whether you can come to me soon, and let
us be quietly married there, or whether I must return for you, we shall see soon. I shall see few in NY—but
daily and hourly, almost, we must be together. Louise, I am now wholly yours—all gone but you. Oh, dear one,
be careful of your health.¹⁹

On November 29, he wrote again to tell Louise that he had decided the best place to recuperate was in England,
with cousin Dod Lauder and a personal physician to watch over him. He asked her to meet him in Liverpool,
where they would be “quietly married…. Then you and your maid, I and [my valet] John (for I take him along) go
off on a driving tour…. They will not be in our way at all. Don’t interpose any objections, Beloved—let me
have this to ponder over at night when I am wakeful. It’s my Dream.”²⁰

After so many years of silence, Louise was desperate to tell her friends about her marriage plans. Carnegie
urged her not to. “Darling, there is only one reason why the whole world should not know of our happiness. It
would not seem in good taste to announce it so soon [after Margaret’s death]…Therefore I hope the public will
not get hold of it. Tell one, tell all, Louise…. In the Spring, when you sail [for Liverpool] with your maid
and in charge of some friend, then of course all will be understood by our friends, and it will take a week to
spread. By that time we shall be united forever. I feel just as you do; we must have plans. Well, Angel Mine,
were I to return for you [and get married in N.Y.] I must have many business questions presented, and a great
hubbub would ensue. I could scarcely get away for some time.” He did not want them to begin life together in
the glare of New York celebrity. Better that they marry and honeymoon in England, away from friends, business
acquaintances, and reporters. “Then, Darling the quietness that would surround our union, so appropriate after
recent events, and the months that would ensue before our return to New York life, would, as I see it, enable
us to begin life together so much sooner without violating the proprieties. Think all this over, my Love.”²¹

Louise considered his suggestions—and rejected them. She would not, she wrote her betrothed, slink away to
England in secret to be married. “Darling, as long as my Mother lives, I never can leave her house but as your
wife.”²²

Carnegie agreed reluctantly. They would be married in New York in the spring, after he had returned from
Europe, fully recuperated. In the meantime, he intended to take over the Whitfield finances so that neither
Louise nor her mother would ever again have to worry about money. “What a blessing we are laden with dollars.
They are of some good. Yes, you and I have dollars plenty, so Mother [Mrs. Whitfield] is all right, and all
her family. Your troubles, brave love, are mine also, only I smile at the business part.” Having written every
day, Carnegie apologized for having let a few days go by without a letter. “I have been so busy with partners
one day, and two days with Mr. Maravetz [his lawyer] on my will, that when done I could not write.” Though
still quite weak, he had begun to transact business again.²³

There was much to be done. The first item on the agenda was finding a way to provide for Lucy Carnegie and her
children by cashing in Tom’s one-sixth interest in the business. Andrew agreed to buy Tom’s stock for himself
and pay Lucy for it over an extended period of time.

More pressing was the question of succession. Tom had been a critically important part of the Carnegie
Brothers management team, perhaps the most important part. Phipps agreed to succeed him as chairman of the
board, but this, it was tacitly agreed, was but a stopgap measure. As good as he had been as treasurer and
senior partner, Harry Phipps had neither the talent nor the inclination to run the company.

Since Andrew’s recovery, Phipps had been working with company lawyers on a plan to protect the company—and the
remaining partners’ investments—should Carnegie be taken ill again. As Andrew owned more than 50 percent of
the stock and Tom another 16 percent, had they died together they would have taken the company with them;
there would have been no way for the surviving partners to buy up their stock.

Phipps proposed that the partners protect themselves from such an eventuality by signing an “ironclad”
agreement—“ironclad” being the accepted nomenclature for agreements that, once signed, could not be
broken—which stipulated that should any partner leave the firm, by death or any other means, that partner’s
interest could be bought back by the company at the “value of the interest, as it shall appear to be on the
books.” Because the so-called book value was far below the market value of the shares, the “ironclad”
agreement guaranteed that, in future, the company would be able to purchase the stock of deceased members at
discounted prices.

Unlike capitalists who overvalued their holdings, Carnegie and his partners purposefully undervalued theirs on
their books. “They prided themselves on keeping everything down,” Carnegie’s lawyer explained in 1912 to the
congressional committee investigating U.S. Steel for possible antitrust violations because it was, “nobody
else’s business but their own, and they kept depreciating the values. Having no stock to sell, or anything
like that, to the public, and no credit to keep up in the public eye, they prided themselves on going to the
other extreme.”²⁴

Phipps’s “ironclad” agreement not only provided that a deceased partner’s stock could be bought back at the
discounted “book value,” but gave the remaining partners plenty of time to do so—a full fifteen years in the
case of Carnegie’s 50 percent share of the company. There was a second part to the agreement. Phipps proposed
that at any time in the future, for any cause whatsoever or no cause at all, three quarters of the
stockholders, if they held among them three quarters of the stock, could force any of the partners to leave
the company and sell back his interest at “book value.” Since Carnegie held 50 percent of the stock, no
ejection could take place unless he agreed to it. He was the only partner so protected.²⁵

“The year 1886 ended in deep gloom for me,” Carnegie wrote in his Autobiography. It was the year in which he
said good-bye to his mother and brother—and to Cresson, which had been his favorite place on earth. He gave up
plans to build his castle and abandoned the cottage that had been his and his mother’s second home for more
than a decade. The year 1886 was also a year of new beginnings, one in which he invited Louise Whitfield to be
his partner in marriage, and Henry Clay Frick to join him in the steel business.²⁶

 

CARNEGIE’S RELATIONS with Frick were nearly as complicated as were his relations with Louise Whitfield. Frick
had invited Carnegie and his partners to invest in the H. C. Frick Coke Company in 1881 because he needed
capital for expansion. When, in August 1883, he suggested that the coke company that bore his name acquire two
new properties, Carnegie, by this time the company’s largest stockholder, demurred. Frick responded with anger
and no little contempt for the steelmaker who had presumed to tell him how to manage his coke business. “I am
free to say, I do not like the tone of your letter,” he wrote Carnegie directly. “Outside of my desire to
follow and accept your views as the largest stockholder in our Company, I have great admiration for your
acknowledged abilities and your general good judgment, and would much prefer to defer to your views but in the
matter of the values of the properties in question & the propriety of increasing our stock I will have to
differ with you & think the future will bear me out.”²⁷

In 1886, when the Connellsville coke workers threatened to strike if the previous year’s wage cuts were not
restored and irregularities in weighing their product remedied, Carnegie and Frick found themselves on
opposite sides of the bargaining table. Frick, looking after the interests of his coke companies, which
supplied not only Pittsburgh but Illinois Steel in Chicago with fuel, was willing to risk a lockout or strike
to keep wage rates down. Carnegie and his steel partners, with large orders to fill, could not afford any work
stoppage.

Carnegie believed a wage increase in the coke fields was inevitable and suggested that Frick try one more time
to reach an agreement. “Naig says make best terms, but make them” as soon as possible, Phipps asked Lauder in
Pittsburgh to instruct Frick. When it became apparent that no such agreement was possible, Carnegie wrote
Frick directly to caution him that if he chose to break the strike, the “fee for protection should be
overwhelming. It will never do to let the discontented beat your protective forces.”²⁸

Frick, in the end, did as Carnegie suggested and settled with the striking coke workers by raising their wage
rates. Then, having done his bit to keep the steel furnaces fueled, Frick asked for stock in the steel company
and offered to pay for it with stock in his coke company. Carnegie bluntly advised him that to exchange shares
in his own company for Carnegie’s “would be the mistake of your life. Your career must be identified with the
Frick Coke Co.” Because he, Carnegie, had found it unbearable working for concerns he did not found, own, and
control, he could not imagine Frick doing so. “You never could become the Creator of CB and Co. Twenty years
from now you might be a large owner in it, perhaps the principal, still the concern would not be your work and
you could not be proud of it.” He suggested that Frick use whatever capital he had or could raise to increase
his stake in the company that bore his name. The letter was signed: “Your friend, Andrew Carnegie,” with a
postscript: “File this for future reference. AC.”²⁹

Frick let the matter drop. Eight months later, with the landscape altered irremediably by Tom Carnegie’s
death, the partnership plan was reintroduced. Carnegie, recognizing that he needed to replace his brother with
a man with executive talents and knowledge of the coke industry, offered Frick a 2 percent share in Carnegie
Brothers, with no down payment. The full cost of Frick’s stock—plus interest—would be deducted, over time,
from his share of the profits. It was a wise move for both men. Frick would turn out to be the ablest
executive ever to work for Carnegie—and he would grow immensely rich and powerful doing so.³⁰

 

BY DECEMBER, Carnegie was well enough to travel. His doctors agreed to let him return to New York, but only on
the condition that he stay at Dr. Dennis’s home at 542 Madison Avenue. He was taken north in a private railway
car dispatched to Cresson by his childhood friend, Bobby Pitcairn, and arrived in New York on December 12, so
exhausted from the trip that his reunion with Louise had to be delayed for five full days. From mid-December
on, Louise visited Carnegie regularly. On one of these visits, he presented her with an engagement ring from
Tiffany which she hid away and wore only when alone in her room.³¹

He decided not to recuperate in England or the South of France, as originally planned, but at Dungeness. Space
was booked for him and Dr. Garmany on a steamer bound for Georgia.

The enforced separation from Louise was painful to both, but flew by rapidly. Andrew was doted over by Lucy,
whom he adored, and surrounded by her children. They spent their days fishing and going on walks; their
evening at whist. Louise, left behind as always in her mother’s house, had plenty to occupy her time. Andrew
had charged her with arranging their wedding, hiring a personal maid, and having the dressmaker prepare a new
wardrobe. Their engagement remained a secret, though news was starting to leak out; how, neither of them quite
knew. Andrew had told no one, not even Lucy. When Louise expressed her concern that she might somehow have
betrayed their secret, Andrew reassured her. “It matters little, my Darling, although it is preferable that we
escape talk, and especially the newspapers. So don’t put yourself too much about—let your friends suspect and
talk as they will. You do what is comfortable for yourself.”³²

They were to be married when he returned to New York in April and escape immediately to England for their
honeymoon. Andrew, still worried about his health and frightened lest too much activity tire his bride,
suggested that they disembark in Southampton rather than Liverpool, and go directly to their honeymoon retreat
at Bonchurch on the Isle of Wight. After some time together—accompanied only by his valet John and her
maid—they could travel “north and see our friends in London.” Louise agreed entirely. “So delightful to avoid
friends until we feel just like seeing them. You always do think of the very nicest way of doing things, and I
do love you so, you angel.”³³

Alone in New York, with no one to confide in or seek assistance from, Louise was spending a good deal of her
waking hours worrying. “Nothing short of perfection as I see it, will satisfy me,” she wrote Andrew on March
12, “so of course everything becomes vitally important, but I know I sometimes carry this too far, only I do
like everything perfect.” Her latest concern was finding a way to let her friends and acquaintances know about
their marriage. As they planned to be married in the Whitfield home before no more than twenty-five to thirty
guests, with no parties or receptions planned, there would be no way to notify anyone of their marriage before
the newspaper notices appeared. The only solution was to send out announcements in advance, timed to reach
their friends at the very moment they sailed to England. But there were complications here, too. It would take
time to design, order, and print the announcements, and if they did so too far in advance of the event, they
risked having news of their wedding leaked to the press.³⁴

Andrew tried to reassure Louise. She needn’t worry about the announcements. They could wait until he returned
to New York City, the week before the wedding, and order them from Tiffany. But what of the outer envelopes in
which the invitations would have to be placed? Louise asked next. They had to be ordered early, as it would
take hours to hand-address them all. Andrew replied that Louise could buy them in advance at any stationers in
the city and address them herself. That, Louise responded, would never do, because if she bought the outer
envelopes at a stationers, they would not match the inner envelopes from Tiffany. “I cannot pick up envelopes
anywhere, and make them do.”³⁵

Andrew finally agreed that they would have to order the outer envelopes from Tiffany as well.

 

AT THE SAME TIME she was planning their wedding, Louise was looking for a place for them to live. Her heart
was set on the house owned by the California railroad magnate Collis Huntington, on Fifty-first Street off
Fifth Avenue, just three blocks from her mother’s home. Huntington’s second wife, Arabella, had convinced him
to buy and modernize the town house—they had even installed a new Otis elevator—but no sooner had the
renovations been completed than Arabella decided the house was too modest for her tastes and prevailed upon
her husband to build a more luxurious and ostentatious one on the avenue.

Though a grand house by any standards, the Carnegies’ new home would be dwarfed by the mansions just to the
east along Fifth. William Henry Vanderbilt’s twin palaces occupied the entire block front on the west side of
Fifth Avenue, from Fifty-first to Fifty-second Streets. Vanderbilt’s son, William Kissam Vanderbilt, had built
his own French Renaissance mansion across the street. Farther north on Fifty-seventh and Fifth sat the mansion
of William Kissam’s older brother, Cornelius Vanderbilt II, this one also in the style of the French
Renaissance—but more restrained and classical. Across Fifty-seventh Street, Collis Huntington, having sold the
Fifty-first Street house which Arabella found wanting, constructed a city château that was so oversized, even
by New York standards, that it took up five 25-foot lots. The house the Huntingtons sold the Carnegie
newlyweds had been squeezed into one 50-foot double lot.³⁶

Though Arabella Huntington might not have thought much of the address or the town house at 5 West Fifty-first
Street, the future Mrs. Carnegie was charmed by it. The Carnegies, rich as they might be, were not going to
live like other Gilded Age millionaires in French Renaissance châteaux on Fifth Avenue. Louise found the
house—which was twice the size of her mother’s—the perfect one in which to begin life as Mrs. Andrew Carnegie.
“To me it is the most attractive in every way,” she wrote Andrew. “It would seem almost impossible to find a
house already built with so many advantages—large yet unobtrusive, and such a choice location.” Carnegie
contacted Huntington and reported to Louise that he thought the property could be bought for what it had cost
Huntington, $170,000 plus the $10,000 Huntington had spent on improvements. “We shall decide, angel, when we
meet and confer. Must have a fireproof, sunny home, love, but whether this is the one, or not, is the
question.”³⁷

Carnegie was still a bit patronizing toward his much younger fiancée, but he was learning to trust her. He
began discussing business with her, because he wanted her to understand the full extent of his fortune. The
steel business was booming. “We never did a business as now. Tremendous boom. I’ll surprise you with some
figures when we meet. Millions for us, my Love, to spend for the good of our fellows. Isn’t it just glorious?”
Louise wrote back at once to congratulate him. “I am so glad everything is so flourishing, so you will have no
anxiety in your absence. Your partners, too, will be more contented, and bear your absence better.”³⁸

Less afraid now of being overwhelmed by her future husband’s celebrity, Louise took pride in his growing
renown as a philanthropist and peace activist who had taken a strong stand against British military
intervention in the Sudan. Carnegie had decided to devote his life to a higher calling. And she loved him for
it. “I certainly feel more in harmony with all the world after having been in communion with you, my Prince of
Peace. I say this reverently, dear, for truly that is what you are to me, and I am so glad the world knows you
as the Great Peacemaker.” “What ideal lives we shall lead, giving all our best efforts to high and noble ends,
while the drudgery of life is attended to by others. Without high ideals, it would be enervating and sinful.
With them, it is glorious, and you are my prince among men, my own love.”³⁹

If Louise, for her part, had once worried that she was too plain a girl for so fine a man, those anxieties
were starting to dissipate. She began to envision now, perhaps for the first time, a role for herself as the
great man’s adviser and partner. Carnegie encouraged her in this. When she wrote from New York about attending
a musicale, he responded that they were his “weakness” as well. “If you will get the best musicales in NY at
our house, then take first prize—Model Helpmeet. Won’t we cultivate real talent, and push it forward! Indeed
we shall. We can develop it when found. Money, my dear, money to spend on its education, that’s the essential,
and bless the Lord, we have it.”⁴⁰

 

AFTER TWO MONTHS of recuperation, Carnegie was ready to return to New York. On the way north, he stopped over
in Pittsburgh to meet with his partners. He was back in full health and vigor and prepared to assume his role
as chief spokesman and salesman for his Pittsburgh firms. There was much to do—and only a week set aside for
it all. “Am writing now with four of my partners talking away,” he wrote Louise from Pittsburgh on April 1.
“I’m supposed to be listening, and to give my views. I fear I’m not deeply interested. ‘Trifles, my dear,
trifles.’”⁴¹

The following day he wrote Collis Huntington from Pittsburgh. Huntington, he had learned, had become
discontented with Carnegie Brothers operations while Carnegie was indisposed. He wanted Huntington to know
that his “people” in Pittsburgh “say the man of all our customers they have tried to do the most for is
yourself, postponing rails when you asked postponement, hurrying up when you asked them to hasten, and in
every way showing you that they were determined to place you under such obligations to us that you would never
think of buying a rail from any other concern…. I hope, by the time this reaches you, you will be in your
natural good humor, and satisfied that at all times, and under all circumstances, your alliance with us is
under ‘the most favored nation clause.’ Let us know what we can do for you and it shall be done.” In a
postscript, he added that he was ready now, having had a “hurried look at” Huntington’s house on Fifty-first
Street, to make a bid and “would give you cost for it, which you told me was $170,000, adding to this the
amount you have expended upon it.”⁴²

On April 4, with only eight days left until their wedding day, Carnegie realized that he had run out of time
and wrote Louise to put off their wedding for ten days. He was, he explained, due in court on April 12 and
couldn’t get a postponement. Two days later, he wrote again, this time to tell her that the court case had
“assumed a new phase and it probably will be arbitrated.” It was by now too late to return to their original
wedding date of April 12. They would be married instead on April 22 and leave for their honeymoon the next
day. To reassure Louise that he was not, no matter how much it might appear, trying to escape his vows, he
reassured her with every letter that he loved and missed her more than ever. The delay was torture for him. He
could not concentrate on business. “I write now in office with talk, talk, talk all around,” he declared on
April 6. “You see how busy I’m kept.” And the very next day, “I snatch a few minutes to write you because, my
Love, I can’t help it. Must turn to you…and after I have, as it were, kissed you tenderly, I can return to
Steel and Iron.”⁴³

A week later, he was back in New York, attending a reading by Walt Whitman at Madison Square Theatre in honor
of the anniversary of President Lincoln’s death. It was the last such gala that he would attend alone.

## SEVENTEEN

## A Wedding and a Honeymoon, 1887

ANDREW AND LOUISE were wed at the Whitfield house at 24 West Forty-eighth Streeth at a little past 8:00 P.M.
on Friday, April 22, ten days late, and seven years after they had begun courting. The wedding, which took
everyone by surprise, was reported the next morning on the front page of the New York Times. It was performed
by the Whitfields’ minister, Reverend Charles Eaton, pastor of the Church of the Divine Paternity, a
Universalist church. There were no bridesmaids and no best man. Louise’s mother gave her daughter away.
Carnegie wore a “four-button black cutaway coat [and] dark-colored trousers.” Louise “was very plainly attired
in a tailor-made gray camel’s hair traveling dress, heavily braided.” Among the guests were Carnegie’s
literary assistant James Bridge, his private secretary Charles Mackie, and his lawyer and doctors; Alex and
Aggie King; his niece, Margaret Carnegie; Mrs. Vandervort, the mother of John Vandevort, his oldest friend and
traveling companion; and his partners, David Stewart, Harry Phipps, and Cousin Dod. Immediately after the
ceremony and a “simple collation” in the dining room, the “happy pair” were “driven direct to the Bremen
steamer pier in Hoboken,” where they boarded the steamship Fulda, accompanied only by his valet and her maid.
They spent their first night as husband and wife on board ship, and the following morning, at 6:00 A.M., set
sail for Southampton.¹

On Sunday, the New York Times, in its review of the week’s society weddings, commented that the “town [was]
still wondering why the wealthy and popular bachelor should have chosen Friday as his wedding day [and] why
the bride consented to the choice.” A moment’s thought would have provided the answers. They were married on
Friday night because their ship left on Saturday morning. This was the only way Andrew could protect himself
and his bride from reporters and well-wishers. He was still not fully recovered and did not want to risk his
health more than he had to.

Colonel William d’Alton Mann, owner, editor, and writer of Town Topics, New York’s gossip paper for the
well-connected, was more amused than distressed by the couple’s unconventional nuptials and rapid exit. “Mr.
Andrew Carnegie made short work of his marriage. He refused to admit its approach to the papers till he was
forced to, and he got married and left the country between dinner and breakfast times. This is quick work for
even so energetic a man as the head of the great Edgar Thomson Steel Works…. Mrs. Carnegie looked rather
rattled during the ceremony, and no wonder. To be telegraphed from maidenhood to matrimony at such a rate
would upset any girl.” Mann, who admired Carnegie and shared his Republican allegiances, added that he
believed the couple would “do a great deal of entertaining when they settle here for good. Both Mr. and Mrs.
Carnegie are companionable people, though neither is given to the lighter vanities of life. There has not been
as congenial a match in NY for a long time as theirs.”²

Just moments before they exchanged their vows, Andrew and Louise repaired to the second-floor sitting room of
the Whitfield house to sign their prenuptial “marriage agreement.” In return for an annual income of $20,000
(more than $3 million today), Louise gave up her rights to her husband’s estate.

The prenuptial began by stipulating the obvious: that “the said Andrew Carnegie is possessed of a very large
amount of property, both real and personal, within the state of Pennsylvania and elsewhere, and said Louise
Whitfield is fully advised as to the amount and value of said property, and of the rights which would accrues
to her under the laws of New York, Pennsylvania and other States in case she should survive said Andrew
Carnegie.” It then proceeded to declare that “Said Andrew Carnegie desires and intends to devote the bulk of
his estate to charitable and educational purposes, and said Louise Whitfield sympathizes and agrees with him
in said desire, and fully approves of said intention.”³

Louise was not coerced into surrendering her rights to the Carnegie estate. She knew precisely what she was
doing. Her husband was going to give away his fortune during his lifetime and she was going to help him.

The April 22, 1887, prenuptial agreement provides evidence that Andrew Carnegie, a full two years before the
publication of his “Gospel of Wealth” essays, five years before the violence at his Homestead steelworks, and
fourteen years before his official retirement, had already decided to give away his fortune. This flies in the
face of claims that Carnegie became a philanthropist to rescue his tarnished reputation and pay penance for
the lives lost at Homestead in the course of the 1892 lockout and strike. On the day the prenuptial agreement
was signed, Andrew Carnegie had not the slightest reason to be concerned about his future reputation. Peace
reigned at his iron mills and steelworks; he was well liked and well regarded, he thought, by his employees,
to whom he had donated reading rooms, mortgages, and cheap coal. He had, as he reported to Louise, been
“cheered” several times by his workmen on his return to Pittsburgh after his illness. He enjoyed, in short,
the clearest of consciences when on April 22, 1887, he signed the marriage settlement with Louise that
stipulated that he planned to give away his fortune.⁴

 

LOUISE AND ANDREW departed for their honeymoon with joy and trepidation. A honeymoon photograph, taken at
Bonchurch on the Isle of Wight, shows two stiff, rather unhappy-looking people: Carnegie sitting, hat in one
hand, cane in the other; Louise, looking more like grandchild than wife, standing in her traveling dress, not
particularly attractive, but not unattractive either, her jaw squared, her expression blank. (Because of their
height difference, they were seldom photographed standing together.) In this picture, both stare straight
ahead at the photographer, barely acknowledging one another’s presence.

Their glum expressions may have had more to do with the formal requirements of photographic portraiture than
with their moods. Carnegie had arranged their honeymoon with the same care that he took when planning his
summer vacations. The honeymooners went directly by ferry from Southampton to Bonchurch, where he engaged
rooms in a beautiful old hotel surrounded by miles of wildflowers. Louise’s letters home paint a picture of a
woman fully satisfied that she has made the right choice in marrying her longtime suitor. She was, she assured
her mother on a regular basis, enjoying the perfect honeymoon. “You should see us at our meals in our cozy
parlor,” Louise wrote, “with grate fire burning, bright flowers everywhere and such a glorious view of the sea
from our windows. We can sit at table and look out to sea at the ships crossing to France. This morning after
breakfast we took a lovely walk, first around the grounds of the hotel, which are beautiful beyond
description.” A few days later, she wrote again. “We have been walking and driving and having such a wonderful
time. This morning we sat for a long time on the cliffs, overlooking the sea; the air so warm and genial, we
seem to drink in health at every breath.”⁵

After a week to themselves, the honeymooners were visited by Carnegie’s favorite relative, Uncle Lauder, and
his daughter Maggie. Louise had worried about this moment, but soon discovered that she had nothing to fear.
Andrew’s Scots relatives were as charming as he was—and delighted that he had finally taken a bride. “Uncle
Lauder is most cordial and Maggie Lauder is so very pleasant. They brought me a pretty ecru plaid shawl with a
sweet note from ‘Aunt Lauder,’ and I felt at home with them at once.” Uncle Lauder had been scouting country
houses for the newlyweds. It was decided that they would move into Kilgraston House in Perthshire after a
short tour of England and a few weeks in London at the Metropole Hotel, the perfect spot from which to watch
the royal procession marking Queen Victoria’s Jubilee. Carnegie had refused to subscribe to the Queen Victoria
Jubilee fund in America because “as an American citizen and republican he [feared he] would stultify himself
were he to celebrate the reign of any hereditary ruler.” That did not mean, however, that he was averse to
watching the festivities from his hotel window with his bride.⁶

Carnegie would have preferred to spend much more of the spring and summer in London, showing off Louise to his
many friends and admirers, but, as he wrote Lord Rosebery, while his “recovery from typhoid has been rapid,”
he remained “under Doctor’s orders not to try doing London Society.” He had instead leased Kilgraston House
for the season. “You will probably be in demand for speeches near us [Rosebery was standing for election] and
in that case I do hope Lady Rosebery and you will pay us a visit, and ‘do’ the district with us. I wish you
both to know my wife. I have indeed been fortunate.”⁷

Louise knew her husband was rather well known and extraordinarily sociable, but not even she, who had kept
such careful track of his comings and goings over the past several years, could have guessed at the extent of
his fame. “Have met more celebrities than I can count,” she wrote her mother on June 10 from the Metropole,
“the poet Robert Browning, and Edwin Arnold, writer John Morley—and spent the day with Lord and Lady Rosebery
at their place at Mentmore. Sunday we spent with the novelist William Black.” On June 13, William Gladstone,
almost a year to the day after he had dissolved Parliament following a crushing defeat on Irish home rule,
came calling with his wife. As Gladstone recounted in his diary entry, “Mr. Carnegie offered me as a Loan ‘any
sum’ needful to place me in a state of abundance, without interest, repayable at my death, if my estate would
bear it; if not, then to be cancelled altogether. Such was my construction of his offer: so large, & so
entirely disinterested. Of course, with gratitude, I declined it altogether. But I tried to turn him a little
towards the election fund. He said he should consider it disgraceful to die a rich man. His income is £370,000
p[ounds]. ann[um],” equivalent in today’s dollars to more than $37.5 million.⁸

When Gladstone refused to accept his offer of a loan, Carnegie took another tack and suggested that he boost
his income by writing a book. To avail himself of the protection of American copyright laws, Gladstone would
have to write at least part of his book in the United States. “You might honor us by coming direct to our
house, & return soon as you pleased. We should keep you as free from interruption as possible.” Carnegie asked
for a small favor in return. He was traveling with the Blaine family and hoped to bring together the senator,
who expected to run again for the presidency in 1888, with Gladstone, who Carnegie hoped would in time return
to Downing Street (as he indeed did, in 1892). “When you and [Senator Blaine] are next in power I expect a
treaty to be made between the two Countries agreeing to arbitration. What a service for you to make War
impossible between English speaking men. It is coming.”⁹

Gladstone thanked Carnegie for his suggestions, and then, apologetically and rather obliquely, asked for a
contribution to what remained of the party. The disastrous split over Home Rule had cost the party the recent
election and Gladstone his position as prime minister. Gladstone explained that he had given £700 to the
party, but feared that that would not be nearly enough to hold the Liberals together until the next election.
Carnegie responded immediately with a letter and a check. “I send my contribution to you direct. It is so
largely a personal admiration for your own self that prompts me to contribute at this time (I mean when a
General election is not soon) that I wish you to have the disposal of enclosed.” Carnegie wanted Gladstone to
use £700 to reimburse himself for his contribution, then turn the remainder over to Mr. Morley to dispose of.
He then offered Gladstone his own ideas as to how the prime minister might revivify his dormant party. He
promised, in a future letter, to “work up my idea about Workingmen Candidates,” to whom he pledged to
“contribute…when necessary.”¹⁰

The following year, and on several occasions after that, the Carnegies would visit the Gladstones in London,
and at their family estate at Hawarden in Wales. Louise was as taken with the couple as her husband was. In
what Gladstone’s biographer, Roy Jenkins, has described as Catherine Gladstone’s passionate “engagement with
the success and wellbeing of her husband,” Louise found a model on which to fashion her own relation to her
husband. In 1888, after their visit to Hawarden, she would write Mrs. Gladstone to thank her for her
hospitality and apologize for the poor quality of the fruit that had preceded her note as a gift. “We feel
that we are a better man & woman for this glimpse of your sweet home life, & wherever you go & whatever you
do, we shall always follow in spirit with even greater interest than ever before.”¹¹

Louise was in the midst of learning what it meant to be the wife of a great man surrounded by other great men.
“Well, Mother Mine, we are in the whirl, nothing but a rush and bang all the while. I begin to experience the
realities of life now and oh!…I am not a bit homesick, but I begin to realize how much a man wants and how
important it is for a woman not to have any wants or wishes of her own.”¹²

From London, after a few more stops at country estates and at Wolverhampton, where Carnegie still owned a
newspaper, they were off to Edinburgh, where on July 9, they laid the memorial foundation stone for the new
Carnegie library and were publicly fêted by the city’s officials. “Our reception exceeded anything I ever
experienced (ever saw given to a private individual) or could ever imagine,” Louise wrote her mother. “It
equaled the receptions given to our Presidents…. It is all right enough for Andrew but imagine me, who three
months ago was not known…. I had to bow right and left in response to the cheers with which we were greeted
from thousands who lined the streets. Every window was crowded to the fifth and sixth stories and American
flags displayed everywhere.”¹³

Carnegie took great delight in traveling with Louise. In his speech in the Edinburgh council chambers, he
joyfully informed his audience that Mrs. Carnegie was, “like all converts…beginning to out-Herod her husband
in her love and devotion to Scotland. There is no tartan she sees that she does not want to wear…. Ladies and
gentlemen, believe me that my wife is as thoroughly Scotch already as I am myself, and I leave it to your
imagination to say what she will become when she lives here as long as I have had the pleasure of living among
you.”¹⁴

The Edinburgh festivities were marred only by an unfortunate incident over Senator Blaine, reported fully in
the New York papers. Senator James G. Blaine, with his wife Harriet, and their two daughters, had been with
the Carnegies almost from the moment he arrived in London—and would travel and stay with them for most of the
next three months. He had been invited to the Edinburgh festivities, along with Senator Eugene Pryor Hale of
Maine, but when the two of them arrived thirty minutes late and without tickets, they were turned away by the
janitor guarding the door of the Edinburgh Council Hall. Carnegie was initially furious at everyone involved,
including the Lord Provost, but when informed of the circumstances, apologized. The next day, at another
gathering in honor of the Carnegies, Blaine was able to give the speech he had prepared for Edinburgh.¹⁵

From Edinburgh, the Carnegies and Blaines were driven to Kilgraston near Perth. Unlike the houses where the
Carnegies would spend succeeding summers, Kilgraston did not have the wild, forbidding feel of a Highland
estate. Instead of densely wooded, rugged crags and peaks, the hills in Perthshire were gentle and rolling,
the fields well kept and mowed. The house itself was described by Senator Blaine as “quite literally a
‘castle,’—a great stone structure, one hundred and ten feet in length by seventy-five in width, with an
innumerable array of rooms of all possible description. There are fifteen or sixteen spare chambers after the
family are all accommodated.” It was in the style of a Palladian English country house, in red stone, situated
on gently rising ground, with, as Louise described it to her mother, perfectly manicured lawns, gardens,
riding paths, “lovely shady walks,” a trout stream, and berry patches of “black, white and red currants,
gooseberries—huge ones such as Scotland is famous for, raspberries—and such strawberries.” The bedrooms, with
dressing rooms attached, were on the second floor; a large entry hall, parlors, and drawing rooms on the
first; the servants’ quarters and kitchens in the basement. Despite its eighteenth-century-style architecture,
Kilgraston was replete with the most modern amenities, having been rebuilt almost from the ground up in 1880.
Louise was enchanted, as Carnegie hoped she would be.¹⁶

Worried that his bride would not be comfortable running a large establishment—with dozens of guests—Carnegie
had asked Uncle Lauder and his daughter Maggie to engage a butler, coachman, and housekeeper. The housekeeper
brought with her a full complement of valets, ladies’ maids, housemaids, two full-time cooks, and a kitchen
staff. She turned out to be such a “treasure” that (as Matthew Arnold reported to his sister after his visit
to Kilgraston), the Carnegies decided to bring her back to New York in the fall—with six members of her
staff—“to start Mrs. Carnegie in her new house.” The estate was also served by “gillies,” gameskeepers, and a
full complement of grooms and stable boys to look after the horses. Because Louise had fallen in love with the
sound of the bagpipes, Carnegie hired a piper. “He plays every morning on the lawn to waken us,” Louise
informed her mother, “and to summon us to dinner and during dinner. It is most thrilling, I can assure you, to
hear the Scotch reels, laments, etc. How you would enjoy it.”¹⁷

Matthew Arnold, when he visited in mid-September, was given a “bedroom with an excellent dressing room, both
looking south over the park to the Ochil Mountains.” The house, “a fine one in red stone,” was “very
comfortable; at dinner was champagne, a menu, and all you could wish.” The guests were served by the staff of
nineteen, though “Carnegie will not stand footmen, so we are waited on by the Butler and a parlour-maid.”¹⁸

Mrs. Blaine was astounded at the ease with which her old friend had assumed his new roles as husband, head of
household, and host to the visiting multitudes. “Andrew Carnegie may be little,” she wrote her son Emmons from
Kilgraston, “but his hoard and heart are great, and he is a happy bridegroom, and rejoiceth as a bridegroom to
have his happiness sure, so that we are enjoying, as only pilgrims and sojourners at hotels can enjoy, this
oasis of home life, and day and night I bless the Providence which has set the solitary in families and moved
them to hospitality.”¹⁹

Carnegie refused to let his guests excuse themselves from each day’s festivities. When Senator Blaine objected
to taking the carriage to a town thirty-five miles away that was honoring Carnegie and Louise, he was allowed
to “go by train, though he had to give his word to coach back” the next day. “Our most generous and hospitable
host,” Mrs. Blaine confided in a letter to a friend, “is very peremptory.” Still, she conceded in a letter to
her son that the Carnegie holiday regimen was having a beneficent effect on all his guests. “Your Father is
getting so much benefit from the open air, in which he spends the entire day, and think, how long the days are
in this latitude…. He has discarded woolen socks and gaiters, and one overcoat, and is getting really a color.
Also he has danced the Haymaker, which is our Virginia Reel, on the lawn, and has played skittles. We
breakfast every morning at nine, and as Mr. Carnegie will not sit down to the table without him, he gets up in
good season, a great advantage over that long and enervating lying in bed which at home, he so much indulged
in.”²⁰

Carnegie had always been sociable, but never on such a grand scale. His friend John Hay, the future ambassador
to London and secretary of state, visited that summer. In a letter to Henry Adams in Washington, he described
his visit “to Andy Carnegie in Perthshire, who is keeping his honeymoon—having just married a pretty girl—in
the sensiblest manner imaginable, by never allowing an opportunity for an hour’s tête-à-tête from one week’s
end to another. The house is thronged with visitors—sixteen when we came away,—we merely stayed three days,
the others were there for a fortnight…. Carnegie likes it so well he is going to do it every summer, and is
looking at all the great estates in the Country with a view of renting or purchasing.”²¹

“Mrs. Carnegie poured coffee this morning for sixteen,” Mrs. Blaine wrote her friend on July 18. “Our hostess,
Mrs. [Courtlandt] Palmer…and young Palmer [aged sixteen] have gone into Perth—for what? To buy a piano, so our
autocrat of the breakfast, dinner, and lunch table has decreed. Young Palmer is a musical genius, and this old
‘grand,’ belonging to the effete nobility, whose purse is light, suddenly found itself condemned last
night…and it was ordered that its successor should be installed in office before the evening of another day.
Hence Perth, which is four miles off.”²²

There was much music making at Kilgraston. Walter Damrosch, the son of Leopold, the founder and conductor of
the Oratorio Society and the New York Symphony Society Orchestra, had sailed with the Carnegies across the
Atlantic and been invited by Andrew to visit them at Kilgraston. Each night, after dinner, he entertained the
guests at the piano. Over a period of several evenings, he performed and discussed Wagner’s “Nibelungen
Trilogy” (which we today know as the Ring cycle) and Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony.²³

“Carnegie,” Damrosch wrote his brother Frank on August 5, “is a strange man full of contradictions, of great
and good ideas and small conceits, but I consider myself lucky that he is my friend.”²⁴

To prove to his friend Lord Rosebery that American orchestras were every bit as good as English ones, Carnegie
was thinking about sponsoring a European tour by the New York Philharmonic, conducted by Theodore Thomas.
Damrosch, who had succeeded his father as conductor of the rival New York Symphony, convinced Carnegie to send
him and his orchestra instead. “I think I have got Carnegie to support me in a tour to England with the
Orchestra,” he wrote Frank from Kilgraston. “He was going to send Thomas, not that he thought Thomas a good
conductor but that his orchestra was the best. I’ve nipped that in the bud and yesterday after starting on a
coaching tour he promised me to back us…Carnegie will be all right if he is worked carefully by some of our
directors…. He will do a great deal for us. Wait and see…. If you can arrange to have are porter to meet me on
the steamer I could get up an interesting interview about this summer without of course breathing a word about
Carnegie and his plans…I am having a glorious time, but getting too fat.”²⁵

Carnegie had always been a remarkable conversationalist, but now, at the head of his table, he blossomed as a
host as well. “In conversation, Mr. Carnegie is cheerful and child-like,” observed one visitor to Kilgraston;
“he can guide discussion of the topics of the moment—whether they relate to men or events—without making
speeches, or repelling the youngest or most diffident of the company; and he has another and a rarer gift—the
gift of expressing himself without reticence upon keenly controverted subjects, and that too without giving
cause of offence to any one.” He spoke with “complete conviction,” but without the authoritarianism of the
know-it-all, never lost his temper, never raised his voice in anger, and never allowed any discussion, on any
subject, to become too acrimonious. He also led his guests in song, dance, card and parlor games, and every
variety of wholesome entertainment. “In company Mr. Carnegie indulges in music and delights in humorous
stories,” another of his guests observed, “and when solicited by his friends he sings a good song, or gives a
recitation with dramatic effect.”²⁶

Louise was always at her husband’s side: at the breakfast table, where she poured coffee for their guests; at
the dinner table; in the parlor; or outside in the gardens. Although she had no responsibilities for
housekeeping, meal preparation, or supervising the help, there were several occasions, she wrote her mother,
in which she found herself “in tight places, but I wriggle out of them and the ladies all compliment me on my
management.” Her major difficulty was in keeping up with the guests. There were far too many of them and no
surcease from their constant comings and goings. “Well, our house is now full,” she wrote her mother on July
17. “I really have no actual care, but it oppresses me to have so many people around.” She had been plunged
into an entirely new life—Andrew’s—and was finding it a bit difficult to adjust. Sundays were her loneliest
days. “I miss the old sweet routine and the great change in my life comes over me more then than at any other
time…. It all seems so very sudden; there has been no growth, no gradual transition. I seem to be leading two
lives—outwardly I am the mature married woman, while inwardly I am trying to reconcile the old and the new
life. I get awfully blue sometimes but I know it is very wrong to indulge in this feeling.” Louise’s
discomforts at her new station in life were more than compensated by her growing affection for her husband.
“Andrew and I are growing more and more together every day. We snatch so many happy moments together and he is
so much more thoughtful in little things than he was before we were married. He takes keen delight in all my
pleasures and is so thoughtful of my welfare. You need have no anxiety, Mother; I have a husband who knows how
to take good care of me.”²⁷

Released from the care of doctors, Carnegie did not behave like a fifty-two-year-old man recovering from
typhoid fever. He spun in perpetual motion all summer, as did his wife and those who fell within his orbit.
From Lord Provosts to members of town councils to workingmen’s associations to Liberal Party enclaves,
everyone, it appeared, wanted to greet and honor the Scottish-American millionaire and his American wife. In
early September, with Louise at his side, Andrew delivered his speech at Stirling. They continued on to
Glasgow, where he addressed the Glasgow Junior Labor Association at St. Andrew’s Hall on the subject of “Home
Rule in America,” and then drove to the Grangemouth Town Hall to personally mark the opening of a newly built
Carnegie free library. Reveling in his newfound celebrity as “something of a public man,” he accompanied
Louise to the Grangemouth Dockyard Company for the christening of a Mexican steamer, the Tabasqueño. At the
luncheon following the launch, Carnegie delivered his second speech of the day on, among other topics, land
tenure, the Corn Laws, and the necessity for the British to emulate the Americans and “cease primogeniture,
entails, and settlements.”²⁸

Carnegie seized every occasion to get into print. His remarks in Grangemouth were recorded and published
alongside his Glasgow and Stirling speeches in the Dunfermline Saturday Press, then reprinted by him in
pamphlet form for distribution to friends, family, admirers, and his libraries and reading rooms. Years later,
Margaret Barclay Wilson collected his published pamphlets and donated them to the Carnegie Library in
Pittsburgh. They fill five bound volumes.

Regardless of the occasion, Carnegie’s message was the same: he praised American republicanism, advocated
Irish Home Rule, and denigrated the British monarchy, the House of Lords, and the aristocracy. Like his uncles
in Dunfermline, whom he was proud to emulate, he had become a bit of a rabble-rouser. Colonel Mann of Town
Topics noted in his December 15, 1887, issue that Carnegie’s “freedom of speech” had gotten him into some
trouble “across the water while he was on his wedding tour last summer.” Invited to speak before a rather
distinguished audience in Dunfermline, Carnegie had insulted many of them with “a most disloyal speech, viewed
from a British standpoint,” in which he criticized the Queen, her court, and the royal family, for being
worthless drains on Britain’s treasury. Mann claimed that an old friend of Mr. Carnegie’s had remarked at the
time that he was afraid that “the democratic bee is going to buzz Andrew clean out of his head before he gets
through. Ever since he began to print his ideas he has grown fonder and fonder of forcing them on people, and
he shows no discretion in doing it, either.” Carnegie so outraged respectable British opinion that a “sort of
black list has been set up in England against Mr. Carnegie’s ‘Triumphant Democracy.’ This ought to make it one
of the most popular political publications of the day.”²⁹

As their honeymoon holiday passed into autumn, husband and wife grew closer together still. The more Louise
came to know her husband, the more she admired and loved him—and the more she was astounded by his little
kindnesses and his doting attention on her. “I believe he becomes dearer to me every day of our lives,” Louise
confided to her mother. “Of course this big life is not altogether one I would choose [but] as long as Andrew
and I are so thoroughly united I never can be otherwise than the happiest woman alive. No one, not even you,
can begin to imagine the sweetness of that man’s disposition.” “Yes, Mother, it is a go,” she wrote on yet
another occasion, “as Andrew says: ‘Happily married—two words fraught with the deepest meaning in the
world.’”³⁰

As happy as Louise was, Andrew was happier yet. All his worries had evaporated into thin air. Louise loved
Scotland and had agreed that they should have a Scottish home and spend every summer in it. She had taken to
his Dunfermline relatives and British friends—and they to her. Even Uncle Lauder, who could be grumpy, found
her “a lovable lady” and “a jewel in your crown. I have taken her to my heart as a member of the family and
every one of us has done the same,” he wrote Carnegie after Louise’s visit to the Lauder home.³¹

Carnegie had found what he had so long been looking for, without quite knowing it: a wife who loved, honored,
and admired him, and who did not seem to mind that he was old and white-haired and growing more gnomelike by
the day. With Louise, he could have a home of his own and a fixed center in the whirlwind that was his life.
And this, he realized, was what had been missing.

On his return to New York from their extended honeymoon, he wrote his friend Vandy and invited him to New York
to meet his wife: “Ah Jackie I’ve got the treasure—only trouble is all my friends like her so much better than
they do me—Scotland England America, all in love with Louise. We have a fire proof house double lot…. quiet
and sunny…Am very well, a Leetle stout—but mean to work it off soon riding…. Do come East and see us all,
spend time with us here—you will dote on Louise, everybody does…. Foolish, poor old batch [bachelor] I’m sorry
for you.”³²

## EIGHTEEN

## The Pinkertons and “Braddock’s Battlefield,” 1887–1888

WHILE THE Carnegies were honeymooning in Britain, Frick was again confronting striking coke workers in
Connellsville.

The strike wave of 1886 had not been an evolutionary aberration, as Carnegie had predicted, but a harbinger of
things to come. The Knights of Labor, having proved their mettle and emerged victorious in their strikes
against the Gould railroads in the Southwest, enlisted hundreds of thousands of new laborers across the
country, including Pennsylvania coal miners and coke workers. In the spring of 1887, the Connellsville workers
who tended the ovens in which the coal was converted to coke threatened to go out on strike for a second year
in a row if their wage rates were not raised when their contracts expired. The coke operators, led by Frick,
agreed to submit the matter to arbitration. When the arbitrators’ decision was handed down, it was accepted by
the employers and by the national unions, but not by the local lodges, who called for a strike. Frick, along
with the other coke operators, was determined to break the strike, but Harry Phipps and John Walker, the
presidents of Carnegie’s steel mills at Braddock and Homestead, ordered him to come to terms with the strikers
at once.

Frick did as they demanded—he really had no choice as Carnegie and his partners owned the majority of the
shares in his coke company—then offered his letter of resignation. “Having temporized with our employes and
made concession after concession to satisfy them and largely in your interest [i.e., the interests of the
steel companies], and against the interest and judgment of all other coke producers…I think that, cost what it
may, we should…not start our works until our employes resume work at the old wages, but inasmuch as you have
large interests depending on our works being operated I do not feel like standing in the way of you managing
the property as your judgment and interests dictate.”¹

Frick hoped and expected that Carnegie, on being apprised of the situation in the coke fields, would support
his decision to break the strike. He was wrong. Carnegie sided with Phipps and Walker and accused Frick of not
doing enough to ensure peace and full production in the coke fields. “Please don’t mislead me second time,”
Carnegie warned him by cable from Scotland, referring to the year before when coke production had been
temporarily stalled by a strike. “Remember suffered enough last time. Make no mistake now. No stoppage
tolerated. Reply.”²

Six days later, on June 7, Frick officially resigned his position at H. C. Frick Coke and lodged his “serious
protest” against “so manifest a prostitution of the Coke Company’s interests in order to promote your steel
interests.” The board accepted his resignation, without comment, and replaced him as president with Harry
Phipps. The strike was settled—and coke continued to flow into the Edgar Thomson and Homestead steelworks.³

The following month, Frick left Pittsburgh for a European vacation. Arriving in London, he found a letter from
Carnegie welcoming him “to Britain’s Isle” and inviting him to spend a week at Kilgraston. There was no
mention of Frick’s resignation or his “serious protest” at the steelmakers’ interference. “It’s superb—Come
and see what one gets in Scotland these summer days,” Carnegie wrote. “Blaine the happiest man you ever saw.
Let me hear your movements. Can take you all in any time.” Frick, probably put out at Carnegie’s decision not
to back him against Phipps and Walker, declined the invitation. Refusing to take no for an answer, Carnegie
issued a second invitation in early September. “H.P. [Harry Phipps] tells me you can spare a few days about
19th to visit us. Come ahead. Shall be so glad to have Mrs. Frick and her sister and yourself and any others
of your party. We hope you will find Scotland in fine trim but we can’t expect July weather in September, so
don’t expect it to be always dry…. We sail Fulda 9th October. Can’t you come with us. Splendid ship&
Captain.”⁴

Frick accepted Carnegie’s second invitation. There is no written record of what the two men talked about at
Kilgraston, but whatever the content of their conversations, Carnegie succeeded in assuaging Frick’s anger and
convincing him to take up again his post at H. C. Frick Coke. Carnegie had decided that the young man from the
coke fields, as impetuous as he might be when it came to breaking strikes, was too valuable a resource to be
let go.

Frick returned to Pittsburgh in October and the following month was reelected president of the company that
bore his name.

 

THE CARNEGIES sailed back to the United States a few weeks after the Fricks. From Scotland, Carnegie had
written to alert his New York City neighbor and now Secretary of the Navy William Whitney that he would be
accompanying a deputation of British MPs and members of Workingmen’s Councils to Washington. The delegation
hoped to meet with President Grover Cleveland to discuss a treaty of arbitration between Britain and the
United States. The response from Washington was positive, and on October 31, Andrew Carnegie and the British
representatives gathered in the White House library at four o’clock. “The President,” the New York Times
reported the next day, “who had been busily employed up to the time of the arrival of the deputation, laid
aside his work and greeted Mr. Andrew Carnegie cordially as he advanced with the visitors arranged in a wide
semicircle.” Carnegie formally introduced the delegates, who gave brief speeches. Cleveland then responded
with a speech of his own in favor of an Anglo-American arbitration treaty. In his Autobiography, Carnegie
claims that he was so stirred by the event that “from that day the abolition of war grew in importance with me
until it finally overshadowed all other issues.”⁵

In December, Carnegie addressed the Nineteenth Century Club on “Triumphant Democracy.” After being introduced
by Courtlandt Palmer, Carnegie recapitulated the argument of his book, that America was the land of progress
and that conditions were steadily improving for working people. He then veered abruptly away from his encomium
to American virtues to attack those who did not agree with him. “You will find many men even in America who
cannot see the glories of the sun. They notice but the spots. They are the kind who would find that in
Paradise the halos do not fit the heads.” Immigration, sectarianism, and intemperance were not going to bring
down the glorious American republic, as the pessimists feared. Nor was socialism a threat to future peace and
prosperity. “It did not begin here, but it may find its end here. It breeds under old forms of government,
under loyalism, under monarchies. In the land of triumphant democracy it withers and dies. It received its
lesson at Chicago…. If you want to live in this country you must be quiet citizens or quiet corpses. That you
may understand this we have hanged a few of your fellows, and if you don’t observe that intimation we will
hang more of you.”

Those who preached socialism and anarchism were not workingmen, he told his rich and pampered audience,
dressed in their tuxedos and ball gowns, nor did they represent working people. They “talk and rant, but won’t
work except with their mouths. Instead of seeking work they seek gloomy halls, where they rant about
wage-slavery and the wrongs of property. They are mostly foreigners, and the scum and dregs of the native
population, the idle ne’er-do-well and dissipated. They are men whom the honest workmen of the country turn
their backs upon…. During the late war in this country expression was given to the popular sentiment in regard
to any one who attempted to pull down the United States flag in the words, ‘Shoot him on the spot.’ And if any
one attempts to establish anarchy in this country, the cry again will be, ‘Shoot him on the spot.’”

Concluding what appeared to be prepared remarks, Carnegie changed direction again and quoted from “a letter by
the club’s President, Courtlandt Palmer, to a meeting of Anarchists, in which Mr. Palmer encouraged them and
said that the souls of the Chicago Anarchists [who had been hanged] would go marching on for the good and
glory of workmen just as John Brown’s soul went marching on for the emancipation of slaves.” According to
Carnegie, Palmer, a sympathizer of Henry George, the founder of the single-tax movement and a recent New York
City mayoral candidate, had declared that it was unjust for landlords to collect rent on property they had not
improved. “If Mr. Palmer, who does not believe in rent, did not take rent to-day from the property which he
did nothing to create he would be a beggar. The unearned increment surrounds him like a halo. I think when Mr.
Palmer next addresses a meeting of Anarchists he would better tell them how to reconcile practice and theory.”
Carnegie proceeded to attack Palmer for claiming that American workingmen were exploited. Had Palmer studied
the census, as Carnegie had, he would have learned that the opposite was the case. “There is no sober workman
in this country who, under present conditions, cannot earn his living, teach his children, and save a
competence. Bring the man here who can prove that true workingmen—not mouth workingmen—are not satisfied with
the condition of things. Show us a true organization of labor that wants Socialism.”⁶

Carnegie’s ad hominem attack on Palmer was widely covered in New York and in Pittsburgh. The New York Times
reported on the address on December 7 and then ran two additional articles on the 9th, one giving Carnegie the
opportunity to defend his actions, the second a “Society Topics of the Week” account of “the first unpleasant
incident in the history of the Nineteenth Century Club…. Whatever may be Mr. Courtlandt Palmer’s attitude
towards the Socialistic problems of the day it is felt by the members of the club that Mr. Carnegie’s attack
upon him was, to say the least, incorrect from the standpoint of etiquette and refinement, and it has produced
much feeling in the club, which it is not probable Mr. Carnegie will be again invited to address.”

Carnegie, for his part, dismissed talk of a quarrel with Palmer. He had mentioned Courtlandt Palmer in his
address, he told the Times, because Palmer was “the foremost and most influential assailant of the existing
relations between capital and labor, and, as such, I honored him by attacking his views and combating them….
He made a very vigorous attack upon my class and called them very hard names. I tried to show that he was
mistaken.”

When the Nineteenth Century Club reconvened two weeks later, Courtlandt Palmer announced that Mr. Carnegie had
resigned. Palmer had initially accepted Carnegie’s resignation but now regretted it. “Mr. Carnegie is made of
too good stuff for us to lose him. He had been too valuable, energetic, faithful, earnest, and progressive for
us to permit him to go. His fear was that if he remained his presence would create a division in the club.”
Palmer asked the members present to join him in requesting Carnegie to remain a member.⁷

The last word on the subject was delivered, as it so often was, by Colonel Mann of Town Topics, who, like
Carnegie, could not abide armchair socialists. “In many years of experience with the small tempests in the
social teapot in New York,” Mann wrote on December 14,

I have never encountered a more amusing one than Mr. Andrew Carnegie succeeded in brewing at the Nineteenth
Century Club last week. Not that Mr. Courtlandt Palmer did not deserve a scoring for his Anarchistic bid for
the notoriety he is so fond of, but it still was rather unconventional that he should have got his
dressing-down in the club he counts among his personal property…. As for Mr. Carnegie’s speech, though one may
question his taste in delivering it as he did, one cannot question its soundness. Mr. Carnegie is a very
hard-headed, sensible man. He is not a hypocrite, either. His democracy is a study, not a fad, and no matter
how many millions he may be worth he need not rely on them to obtain him consideration. Besides, he earned his
millions himself, and if this has made him a trifle self-assertive, his egotism is not that of a Josiah
Bounder by [the self-righteous villain in Dickens’s Hard Times], a mere gaseous inflation from the crucible in
which his gold is cooked.

Mann, who was a rock-solid conservative, had clearly enjoyed Carnegie’s attack on Palmer’s armchair socialism.
But he may have been in the minority in praising him as he did. The truth was that Carnegie was becoming more
and more of an anomaly in polite New York society. He had already made himself something of a pariah by coming
out so strongly in favor of workingmen’s associations. He had then done the unpardonable and attacked a friend
publicly and viciously. No one knew quite what he was going to do next.

 

THE CONNELLSVILLE coke strike that Carnegie had forced Frick to settle in 1887 was the beginning, not the end,
of a cycle of labor disputes that would rip through the Carnegie firms for the next five years, ending only
with the Homestead lockout of 1892. While earlier Carnegie had stood pretty much on the sidelines and allowed
Captain Jones and his brother Tom to set labor policy in Pittsburgh, he now felt obligated to show his fellow
manufacturers the path to industrial harmony. He had publicly and in print in his 1886 Forum articles laid out
his plan to restore labor peace through the use of arbitration and the sliding scale. What better way to
demonstrate the wisdom of his plan than to put it into operation at his Pittsburgh steel mills.

In analyzing past labor conflicts, Carnegie had found that employer intransigence and insensitivity were the
precipitating causes. Because he believed himself infinitely smarter than his fellow industrialists, he was
confident that he could avoid the errors they had made. There were, he recognized, hotheads in every group of
employees, including his own, who, aided and abetted by “foreign anarchists” and armchair socialists, would
attempt to provoke trouble. But he counted on the union leaders he had worked with in the past, and never
ceased to praise publicly—most notably William Weihe of the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers
and Terence Powderly of the Knights of Labor—to listen to reason (his) and outargue, shout down, or shut out
the “ignorant demagogues” who regarded “capital as the natural enemy of labor” and tried their best to
“embitter the relations between employer and employed.” That this approach—relying on leaders to control their
rank-and-file—had failed in Connellsville where the local lodges had refused the arbitration package agreed to
by the national unions seemed not to deter him.⁸

Having committed his ideas to paper, Carnegie prepared to put them into practice—at his Edgar Thomson works at
Braddock. On December 16, 1887, weeks before the existing labor contract was due to expire, notices were
posted at the gates of Edgar Thomson announcing that the works would be shut down the next day for “annual
repairs.” On December 28, the Knights of Labor presented its wage demands for the new contract to Captain Bill
Jones. (The Amalgamated, having disbanded its lodges two years earlier, was no longer a presence at Edgar
Thomson.) Jones had no response—for the moment.

In New York City, Carnegie outlined the firm’s position in an interview with the New York Times on January 20,
1888. Because both steel rail and pig iron prices were down by 20 percent, it was “only fair to ask the men to
submit to a 20 percent reduction in wages.” However, he intended to request only a 10 percent wage cut. “If
this were not satisfactory to the employes…his firm would not only be willing but anxious to submit the matter
to arbitration.” He did not expect the men to refuse arbitration or go on strike, as this would be “contrary
to the fundamental laws of the Knights of Labor, to which organization the men belong to a great extent.”

On February 8, Captain Jones summoned the Knights of Labor “conference committee” to the company offices in
Pittsburgh and formally presented his firm’s proposal for a 10 percent cut in wages. The men rejected the wage
offer, but agreed to submit it to arbitration on the condition that any settlement reached be in effect for
six months only, to July 1, and that from this point on, the annual contract expiration date be, as at
Homestead, July 1, not January 1. The Knights leadership knew that it would be easier to organize a strike,
should one ever be necessary, in the summer, when gardens could supply strikers with food and there was no
need to purchase fuel for home heating. They were also persuaded that with rail prices depressed they would be
better off negotiating a short-term agreement and waiting six months before signing a new contract.

To this point, there was nothing out of the ordinary about the negotiating process or timetable. That the
Knights had turned down Jones’s initial offer, and he theirs, was not in itself cause for alarm. Nor was the
fact that the mills remained closed and the workers locked out during a slack period with few new orders
coming in. (Only the furnace departments remained in operation, as was customary during shutdowns.)

Jones and Carnegie had expected that the Knights leadership and the rank-and-file would, after a few months of
being locked out, accept the new wage offer. But they did not. In late February, with the lockout still in
effect, Carnegie visited Chicago with Louise, then stopped over in Pittsburgh on his way back to New York. On
arriving at the Hotel Duquesne, Carnegie was taken to the company’s headquarters on Fifth Avenue, where,
according to the newspapers, he remained in consultation with his partners for several hours. The Knights of
Labor officials who had been waiting for negotiations to resume interpreted his visit as a signal that he had
decided to intervene. “Andrew May Settle It…. Employes Expect Good Results” read the headline of a Pittsburgh
Press article announcing his arrival in Pittsburgh. “The employes at the Edgar Thomson Steel Works have a high
regard for Andrew Carnegie,” a Knights official explained to a reporter. “He fully understands the men, and
they have full confidence in him. He has settled difficulties there before by simply calling a meeting of the
employes and discussing the points at issue in a businesslike way.”⁹

Carnegie did not take the train to Braddock to meet with the locked-out Edgar Thomson workers or the Knights
of Labor leaders. He returned instead to New York, but not before issuing what the newspapers referred to as
the “startling statement” that Pittsburgh steel was in grave danger of being driven out of markets in the
Midwest and Northwest “by Chicago manufacturers” who paid their workers less than he paid his. His comments,
broadcast the next day on the front page of the New York Times and in the Pittsburgh papers, “created a
sensation.” It was assumed that he was laying the groundwork for his wage cut proposal by intimating, none too
subtly, that if his workers didn’t accept reductions, he might move his plant to a location with lower labor
costs.¹⁰

Carnegie was not simply crying wolf about the competition from Chicago. He had looked into the future—and
hadn’t much liked what he saw. Pittsburgh was rapidly losing its locational advantage to Chicago, which was
nearer to the western states where the majority of new track was being laid, and to the Lake Superior region,
the largest source of high-grade iron ore. In 1880, 53 percent of the nation’s iron ore had come from New
York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, with less than 24 percent from the states bordering Lake Superior. Ten
years later, the situation was reversed: less than 20 percent of ore was produced in the three mid-Atlantic
states, with more than 56 percent shipped from Minnesota, Michigan, and Wisconsin. By 1895, the Lake Superior
region would supply almost two thirds of the nation’s iron ores; the mid-Atlantic states, less than 10
percent.¹¹

Carnegie had poured millions of dollars into the Edgar Thomson steel mills. He was prepared to do whatever he
had to to protect this investment from the new competition posed by the Chicago steel mills. While he couldn’t
undo the locational advantage the Chicago firms enjoyed, he could eliminate their advantage in labor costs.

From the safe haven of the library at his new home on Fifty-first Street, Carnegie had been studying the
detailed records assembled by Captain Jones at Edgar Thomson and discovered that his labor costs were higher
than those paid for comparable work in Chicago’s steel mills. The only solution to the competition, he quickly
determined, was to both cut the wage rates he paid his skilled workers and increase the length of their
workday to twelve hours, as was standard practice in Chicago.

Having decided to give away his fortune—and confirmed as much in his prenuptial agreement—Carnegie was
ruthlessly single-minded in his determination to keep his steel company competitive. It was of vital
importance, he believed, that Edgar Thomson survive and prosper, not because this would further enrich him and
his partners—he had already accumulated more money than he could ever spend—but because a successful steel
mill would benefit the larger community, first by providing employment to thousands, then by generating
profits which would be given back to the community on his retirement. With a self-righteousness born of
self-confidence in what appeared to him to be his historic role in a larger evolutionary drama, Carengie felt
fully justified in demanding whatever sacrifices were necessary from his workingmen to keep Edgar Thomson
afloat and profitable.

 

IN MID-MARCH, in the third month of the lockout, the Knights leadership, hoping to restart negotiations and
still confident that Carnegie was more sympathetic to their plight than Captain Jones, dispatched a three-man
conference committee to New York City. Carnegie welcomed the delegation to the Windsor Hotel, where he wined,
dined, and lectured them on the steel business, freight rates, rail prices, and the competition from Chicago.
He then presented what he claimed was the solution to all their problems: a new “cooperative,” profit-sharing,
sliding-scale plan, which would obviate forever the need for strikes or lockouts. Under his sliding scale,
wages would be adjusted every month according to the price that steel rails had fetched the month before. When
the price of rails went up, so would wages; when it fell, wages would fall accordingly.¹²

The daily newspapers, informed, probably by Carnegie, of his grand new plan, outdid themselves with praise.
The New York Times devoted two front-page articles to “Mr. Carnegie’s New Plan. A Surprise In Store For His
Striking Workmen.” The Pittsburgh Press praised “Carnegie’s Big Surprise.” B. T. Stewart, one of the Knights
delegates who had traveled to New York City, commended Carnegie for talking “fair.” Stewart, the papers
reported, did not think there would be trouble reaching a settlement. Only the National Labor Tribune
refrained from commenting until “all the points of the proposition shall be at hand.”¹³

The outstanding question, which only the NLT even hinted at, was why Carnegie had jettisoned the proposal
Captain Jones had made and come up with an entirely new wage plan. The answer was that he had decided that
Jones’s proposal did not go far enough toward eliminating the advantage he believed his Chicago competitors
enjoyed. His “sliding-scale” plan, despite the rosy rhetoric with which he presented it, was intended to
establish a new precedent for cutting labor costs by adjusting them to steel prices, which Carnegie knew were
bound to fall in the future, as they had in the past. More important, Carnegie had decided that at the same
time that he instituted his new sliding scale, he was going to increase the length of the workday for skilled
workers from eight to twelve hours.

After their day of talks at the Windsor Hotel, Andrew Carnegie sent the three delegates back to Pittsburgh
with copies of the April 1886 article in Forum in which he had first outlined his ideas for a sliding-scale
wage plan. He said nothing to them about his intention to increase the workday. Instead, he promised them that
he would put his current views “into a letter and transmit it to the Executive Board.”¹⁴

On March 28, the executive board of District Assembly 3 of the Knights of Labor met in a special evening
meeting to read Carnegie’s letter aloud and discuss it. The letter described the new sliding scale in broad
generalities. “I wish our men and ourselves to become practically partners by paying them upon a monthly
sliding scale based upon the price received for rails during the month preceding.” After referring to
competition provided by the Chicago mills, Carnegie let loose his first bombshell: “It follows that we must do
as our competitors do, viz., run two turns [of twelve hours each] where and when they do so.” If that were not
enough to jolt the Knights delegates out of their mistaken belief that Carnegie was going to offer them a
better agreement than the one Jones had put on the table, reading on, they discovered that Carnegie insisted
that the new labor contract be made binding not for a year, as was normal in the trade, or for the six months
the Knights had asked for in February, but for a full three years. The extended time period was necessary, he
claimed, “to give the sliding scale a fair trial.” He added that he wanted every worker in the plant to sign
the new contract “individually and for himself.” Recognizing, of course, that by demanding this he was at the
stroke of his pen eliminating the Knights as the bargaining agent at Edgar Thomson, he slyly added that he
“had no objection to any committee signing also, as a committee.” His ultimate intention to restrict, if not
remove the Knights’ influence at the works was indicated in the statement that “of course our managers would
select such men as they desired to serve under them.” The change from three to two shifts was going to result
in the layoff of hundreds of skilled workers in every department. Carnegie was making it clear that the union
was to have no role of any sort in determining who stayed and who was discharged.¹⁵

On Thursday, March 29, the executive committee presented Carnegie’s letter at an open meeting of the four
Knights of Labor lodges at Edgar Thomson. The meeting was attended by some two thousand steelworkers.
“Carnegie is Answered. His Proposition Falls Very Flat,” read the headline in the Pittsburgh Press the next
morning. The Pittsburgh Times reported that the steelworkers had been “surprised” by the proposal. Though they
were “generally pleased with the document as opening a means of settlement,” they refused to vote it up or
down, as Carnegie had demanded. Instead, they authorized the selection of a committee of nineteen, each member
representing one of the departments at E.T., to “confer on the proposition,” discuss it with Mr. Carnegie, and
make it clear to him that they “did not favor a return to the 12-hour turn.”¹⁶

The following Tuesday, April 3, the Committee of Nineteen, having met all weekend, sent an almost fawning
letter to Andrew Carnegie, Esq., who had returned to Pittsburgh in the interim. “There is evidently a
misunderstanding between the firm and the men,” the committee wrote, “and we believe that if we could have a
full and free conference with you that the relations between us might be improved…. We are somewhat restless
under the fear that you are not in possession of all the facts in connection with the unfortunate condition of
things. We want to assure you that there is no disposition on our part to interfere with the management of
your works, and yet, while the force of circumstances compels us to labor, we are men of like passions with
yourself, having interests dear to us involved in the price of our labor, and we are ready to be corrected if
we are wrong. Therefore we hope you will concede to us this conference.” The letter went on to assure Carnegie
that the committee—and the men they represented—agreed with the “fundamental principles underlying your
proposition to pay us on a sliding scale.” Should their conference not result in a settlement, the Knights
agreed to “submit what we disagree on to arbitration.” Carnegie granted the men their meeting on Wednesday
morning at the Monongahela House. Then, “after congratulating them on the tone of the letter, he politely told
them his proposition was his ultimatum and they would have to accept it as written.”¹⁷

Though he had insisted that he was not going to negotiate on the terms of the new contract, no one quite
believed him. Rumors surfaced daily that he had agreed to meet with the Knights in Pittsburgh or New York City
or had delegated Captain Jones or his cousin George Lauder to reopen negotiations in Pittsburgh. A local
Catholic priest, the Reverend Father Hickey, offered at his own expense to lead a new delegation to New York
City. Only when Carnegie informed Father Hickey by telegram that he had finished talking and would not meet
with any more committees did the citizens of Braddock begin to take him at his word. “Won’t Confer Again.
Carnegies Say They Have Had Enough of Committees,” the Pittsburgh Press reported in a front-page headline on
April 17.

The people of Braddock, Pennsylvania, prepared for what they were now sure was going to be a long lockout. The
largest grocer in town closed its doors; several more cut off credit for Edgar Thomson workers. Captain Jones
called in the “minor bosses” to oil the machinery, put the rollers in tallow, and otherwise prepare the works
for a lengthy period of inactivity. The skilled steelworkers who were able to find work elsewhere did so. The
Knights concentrated on holding their members together; they held weekly rallies at the skating rink and tried
to raise strike funds from the District Assembly, the national union, and other labor organizations. They also
did their best to reach out to the skilled workers and unskilled Eastern Europeans who did not belong to the
union.¹⁸

In mid-April, Father Hickey thrust himself into the headlines again by assuming what he called “a protectorate
of the non-union men.” He declared that he was going to hold a referendum at the local parochial school at
which all Edgar Thomson workers would be asked to vote on whether to return to work. The Knights boycotted the
referendum. In the end, fewer than 500 of the 4,500 E.T. workers cast ballots.¹⁹

Carnegie and Jones did not act until it became clear that Hickey’s referendum was going nowhere. And then they
made their move.

On Thursday, April 19, Jones arrived unannounced on the 12:45 train from Pittsburgh. On the way to the
steelworks from the station, he stopped his carriage and “spying the boss bricklayer ordered him to get his
men ready for work Monday. The effect of this order,” the Pittsburgh Times reported the next morning, “was
electrical. At every corner groups of men congregated, wondering what was in the wind. They were not long kept
in waiting for the mill policemen appeared on the street, hunted up the bosses in the various departments and
informed them that Captain Jones wished to see them at the works immediately.” When they arrived, Jones told
them that the works would be opened on Monday and that they should round up their men. Joe Wolf, the boss of
the “Hungarians”—the generic term applied erroneously to the unskilled Eastern European day laborers—was also
directed to bring in his men. “The general feeling at Braddock,” the Pittsburgh Times reported, “was one of
intense, suppressed excitement. It was seen that the crisis had come, and trouble is feared.” Asked if he
intended to reopen the works as non-union, Captain Jones parried the question by claiming that Carnegie
Brothers did not “discriminate against any one because of race, creed, or organization. We have posted our
terms and anyone who desires can sign. The choice of positions goes of course to those who sign first. I do
not anticipate any trouble from the Knights and certainly hope there will be none. But I shall start the works
by hook or crook and there are laws in the country, which as the largest taxpayer in the borough, we have a
right to invoke for our protection.” The implication was clear. If the Knights leadership did not order its
members to return to work at once, Jones would fill their jobs with outsiders. “Among the Knights of Labor
faction,” the Pittsburgh Times reported, “the news was received in grim silence and the feeling that the
conflict between them and the firm had now begun.”²⁰

Jones insisted to reporters that he was in charge, but acknowledged that he had met with Carnegie in New York
a few days earlier, and, on his return to Pittsburgh, received final instructions by telegram.

On Sunday morning, April 22, three days after Jones had announced that he was reopening the rail mill, the
people of Braddock awoke to discover that shortly past midnight, a small army of Pinkertons had arrived and
now stood guard over the Edgar Thomson steelworks in preparation for Monday’s reopening. The Pinkertons had by
1888 established a well-deserved reputation as strikebreakers. The so-called Detective Agency had been founded
by Allan Pinkerton, a Scotsman who had emigrated in 1842, just six years before Carnegie. Pinkerton at first
provided guards for banks and businesses, then expanded his operation to guarding railroads against robberies.
Beginning in 1866, the agency began providing armies of paid strikebreakers to coal companies and
manufacturers who had the means to hire them. Because the Pinkertons had no ties to the communities they were
sent into, they could and did act with brutal efficiency in protecting private property and breaking strikes.
Their arrival was a signal that company owners were willing to use any violent means necessary to get their
way.

“Braddock’s Battlefield. Warlike Character Around the Edgar Thomson” read the headline in the Pittsburgh Press
on Monday, April 23, the first day of the Pinkertons’ occupation. “When the residents of Braddock and
Bessemer’s [the area immediately surrounding the works] woke yesterday morning and strolled out towards the
works they found them in charge of strangers, all armed, gloomy and determined,” the Pittsburgh Times reported
that same day. “One or two of the more curious walked toward the mill only to be halted in true military
fashion…. At first only a few of the people of Braddock had encountered the guards in the gray of the morning,
but these quickly returned to the town and in a few minutes the whole population was out of bed and shortly
after hundreds were swarming around the guards…. The first feeling was one of curiosity,” which soon gave way
to anger and fear. “Fully convinced finally of the purpose of the armed men, the Braddock people fell back and
every individual began a discussion of the new phase of things. The more prominent of the Knights of Labor
were insistent and outspoken in their denunciations, and they found eager and ready listeners. Their wives and
children, and even persons who were not personally interested in the matter of a resumption, joined in the
talk, and there was all morning a fever of suppressed excitement.” The Braddock police were bewildered, but
Allegheny County Sheriff Alexander McCandless quickly deputized fifty new men to patrol on the outside of the
works and establish a barrier between the town and the Pinkertons. Captain Jones explained that he had hired
the men only as a precaution and had decided to house them in a barracks inside the yards, rather than in the
town proper, where they might not be welcome.²¹

Jones took full credit for the decision to bring the Pinkertons to Edgar Thomson, though it is inconceivable
that he could have made such a decision without at least tacit agreement from Carnegie, with whom he was in
direct contact. Testifying in 1912 before the congressional committee investigating U.S. Steel for antitrust
violations, Carnegie declared that “Pinkerton guards were never employed except when I was away in Europe” in
1892. When confronted with testimony to the contrary, he asserted that if Pinkertons had indeed been engaged
at Edgar Thomson, it had been “without my knowledge. I never heard of it until now, as far as I remember. We
would have no use for Pinkertons.”²²

It is clear from the available evidence that Carnegie, who had in the past declared that he would never bring
in substitutes to replace his workers, had changed his mind. His mills had been shut down for almost four
months; he could not afford to keep them closed any longer. The market for steel rails, which had been almost
dormant in early 1888, had come alive again, the National Labor Tribune reported on April 21 and reaffirmed on
April 28. If the Knights refused to return to work on his terms, which he was convinced were fair, he would
replace them with men who would. And if that necessitated armed protection for substitute workers, he would
provide it.²³

Jones’s demand that the men return to work and the introduction of the Pinkertons transformed a peaceful
lockout into a potentially violent strike. The works having been secured by the Pinkertons inside the
gates—and the sheriff ’s deputies outside—Jones and Carnegie could now bring in substitute workers on the B&O
tracks that ran through the works. While insisting that he would rather have his old men back than introduce
new workers, Jones admitted to the reporters that he had received dozens of job applications. The company was
already refitting a number of old houses in the yards “for those men who are brought from other places,” the
Pittsburgh Times reported on April 25.²⁴

In its lead editorial on Monday morning, April 23, the Pittsburgh Press, like most of the local papers,
expressed shock and dismay at Carnegie’s decision to bring in the Pinkertons. “It seems, as our recollection
serves us, that Mr. Carnegie was quite emphatic, yet now we find him turning the Edgar Thomson into an arsenal
instead of a library, and garrisoning the works with extra police, special deputy sheriffs and Pinkerton
detectives in order to effect a resumption of the works by force if force should be necessary.” Carnegie, the
editorial concluded, had every right to run his works as he pleased, but not to lie to his workers about his
intentions. “The men may be expected to regard his statements and addresses to them with extreme caution in
the future.” There was no response from Carnegie, nor would there ever be to criticisms of his bringing in the
Pinkertons.

The Knights continued to talk tough to whomever would listen and insist that the introduction of the
Pinkertons had only solidified the resolve of their members to fight on. But they recognized now that there
was no way they could prevent Carnegie from reopening the steelworks with non-union men from Braddock and
scabs from elsewhere. Their only hope was that Carnegie would invite them back to the bargaining table.
Carnegie himself, in an interview with a reporter from the Pittsburgh Dispatch, insisted that he was finished
negotiating. “Carnegie’s Crusher” read the Pittsburgh Press headline on April 28, 1888. “Effect of His Last
Statements on Men At Braddock. Depression Exerted By Realization of the Fact That The Steel Works Will
Start.”²⁵

On the first Friday evening after the Pinkerton invasion, the unskilled laborers—almost all Eastern European
immigrants who though not members of the Knights had stayed away from the plant in large numbers until
now—held a giant rally with their wives and children at the corner of Thirteenth and Washington. Their
spokesmen announced, in several languages, that while the “Hungarians” had no love for Carnegie or his new
wage scales, they needed work and would give the Knights until Monday to reach a settlement. If no progress
had been made by then, they would return to Edgar Thomson.²⁶

On Monday morning, large numbers of “Hungarians,” joined by a significant number of skilled workers, went back
to work. On Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, other skilled workers, fearful that if they did not return at
once they would lose their jobs to scabs, left their homes at daybreak, their lunch pails in hand, and walked
silently past the lines of picketing strikers, who jeered them as they entered the gates of the plant. Once
inside, safely through the cordons of strikers, police, and Pinkertons, the returning workers were forced to
sign Carnegie’s labor agreement before they were allowed to take their places among the strangers who had
replaced their striking companions. Ten days after the arrival of the Pinkertons, enough skilled and unskilled
workers, including a few members of the Knights’ Committee of Nineteen, had returned to Edgar Thomson to
permit Captain Jones to start up production.²⁷

The question now was no longer if the Knights would call off their strike, but when. In its May 5 issue, the
Commoner & American Glass Worker, the local Knights’ newspaper, admitted that the strike was still on, but
near defeat because “those buzzards of labor, the Hungarians, were flocking to Braddock daily.” Carnegie’s
“real object,” the Knights charged, was “to crush the union…. Should not this condition of affairs stamp
Carnegie with his true colors? Hypocritical protestations of love and regard for his workmen will not stand
when compared with the facts.”²⁸

The Knights called off the strike a few days later, and then, having given up their only bargaining card,
“called upon Capt. W. R. Jones in order, if possible, to effect a settlement.” Having lost all else, they
meekly requested that Carnegie and Jones not ban the union from Edgar Thomson, that grievance committees be
recognized, that jobs be found in other Carnegie mills for workers who were going to lose theirs in the switch
from three eight-hour to two twelve-hour shifts, and that a general amnesty be provided. Jones replied that he
was not authorized to grant any demand regarding the future of the Knights at Braddock, but that he would do
his best to “obviate” the most disagreeable features of the new contract.²⁹

The week the strike ended and the Pinkertons left, Carnegie’s name appeared again in the Pittsburgh papers,
this time for donating $5,000 to the Exposition Society, which proposed to build a grand new music hall in
Pittsburgh. On May 15, when Carnegie arrived in Pittsburgh to meet with his partners, as he did every spring
before leaving for Europe, Edgar Thomson was back in operation. In the switch from three to two shifts,
hundreds of jobs had been lost. Those who had been fortunate enough to keep their jobs had agreed, over their
signatures, to abide by the terms of the new three-year contract, accept a sliding scale with no minimum rate,
work a twelve-hour day, take whatever position the company offered them, and pledge themselves as “men and
citizens [to] abide by and obey the rules and regulations” posted at the Carnegie steelworks and furnaces.³⁰

Twenty-four years later, in 1912, seventy-seven-year-old Andrew Carnegie, testifying before the U.S. Steel
congressional investigating committee, insisted that the Edgar Thomson workers had freely and of their own
accord signed the sliding-scale agreement he had offered them. “It is astonishing what you can do for workmen
when you get their confidence. I have never had any trouble with them.”³¹

From this point on, Edgar Thomson would be run as a non-union shop. Carnegie and Jones would no longer bargain
with union committees about grievances, wage rates, work rules, or transferring or firing recalcitrant
workers. In crushing the Knights, Carnegie had won himself at least two and a half years of labor peace at
Edgar Thomson and made it clear to the Amalgamated at Homestead that he could bust that union, too, if it
offered resistance to his plans.

What, in the final analysis, is perhaps most astounding about the Edgar Thomson strike of 1888 is its virtual
erasure from history. The New York press reported on Carnegie’s wondrous, inventive sliding-scale plan when he
introduced it, but ignored what went on when he tried to force it on his workforce. Many of Carnegie’s
biographers have overlooked the story entirely. Had more attention been paid to what happened at Edgar Thomson
in 1888, there would have been less surprise at what transpired at Homestead in the summer of 1892.

## NINETEEN

## Friends in High Places, 1888–1889

IT WAS to be Louise’s first coaching trip. As had become his custom, Carnegie had assembled an illustrous
collection for the occasion. Joining the Carnegies in their four-in-hand were Senator Blaine, still the most
well-known Republican in the land, with his wife and her cousin, the author Gail Dodge. The coaching party,
which also included Walter Damrosch and Louise’s friend and pastor, Dr. Eaton, departed from the Metropole
Hotel in London on June 7, 1888. Lord Rosebery and John Morley were there to see them off, as were “hundreds
of slightly astonished Englishmen and women” who watched from the sidewalk as the men, in their tall white
hats, and the women in their traveling costumes—Louise’s was blue serge—were escorted to the coach. Carnegie,
also in a serge suit, with a red rose in his buttonhole, took his place alongside his wife, and they were off
on a six-week coaching trip to Cluny castle in the Scottish Highlands, where they were to spend their second
summer as husband and wife, once again with the Blaines as houseguests.¹

As the coaching party made its way through Britain, the Republicans gathered in Chicago to nominate a
candidate to run against Grover Cleveland in November. Blaine, the plumed knight from Maine and the only
Republican to have been defeated in a presidential election in thirty years, had insisted he was not a
candidate, but no one, including his supporters, quite believed him. For the next twenty days, as the
Republicans debated and then chose their nominee, Carnegie’s coach was trailed by reporters. “New York
newspaper reporters have followed us from place to place by rail, horseback and tricycle,” Walter Damrosch
wrote his brother, Frank. Carnegie appointed himself the senator’s unofficial press secretary. “Our host,”
Harriet Blaine wrote to her son James, “is not a man to turn a deaf ear to a reporter’s appeal.”²

On June 23, at the ruins of Linlithgow Castle, the four reporters who were trailing the party presented Blaine
with the telegram announcing Benjamin Harrison’s nomination. Blaine, according to Walter Damrosch, “bade a
friendly good-by to the four young sleuth-hounds…and we continued our journey farther north until we arrived
at Mr. Carnegie’s home, Cluny Castle, on the evening of July 3.”³

Carnegie had rented Cluny from the Macpherson clan, which, like other ancient Scottish clans, had fallen on
hard times and been forced to lease its ancestral home in the Grampian Hills. The estate comprised 11,600
acres of mountain, valley, forest, and moorland in the Cairngorm mountain area in the southeast section of the
Highlands along the River Spey. Because of the heavy and almost constant rainfall, the vegetation in this area
of the Highlands is extraordinarily lush from spring through fall. The fields of heath give the area an almost
purple look, enlivened by yellow gorse and broom, pink and purple rhododendron, wild lupine, and bluebells,
overhung by low-lying clouds and a dark mottled-blue sky. Heather-colored hills sparkled in the near distance,
with mountains rising up behind them, craggy, forlorn, and forbidding. For Carnegie, who had in An American
Four-in-Hand in Britain, described landing a big fish as a “more thrilling sensation” than “making a hundred
thousand,” the estate, crisscrossed by streams, burns, and rivers, with several magnificent lochs for fishing,
was paradise.⁴

Carnegie’s American guests were enchanted by the landscape, but put off by the weather. “It rains at Cluny
every day and at all hours…. And it is so cold,” Harriet Blaine wrote her son Walker. “When we go out driving
we bundle up, as we do in Augusta [Maine] only in winter.” Mrs. Blaine, who enjoyed carriage drives, was also
distressed to find that there were but three serviceable roads in the vicinity: “Mr. Carnegie has a coach, a
landau, a closed carriage, two wagonettes, saddles and saddle horses, and baggage traps of all kinds, ten
horses at least, but it is like the equipage of a railway with no tracks, there are no drives.” Still, despite
the cold and the rain and the absence of drives, Harriet, the senator, and their two daughters, one of whom
was to marry Walter Damrosch, enjoyed themselves. “The walks about the castle are fascinating, wild, running
by the mountain torrents up hill and down, sheep everywhere and a loneliness which may be felt,” Mrs. Blaine
told Walker. “Then the hospitality is immense, and I must not forget the long days, which reduce candle light
to a minimum, for we leave the dinner table at nine and lights at ten seem an impertinence, only Damrosch, who
plays Wagner music every evening, needs candles to make out his operas.”⁵

Cluny was not, like Kilgraston, a castle, but a large turreted house of white granite with a slate roof. There
were several bedrooms on the second floor, and drawing, dining, and sitting rooms downstairs. Each room had a
fireplace, fueled by peat, which was abundant in the Highlands. “The house itself is not so large or beautiful
as Kilgraston,” Walter wrote his brother Frank, “but very comfortable and imposing surrounded by gardens and
park land with a splendid trout stream running over the rocks down the hill and a fine loch a few miles
distant. We are eight miles from the railroad…. The staff of servants is very large.”⁶

“We are all in love with Cluny already,” Louise wrote her mother soon after arriving. It would remain, for
her, the favorite of all the Carnegie houses. “Such walks, such drives, such romantic little nooks! Imagine
the most beautiful mountain brooks, one each side of the Park, with rustic bridges, beautiful waterfalls,
plenty of shade trees and shrubs and all surrounded by high rocky mountains with not a tree on them—nothing
but rocks and heather—and you have some idea of it all.” Whereas Kilgraston had been rather like a large hotel
run by the servants, Louise found Cluny “much more homelike and I just revel in it. From my little sitting
room, steps lead right to the lawn, and Andrew’s business room opens from my sitting room; so we slip from
each other’s rooms and out to the lawn with the greatest ease…. The lawn is like velvet and the flowers bloom
continually. They have no end of gardeners about the place, and they keep it in beautiful order.” Andrew and
Louise went hiking and horseback riding—with a groom along for the longer rides “to attend to us if we want
stirrups altered, etc.”⁷

The daily routine was much like the one Carnegie had established at Kilgraston the summer before. Carnegie,
Louise, and their guests were awakened at 8:00 A.M. by the piper who circled the house. Everyone ate breakfast
together (often yesterday’s catch, “rolled in oatmeal flour and deliciously fried”). After the meal, Carnegie
retired to his rooms to read, write, and answer correspondence, leaving his guests to their own devices. They
reassembled for luncheon. Carnegie organized and led his guests on the afternoon’s activities and excursions.
A full-dress dinner was held at 7:00 P.M., with the guests led to table by the piper. After dinner, there was
music, dancing on the lawn—Highland flings and Virginia reels—group singing, and more conversation, often
about politics.⁸

If earlier in life Carnegie had been a good listener, especially in the company of politicians and writers,
that trait had by now almost entirely vanished. Possessed of an astonishing gift of gab, he had, with age and
success, let it run away with him, often to the delight, occasionally to the dismay of his dinner companions
and houseguests. Fishing, hiking, picnicking, in his carriage or on horseback, at table or on the lawn
outside, he always had something to say.

“The Laird of Cluny was earnest and emphatic in conversation, and not always too respectful of the opinions of
his guests,” Louise’s biographers reported of Carnegie in his middle fifties. “Mrs. Carnegie was vigilant and
tactful in averting or softening little social crises…. Occasionally Carnegie, at the height of one of his
most enthusiastic outbursts, would catch a glimpse of his wife, preening the front of her dress. ‘Oh!’ he
would exclaim, ‘Lou thinks I’m talking too much,’ and quiet down. Another signal was the scarcely perceptible
switch of her skirt—which Carnegie, however, would see and understand.”⁹

Walter Damrosch had hoped to return to Britain that summer with an orchestra of his own, sponsored by
Carnegie. Though this had not happened, he had been invited to spend his second summer with the Carnegies and
was determined to make the most of it.

Carnegie was now president of two of New York’s major musical organizations, the Oratorio Society and the
Symphony Society, neither of which had a permanent home. Damrosch suggested that Carnegie build a new concert
hall for these and New York’s other choral and symphonic societies. Carnegie declined. “Mr. Carnegie,” as
Damrosch explained a half century later, “insisted that if he built the hall, it would have to be a business
enterprise.” The young conductor was not discouraged. “Tell [Morris] Reno [manager of the Symphony Society and
the Oratorio Society],” he wrote Frank in August, “not to worry about the rent for the S.S. and O.S. We are
all right and as soon as Carnegie can afford it we will have a hall of our own. Steel rails are rather low now
but the time will come.”¹⁰

 

THE CARNEGIES returned to New York in October 1888 at the height of what had become the most hotly contested
political campaign in years. The Republicans were trying to unseat Grover Cleveland, the first Democrat
elected president since James Buchanan in 1856.

Andrew Carnegie had always been a Republican. He had been attracted to the party as a young man because of its
antislavery platform and Abraham Lincoln. He had grown more attached to it because of its support for high
tariffs and hard money. Through good times and bad, protected tariffs on imported steel rails had kept the
domestic steel business strong—and the steelmakers, a major force in Pennsylvania politics, had responded by
doing all they could to reelect pro-tariff Republicans. Three weeks before the 1884 elections, Carnegie had
written his partners in Pittsburgh that “Bethlehem, Penna. Steel Co., Cambria, and Lackawanna I & C [Iron &
Coal] have each given $5,000 to the Republican National Committee and we have been asked to give the same
amount which I think is only fair.”¹¹

Despite the manufacturers’ contributions, Cleveland had defeated Blaine in the election of 1884. The protected
manufacturers were frightened at the prospect of a shift of power in Washington, but they need not have been.
Though a Democrat, Cleveland was not a champion of tariff reform. In October 1887, Carnegie declared that
Cleveland’s first-term administration had been “highly creditable…. I for one will shed no tears if Mr.
Cleveland is reelected.”¹²

Six weeks later, on December 6, in his annual message to Congress, Cleveland changed course and declared
himself an advocate for substantive tariff reductions and an opponent of the “trusts,” which, he claimed, were
strangling competition. Cleveland had decided to fight the 1888 elections on the issue of tariff reform. In
their effort to hammer home the message that protected tariffs stole from poor consumers to enrich wealthy
industrialists, the Democrats pointed directly at Andrew Carnegie as the prime beneficiary of a Republican
economic policy that redistributed wealth from West to East and from labor to capital. Carnegie, a Scotsman
and rich beyond imagination, was an easy target, especially in Pennsylvania. Cartoonists had a field day with
the little man with the big head, usually picturing him in some sort of kilt or Scottish headdress, though he
had never in his life worn either. The fact that Carnegie had in the spring of 1888 been engaged in battle
with the workers at Edgar Thomson gave the Pennsylvania Democrats added ammunition. So too did the charges,
launched first by Congressman William Lawrence Scott of Pennsylvania, that Carnegie was not an American
citizen.

In an open letter, reprinted on page one of the New York Times, Carnegie answered the charges, though a bit
indirectly. He claimed that he had confronted Congressman Scott at a meeting of the House Ways and Means
Committee in Washington. “I said to Mr. Scott: ‘You have been making speeches around the country saying that I
would not consent to become an American citizen and that I was a foreigner profiting by the high tariff.’”
According to Carnegie, Scott replied “that he had made that statement under a misapprehension, and he now knew
it was not true. He had read ‘Triumphant Democracy’ and knew that I was an intensely patriotic American.”¹³

[image]

PUCK SUGGESTS A SUITABLE TABLEAU FOR THE PROCESSION IN HONOR OF THE UNCROWNED KING OF THE G.O.P.

Other Democrats kept up the barrage through the spring and the summer of 1888. Not a week passed during the
campaign without some reference to Carnegie and his millions, the workers he was exploiting, and his extended
and luxurious Scottish vacations. Carnegie tried to counter the attacks by leaking to the press the news that
the workers at Edgar Thomson, under his new three-year sliding scale, earned more in August 1888 than they
would have under the wage rates originally proposed by the Knights of Labor. That much was true, but only
because, as the National Labor Tribune noted, they were working twelve hours a day instead of eight.¹⁴

On his return to the United States in October, Carnegie invited reporters to his library at 5 West Fifty-first
Street. The next morning, the text of his interview was published in the New York Times and, on page one of
the New York Tribune, under a headline almost as long as the article: “A CHAT WITH MR. CARNEGIE—DISPOSING OF
SEVERAL CAMPAIGN LIES—NO STEEL TRUST IN THIS COUNTRY—TRUSTS FLOURISH UNDER FREE TRADE—HOW HIS OWN BUSINESS
WILL BE AFFECTED BY THE ELECTION OF HARRISON—A PLEASANT COACHING TRIP DESCRIBED.”

Carnegie began the interview with a monologue on the joys of coach riding in Scotland. When he had finished,
the reporter from the Tribune asked the first question.

“You have recently been much talked of in certain quarters in connection with steel rail monopolies and such
affairs. A good deal has been said about trusts during the campaign. Have you any objection to speaking on
this subject?”

Carnegie did not. The public, he explained, had no reason to fear trusts. Competition was the lifeblood of the
new industrial age and would, in the end, bring any trust to ruin. “There is no possibility of maintaining a
trust. It is bound to go to pieces sooner or later, and generally to involve in ruin those foolish enough to
embark in it.” The more successful a trust was in raising prices, the more likely it was that those high
prices would encourage competitors to enter the industry and sell similar goods at lower prices. “When you
find me trying to organize a steel rail trust, set it down that softening of the brain has surely begun.” As
to the reports that he—and other steel manufacturers—were making “unusual profits,” he asserted that “nothing
could be more groundless…. The rail business is good about one year in five, and then for four years
manufacturers are fortunate who pay their interest accounts. Competition is terribly severe.”¹⁵

Carnegie’s denial that he belonged to a formal steel trust was technically true. The steelmakers had not
established a formal trust in the same way that Rockefeller had with Standard Oil. But they had set up a
number of informal pools, which set prices and divided markets for rails, beams, wire nails, steel billets,
axles, channels, and angles. The differences between formal trusts, with centralized boards, stock
certificates, and dividends, and the informal pools, which were non-binding on any of the participants, were
significant. Their purposes—to control, if not eliminate competition—were identical.

 

BENJAMIN HARRISON, the Republican candidate for president in 1888, was something of an unknown quantity.
Blaine and Carnegie were not, and they bore the brunt of the Democrats’ attack in Pennsylvania in the months
preceding the November election.

The Republicans, the Democrats charged—and rightly—were the party of protectionism, of tariffs which enriched
manufacturers like Andrew Carnegie. “After a long sojourn with the nabobs of Europe, and a full month’s
indulgence at Cluny Castle,” the National Labor Tribune wrote on October 6, James Blaine

comes home arrayed in English clothes and shod in English leather, and, like a great horny-handed toiler,
begins to talk about the blessings of protection and the comforts of the poor people of this country compared
with those of Europe. Mr. Blaine says nothing about his host, Mr. Carnegie, or about the system that makes it
possible for him to live abroad in regal style and maintain an expensive, lordly castle in a foreign country,
three thousand miles away from his place of business. Plain people who hear these matters discussed, and who
have read about Mr. Blaine’s coaching tour abroad, and who are asked to vote to continue the conditions that
have given Cluny Castle an international reputation, are reading and thinking, and the more they read and
think the better they are satisfied that this protection Mr. Blaine talks so glibly about is a fraud and only
protects such men as Mr. Carnegie, while the producers and workers get nothing but the protection afforded by
Pinkerton’s police…. Shame on the protection that permits one man to live on the fat of the earth wrung from
the sweat and toil of three thousand.¹⁶

Two weeks later, the New York Times published a list of Pittsburgh millionaires—there were one hundred of
them, forty-nine of whom were or had been “beneficiaries of the present protective tariff system.” At the top
of the list was Andrew Carnegie, whose wealth was estimated at $20 million (about $3.5 billion today). Further
down came Henry Phipps, Jr., at $5 million and H. C. Frick at $1 million.¹⁷

Carnegie did not dispute his inclusion in this list. He focused instead on the more damaging charge being made
that he was not an American citizen. On October 24, months after the accusations had first been leveled in
public, the New York Times published a front-page article which it claimed settled “the question of Andrew
Carnegie’s citizenship,” citing his assertion that he had become a citizen three years earlier but had mislaid
his naturalization papers. A court document attesting to Carnegie’s having become a citizen on May 28, 1885,
was appended to the article.¹⁸

Carnegie had delayed so long in furnishing proof of his citizenship, not because he had mislaid his papers,
but because he did not want to admit that he had not applied for citizenship until 1885, when he was fifty.
When the charges first surfaced, he asked his lawyers in Pittsburgh, one of whom was the highly connected
Republican Philander Knox, who would later serve as senator from Pennsylvania, attorney general, and secretary
of state, to find out whether his having worked for the War Department in 1861 or 1862 and taken “the oath of
office, which is one of allegiance,” had made him a citizen. He also directed his lawyers to search for any
records that might demonstrate that his father had been naturalized—or applied for naturalization. Had William
Carnegie become a citizen before he died, his minor son would have been one as well. His attorneys informed
him that his service in the War Department did not make him a citizen and that there were no records that his
father had ever been naturalized or declared his “intention” to be naturalized.¹⁹

Carnegie asked them to look again for his father’s application for citizenship. On November 8, 1888, his
lawyers wrote back that they had again found no record of his father’s ever having filed a “declaration of
intent” to become a citizen. They had, however, located Jared Brush, the court clerk who would have received
such a declaration had it been filed in 1854. Brush had, at their request, signed a “duplicate” of what he now
claimed was the “declaration of intent” he had accepted from William Carnegie thirty-four years earlier.

At the time he signed the document, Brush was no longer a court clerk. He had left decades earlier, gone into
politics, served as mayor of Pittsburgh, and then gone into business. The 1880 census listed him as an “iron
manufacturer.” When asked to help out Mr. Carnegie, a fellow Republican and iron maker, he no doubt agreed to
do so by signing his name. To protect himself legally, Brush clearly wrote “duplicate” in red ink on the
left-hand margin of the document he signed. That notation was afterwards erased from the “declaration of
intent” which Carnegie held on to during his lifetime and later deposited with his papers at the Library of
Congress.[*][1]²⁰

 

BENJAMIN HARRISON was elected president of the United States in November 1888, though he lost the popular vote
to Grover Cleveland. Carnegie telegraphed his congratulations from New York: “First for the continued
prosperity of the Republic. Second for your personal merits, I tender you my heartfelt congratulations upon
being called to the foremost position in all this world.”²¹

The changing of the guard in Washington occurred at the same time as a similar transfer of power in
Pittsburgh. Harry Phipps, who had reluctantly assumed the chairmanship of Carnegie Brothers on Tom’s death,
resigned in October 1888 and was replaced by David Stewart, one of the original partners. When Stewart died
almost immediately after assuming the post, he was replaced by Henry Clay Frick.

Even before his formal appointment, Frick had begun to serve as Carnegie’s chief lieutenant in Pittsburgh. One
of his primary tasks, in the fall of 1888, was to get from the Pennsylvania Railroad the money it had owed
Carnegie since 1885, when it agreed to buy his shares in the South Pennsylvania Railroad. Carnegie, having
reluctantly decided that there was no way to fight the Pennsylvania’s monopoly on freight traffic to and from
Connellsville, was “most anxious,” as he wrote Frick in September, “to get into closest alliance with PRR. It
is worth all the other RRs to us put together…. We could do much for PRR…. My policy is to keep to our own
business [i.e., making steel, not building railroads]—work loyally with Mr. Roberts [the Pennsylvania’s
president]—do all we can to advance PRR…. We should all agree to put [the money originally invested in South
Pennsylvania stock] into its shares and hold it as a permanent investment—I would take a million of its
stock.”²²

When Roberts refused to pay Carnegie full price for his stock but offered him 60 percent, without interest,
Carnegie threatened to sue the railroad for making the deal in the first place. Roberts, Carnegie insisted,
had, by offering to buy his stock in the South Pennsylvania, circumvented the court order prohibiting the
Pennsylvania from swallowing up the South Pennsylvania, a potential competitor. “I have not the slightest
doubt but that the Penn. Railroad Co. has rendered itself liable to every South Penn stockholder,” he wrote
Frick on February 2, 1889. “The Courts of Pennsylvania will be indignant at the Penn. Railroad officials
evading the spirit of their decisions…. You know that I have been right in several legal matters,” he assured
Frick. “Believe me, I am right in this, that we now have the Penn. Railroad in a position where it must settle
in full with us. I know the men to summon and the questions to ask. Roberts and Thomson are nearer to going to
jail to-day than they ever yet have been.” He added, as postscript, “Keep this to ourselves for present.”²³

Frick counseled caution. He was wary of entering into battle with the state’s most powerful corporation.
Carnegie refused to back down. “Frank Thomson [PR vice president] can be convicted of contempt of court and so
can Mr. G. R. Roberts—that is quite clear. Now if they will [agree to pay us, even in installments] we can let
matters go…. Mr. Roberts cannot expect us to be cheated.”²⁴

In the spring of 1889, Carnegie made good his threats. In a series of speeches at the Franklin Institute of
Philadelphia, the Pennsylvania state legislature in Harrisburg, and at the dedication of his new library at
Braddock, he publicly accused the Pennsylvania Railroad of crimes against the people of Pennsylvania,
particularly those who lived in the western sections of the state. Few knew that his anger had been stoked by
the Pennsylvania Railroad’s refusal to pay him in full for his South Pennsylvania stock. Carnegie claimed,
instead, that he was speaking out against the behemoth only because the exorbitant rates it charged for
shipping raw materials to Pittsburgh impeded the state’s “commercial growth” and menaced “her future
prosperity.” While other cities, Chicago in particular, benefited from cheaper freight rates for shipping raw
materials to their factories and finished goods to their customers, Pittsburgh was being squeezed by the
Pennsylvania Railroad. It was not only the manufacturers who were being injured by the extortionate rates;
jobs were being lost. Positioning himself as spokesperson and representative of “the great army of labor”
whose livelihood was imperiled by the Pennsylvania Railroad, and using language as provocative as that
employed by the armchair socialists and foreign anarchists he had so recently castigated, Carnegie reminded
his listeners that during the Civil War Pittsburgh’s workers had taken to the streets to prevent guns from
being shipped south. “They did this in the interest of the nation. Are they to be forced into a similar
protest against the Pennsylvania Railroad Company carrying supplies past Pittsburgh furnaces to furnaces in
other states upon terms they refuse us?” To eliminate the threat of violence, which he himself had called into
being, Carnegie asked the Pennsylvania legislature to regulate the railroads by passing a “state Commerce law
similar in its scope to the Interstate Commerce law,” approved by Congress in 1887.²⁵

His language was bombastic and incendiary, and that was intentional. He wanted to draw headlines again, this
time as Pittsburgh’s knight in shining armor, riding to its rescue against the evil villain. Savvy as he was,
however, he could not control what was written about him. The stories in the Pittsburgh papers that praised
Carnegie for his attack on the Pennsylvania Railroad reminded readers of the rumors that he had earlier
plotted to block the completion of the South Pennsylvania Railroad.²⁶

 

AT THE SAME TIME that Carnegie was blasting the Pennsylvania Railroad for being unfair to Pittsburgh, he was
extolling its virtues in letters to his British friends. He was immensely proud of the fact that American
railroads were outstripping the British in the luxuries they offered their passengers. “I am traveling
homeward from Pittsburgh to New York at rate of forty miles an hour upon the Pennsylvania Limited, which runs
daily between New York and Chicago, a distance of 1000 miles, without change,” he wrote William Gladstone in
February 1890.

The cars are connected by a covered passage-way, so that we can pass from end to end of the train. The train
has a Dining car, its tables beautifully ornamented with flowers, excellent meals provided, fresh cooked on
the train, a Ladies’ Maid who waits on the ladies, men servants, all the latest daily and weekly papers, bath
rooms for ladies and gentlemen, a barber shop, an excellent library, special telegrams of public interest are
received as we proceed; but the latest addition is the Official Stenographer to whom I am now dictating. All
of these are free of charge. Passengers can thus write home and business men can clear up their
correspondence. We happen to have on board to-day a Clergyman who has dictated the heads of his Sunday
sermon…. You have received thousands of letters, but none written, I venture to say, under such
circumstances.²⁷

 

IN THE MIDST of his public battle with the Pennsylvania Railroad, Carnegie returned to Braddock in March 1889
to dedicate his new library. The dedication ceremonies were held at the largest venue in town, “Leighton’s
rink,” which the year before had been the site of the Knights of Labor rallies against him.²⁸

Carnegie refused to apologize for the Pinkertons or the breaking of the strike or the institution of the
twelve-hour day and the new sliding scale. On the contrary, his address was a full-throated paean to himself
and the gifts he had bestowed on Braddock and his Edgar Thomson employees. He had funded their cooperative
stores and beneficial societies, invested their money in his savings banks, offered them reasonable mortgages,
and built a library for their use. The sliding scale had established a new era of peace and harmony and
motivated him and his partners to do even more for the workingmen of Braddock. “Never before have my partners
and myself taken such pride, such interest, such satisfaction in our business as this year, when, having
adopted the sliding scale, we walk through these mills knowing that instead of Labor and Capital standing face
to face, jealous and distrustful of each other, we and our workmen are now practically partners, sharing in
the present depression of prices together, but also bound to share in the advance of prices which must come
sooner or later. This common interest has changed the feelings of my partners and myself to our workmen. You
are no longer only employees, you are also sharers with us in the profits of our business, and, sooner than
return to the old plan by which Capital and Labor were antagonized, and we had to quarrel every year upon the
subject of wages, I would retire from business altogether.” The effect of the sliding scale upon management,
he continued, had been nothing less than transformative. “It made us feel that we were prepared to make any
sacrifice necessary to give steady employment to you who were now shoulder to shoulder with us…. The firm
could probably make more money just now, in depressed times, by manufacturing less, but where would labor be
with work perhaps only half the year?…If we had not made a partnership with our workmen, we might have
considered the proposition [of closing down until prices rose for rails]. Having them with us in the struggle
we reject it, and will continue to run our works to their capacity.”

He took enormous pride in having provided “steady employment” for his workers, but he also rejoiced in the
fact that under the sliding scale their “aggregate wages” were higher than they had been. “You have to work
harder, no doubt,” he conceded, acknowledging that the workday had been extended, but he assured his
listeners—without any hint of irony—“that in these times the owners of the concern have to work harder also.”

Carnegie was, he claimed, a “fellow workman” himself. The more he made such a claim—and he would make it
repeatedly in the years to come—the more he came to believe it. He was no idle landlord or coupon clipper who
lived on dividends, but an active partner—a worker—in the steel mill. The fact that he now “worked” out of his
library in New York and was usually finished after a few hours in the morning did not, in his mind, disqualify
him:

I resent the idea that because the interest of the firm compelled me to remove to New York and attend to a
special department, I am to lose my rank as a worker with you in the business…. Let it always be understood
that we are workers together, and although I no longer work with my hands, as I am proud to say I once did,
yet when I pass through the works I object to the airs which the men at the lathes or the blooming mill, the
converting works, or blast furnaces seem to put on as I pass along. I am just as much entitled to the proud
appellation of “workingman” as any of you, and I hope you will remember this hereafter and treat me with
proper respect as one of the great guild of those who labor and perform a use in the community, and who upon
that basis alone founds his claim to live in comfort.

He objected also to those who considered him “no longer a Pittsburgher.” He had “put all my eggs in one
basket, right here in Western Pennsylvania. I may be ranging the earth, but my heart must be directed to the
home of my youth, and my thoughts to the prosperity of those industries in which I have not been afraid to
invest, and am not now afraid to let my capital remain. When Pittsburgh sinks, I sink with it, and when
Pittsburgh swims, I shall swim with it.”

If the steelworkers of Braddock and Homestead, most of whom were already on a twelve-hour day, wanted to blame
someone for their situation, they should look not to him but to themselves and their unions. “The real enemy
of labor is labor, not capital.” Carnegie could not be expected to unilaterally reduce the workday at his
plants to eight hours when his competitors enjoyed the advantage of twelve-hour shifts. The unions, having
failed to do their job and compel his competitors to institute the eight-hour day, had no choice now but to
attempt to reduce the workday “by slow degrees through State laws.” Until that occurred, he counseled the
workingmen to make the best of their lot. “Even, as at present, if workmen used well the time they have at
their disposal they will soon rise to higher positions. You need not work twelve hours very long; most of us
have worked more hours than twelve in our youth.” With astounding insensitivity to the demands that a
twelve-hour workday made on a man’s body and soul, Carnegie admonished the Edgar Thomson workingmen not to
“forget the importance of amusements…. It is a great mistake to think that the man who works all the time wins
in the race. Have your amusements. Learn to play a good game of whist or a good game of drafts, or a good game
of billiards. Become interested in baseball or cricket, or horses, anything that will give you innocent
enjoyment and relieve you from the usual strain. There is not anything better than a good laugh.”

Well aware that his words were going to appear in the newspapers the next morning and be reprinted and
circulated in pamphlet form (paid for by him), Carnegie seized the opportunity to issue a rather brazen
challenge to his employees at Homestead. He read aloud a “letter…from a Homestead man” who asked when Carnegie
was going “to do something for Homestead,” and then launched into an attack on the Amalgamated Association,
which, he claimed, stood in the way of his instituting his sliding-scale plan. Only when the skilled workers
at Homestead, like those at Edgar Thomson, agreed with him that a new wage rate structure had to be instituted
to protect the interests of capital and guarantee steady employment would he welcome them as partners and
build them a new library. “As a friend of labor, I advise them to accept the sliding scale and be done with
labor disputes.” He did not have to mention what would happen if they did not. The Homestead workers and the
Amalgamated were already well aware of how, with the assistance of the Pinkertons, he had broken the
strike—and the union—at Edgar Thomson.²⁹

[1]: footnote17.html

## TWENTY

## The Gospels of Andrew Carnegie, 1889–1892

AT THE BRADDOCK LIBRARY dedication in the spring of 1889, Carnegie announced his decision “to withdraw more
and more from business. My intention is to devote less and less of my time to it.”¹

Like the grandfather retired to his rocking chair, he wanted to spend his remaining days dispensing advice to
whoever would listen. He was embarking on his most productive period as a writer. Between the spring of 1888,
when he broke the Edgar Thomson strike, and late 1891, he published articles in leading literary journals on
the major issues of the day: trusts, tariffs, monopoly regulation, the gold standard, wealth and poverty.
Because he believed fervently that he was not writing propaganda, he became a superb propagandist for
industrial capitalism and the Republican Party that protected it through high tariffs, maintenance of the gold
standard, and the provision of the minimum antitrust regulation necessary to keep working-class and agrarian
dissidents at bay.

In his pronouncements on questions of capital and labor, Carnegie claimed for himself the disinterested status
of a social philosopher who looked beyond present-day fads and fancies to “the great laws of the economic
world, [which] like all laws affecting society…alone remain unchanged…. Whenever consolidations, or watered
stocks, or syndicates, or Trusts endeavor to circumvent these, it always has been found that after the
collision there is nothing left of the panaceas, while the great laws continue to grind out their irresistible
consequences as before.”²

Carnegie presented his arguments within the framework he had borrowed from Herbert Spencer. Larger
evolutionary laws governed the workings of the domestic economy in its transition into and beyond
industrialization. The proper role of government was to remain on the sidelines and let these laws work their
magic. Carnegie repeatedly invoked the “laws” of wages and profits, competition, consolidation, aggregation,
supply and demand, and accumulation of wealth to justify his business practices. He was not alone in doing so.
Answering critics who suggested that there was something unnatural, even criminal about the extraordinary
“increase in the value of [Standard Oil’s] possessions,” John D. Rockefeller claimed in his 1909 “memoirs”
that “it was all done through the natural law of trade development.” Jay Gould, asked in 1885 by a Senate
investigating committee if he believed a “general national law” was needed to regulate railroad rates,
responded that they were already regulated by “the laws of supply and demand, production, and consumption.”³

While fully understanding the value of protective tariffs, Carnegie was enough of a pragmatist to understand
that periodic revision of the rates was necessary, as was some regulation of the railways and trusts. Gestures
had to be made, crumbs offered the angry masses to protect the larger capitalist edifice. He endorsed the
Interstate Commerce Commission, established in 1887, and recommended that Pennsylvania establish its own
railway commission.

Only when it came to the gold standard did he and his fellow captains of industry oppose any compromises.
Those who held large amounts of capital, no matter how accumulated, did not want the value of that capital
diluted by inflation, as it would be were additional dollars coined of silver. The more dollars in
circulation, the less each one would be worth. As critical, the nation’s bankers, merchants, manufacturers,
and railroad directors feared that European financial houses would not purchase American stocks and bonds
unless they were fully backed by and convertible to gold.

When, in 1890, Congress passed the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, which mandated that the Treasury buy and coin
4.5 million ounces of silver, businessmen outside the western silver states were outraged at what they
regarded as blatant political interference in economic affairs. The fact that Republicans had voted for the
bill was particularly disheartening. “The idea of reintroducing silver currency” was, for J. P. Morgan, as his
biographer Jean Strouse has noted, “about as welcome as a biblical plague.”⁴

Carnegie, who had taken on himself the task of educating the public on economic matters, sat down at once to
write a primer on the gold standard, “The ABC of Money,” which was published in the North American Review in
June 1891. He relied, as always, on the evolutionary theories he had adapted from Herbert Spencer to make his
case. There were, he explained, two metals currently in use in “civilized countries” as standards of value:
silver and gold. Less advanced nations like the South American republics and Japan had adopted and retained
the cheaper metal, silver, as their standard. The United States, like “the principal nations of Europe…being
further advanced and having much greater business transactions, found the necessity for using as a standard a
more valuable metal than silver, and gold was adopted.” To facilitate commerce between gold standard and
silver standard nations, it had been agreed to value 15¹/2 ounces of silver as the equivalent of 1 ounce of
gold. “Everything went well under this arrangement for a long time. The more advanced nations were upon a gold
basis, the less advanced nations upon a silver basis, and both were equally well served.” As more silver was
mined, however, it lost its fixed value relative to gold. The British government had, as a consequence, wisely
disposed of its holdings in silver; but American politicians, under the sway of the “silver power,” had
required their government to continue to buy and coin silver, even as it declined in value. This meddling in
the evolutionary process, Carnegie argued, threatened the prosperity of the nation. No country could long
endure with two standards, just as no people could salute two flags. Because silver was worth less than gold,
individuals, companies, and nations would pay for American goods in silver; employers, given the choice, would
also pay their workers in the cheaper currency. The immediate losers would be the nation’s farmers and wage
earners, who would receive a debased currency for their crops and their labor.⁵

Reaffirming his credentials as a disinterested public servant, Carnegie concluded his primer by claiming that
the protection of the gold standard was, for him, even more important than the maintenance of the protective
tariff. “In the next presidential campaign, if I have to vote for a man in favour of silver and protection, or
for a man in favour of the gold standard and free trade, I shall vote and work for the latter, because my
judgment tells me that even the tariff is not half so important for the good of the country as the maintenance
of the highest standard for the money of the people.”⁶

 

CARNEGIE’S most provocative and best-known article dates from this period. Originally entitled “Wealth,” it
was published in the North American Review in June 1889 and subsequently republished in the British Pall Mall
Gazette as the “Gospel of Wealth,” a title Carnegie adopted as his own.

The “Gospel of Wealth” was a primer on the workings of the political economy and an advice manual for
millionaires. It was also a self-conscious attempt on Carnegie’s part to understand why so much wealth was
accumulating in so few hands and why he, the son of a Dunfermline weaver and an ex-bobbin boy from Allegheny
City, had become so fabulously wealthy.

Had he been a man of faith, as was his contemporary John D. Rockefeller, he might have attributed his material
success to divine providence. But Carnegie could not accept the notion of a supreme being who randomly blessed
some with riches on earth and everlasting joy in heaven while condemning others at infancy to eternal
damnation. He also put no credence in the chief tenet of the nineteenth-century success manuals, that success
was the fruit of hard work. How could he base his right to his millions on the hard work he had expended in
earning them when he had, from his mid-thirties on, devoted but a few hours to business every morning?
Diligence was obviously not a prerequisite for material success. On the contrary, Carnegie took great pride in
his state of semiretirement and urged others to follow his example.

It was clear to him, as he would explain in a 1906 North American Review article entitled “Gospel of Wealth
II,” that wealth was “not chiefly the product of the individual under present conditions, but largely the
joint product of the community.” No man could possibly earn millions by his own exertions. He illustrated this
point by conjuring up the stories of four representative millionaires who had made their fortunes in railroads
in New York, iron and steel in Pittsburgh, meatpacking in Chicago, and mining in Montana. Though he did not
name names, it was clear that the railroad millionaires were Vanderbilts; that he himself was the model for
the iron and steel magnate; Philip Armour or Gustavus Swift for the meatpacking king; and William A. Clark for
the Montana miner. In each case, the wealth that found its way into the hands of the individual had been
created by the larger community. The railroad stocks of the first millionaire would have remained worthless
had the communities his railroads served not soared in population. “Floating on a tidal wave of swelling
prosperity, caused by the increased traffic of rapidly increasing communities, he soon becomes a
multi-millionaire.”

Similarly with the iron and steel manufacturer and his partners. “Their venture was made profitable by the
demand for their products…from the expanding population engaged in settling a new continent.” The same could
be said of the meatpacker: the growth in his business, profits, and fortunes was “based solely upon the wants
of the population.” The fourth millionaire, the Montana miner, “did not create his wealth; he only dug it out
of the mine as the demands of the people gave value to the previously worthless stones.”⁷

The word “millionaire,” which had barely existed a few decades earlier, had entered the American lexicon. From
the mid-1870s onward, American newspapers would be glutted with stories of the newly wealthy, their comings
and goings, mansions and fêtes, European excursions and Newport holidays. “This is an age of great fortunes,”
the New York Times exclaimed in 1882. “Never before in the history of the Republic have there been so many men
who are very rich.” And “very rich” today, as the New York Times instructed its readers, was quantitatively
different from “very rich” in any other era of the nation’s history. “One who might have been ‘very rich’ in
1842 would not be accounted rich at all, with the same fortune, in 1882.” The Spectator of London, in an
article reprinted in the New York Times in November, marveled at “the evidence forthcoming from America that
fortunes may be accumulated on a scale of which Englishmen have little conception.” While the English were
pleased to earn 4 percent on their investments, Americans were satisfied with nothing less than “three times
to ten times that rate.”⁸

It was these facts of modern life that Carnegie felt obliged to make sense of in his “Gospel of Wealth”
articles. “The conditions of human life have not only been changed, but revolutionized, within the past few
hundred years. In former days there was little difference between the dwelling, dress, food, and environment
of the chief and those of his retainers…. The contrast between the palace of the millionaire and the cottage
of the laborer with us today measures the change which has come with civilization.” Others, including
Carnegie’s former friend Courtlandt Palmer, and Henry George, who had run for and come close to being elected
mayor of New York City in 1886, believed that this growing gap between wealth and poverty was a social problem
to be solved. Carnegie “welcomed [it] as highly beneficial. It is well, nay, essential for the progress of the
[human] race that the houses of some should be homes for all that is highest and best in literature and the
arts, and for all the refinements of civilization, rather than none should be so. Much better this great
irregularity than universal squalor.”⁹

Carnegie made no excuses for conditions he had not brought into being. Like everyone else, he was a creature
of long-term evolutionary processes, albeit a very fortunate one.

The historical changes Carnegie described which had led to this gap between rich and poor were “inevitable,”
governed by “laws” that were immutable. There was no reversing the transition from the household or workshop
mode of manufacture, which fostered “social equality” but had resulted in “crude articles at high prices,” to
the present industrial system, which generated social inequalities but produced goods in such abundance and so
cheaply that the poor could now “enjoy what the rich could not before afford.” The new industrial age with its
huge business establishments required for its leaders men with a “talent for organization and management.”
Because such men were in short supply, they had to be highly recompensed, often with partnership stakes. As
they increased the capital of the business organizations they administered, so too did their own capital
holdings increase. “It is a law…that men possessed of this peculiar talent for affairs, under the free play of
economic forces must, of necessity, soon be in receipt of more revenue that can be judiciously expended upon
themselves.” And this was for the best. “Not evil, but good, has come to the race from the accumulation of
wealth by those who have had the ability and energy to produce it.”¹⁰

There was, for Carnegie, no turning back the clock of history. The only question worth asking was: “What is
the proper mode of administering wealth after the laws upon which civilization is founded have thrown it into
the hands of the few?” The answers could be deduced from the work of Herbert Spencer. If, as Spencer claimed,
a “beneficent necessity” governed the workings of human history, then it followed that there was an
evolutionary purpose behind the accumulation of great wealth in the hands of the few. Just as the “laws upon
which civilization is founded” had decreed that wealth fall into the hands of those with the rare but
essential “talent for organization and management,” so too did they decree that these same men should
administer this wealth on behalf of the larger community. “This, then, is held to be the duty of the man of
wealth: To consider all surplus revenues which come to him simply as trust funds, which he is called upon to
administer…in the manner which, in his judgment, is best calculated to produce the most beneficial results for
the community.” The millionaire’s wealth was not his to spend, but his to wisely give away. “Rich men should
be thankful for one inestimable boon. They have it in their power during their lives to busy themselves in
organizing benefactions from which the masses of their fellows will derive lasting advantage, and thus dignify
their own lives.”¹¹

Like much of Carnegie’s writings from this period, his “Gospel of Wealth” articles are suffused by a barely
disguised anger. His confidence in the wisdom of his preachings was beginning to spill over into abuse of
those who disagreed with him and those who did not behave as he thought they should.

In these articles, he criticized utopian thinkers with unembarrassed zealotry. “Our duty is with what is
practicable now—with the next step possible in our day and generation. It is criminal to waste our energies in
endeavoring to uproot, when all we can profitably accomplish is to bend the universal tree of humanity a
little in the direction most favorable to the production of good fruit under existing circumstances.” Carnegie
reserved his greatest scorn not for his ideological and political opponents, but for the men of his own class,
who, not having foreseen what he was going to propose, had not followed his as yet unwritten precepts for
administering their wealth. He began by assailing those who left “great fortunes to their children. If this is
done from affection, is it not misguided affection? Observation teaches that, generally speaking, it is not
well for the children that they should be so burdened…. Looking at the usual result of enormous sums conferred
upon legatees, the thoughtful man [i.e., Andrew Carnegie] must shortly say, ‘I would as soon leave to my son a
curse as the almighty dollar,’ and admit to himself that it is not the welfare of the children, but family
pride, which inspires these legacies.” As he and Louise did not at the time have any children and none
appeared to be on the way, these were not difficult statements for him to make.¹²

The man of wealth who left his fortune for others to administer after his death was only slightly less
deserving of rebuke. “In many cases the bequests are so used as to become only monuments of his folly. It is
well to remember that it requires the exercise of not less ability than that which acquired it, to use wealth
so as to be really beneficial to the community.” The rich man who abjured the responsibility that came with
his wealth—of wisely administering it for the good of the community—did that community a grave disservice.
“The memories of such cannot be held in grateful remembrance, for there is no grace in their gifts.” To
prevent the bestowal of vain and foolish legacies, Carnegie advocated the steepest possible inheritance taxes.
“By taxing estates heavily at death the State marks its condemnation of the selfish millionaire’s unworthy
life.”¹³

Having condemned as misguided, vain, and selfish most of his fellow millionaires for not giving away their
money during their lifetimes, Carnegie turned his rage toward those who did give it away, but indiscriminately
and unwisely. Sounding much like Ebenezer Scrooge, he poured forth a torrent of abuse at the rich man who
“gratified his own feelings [and] saved himself from annoyance” by giving alms to the unworthy. “It were
better for mankind that the millions of the rich were thrown into the sea than so spent as to encourage the
slothful, the drunken, the unworthy…. Neither the individual nor the race is improved by almsgiving…. He is
the only true reformer who is as careful and as anxious not to aid the unworthy as is to aid the worthy, and,
perhaps, even more so, for in almsgiving more injury is probably done by rewarding vice than by relieving
virtue.”¹⁴

He concluded by damning yet again the millionaires who died with their fortunes intact. “The day is not far
distant when the man who dies leaving behind him millions of available wealth…will pass away ‘unwept,
unhonored, and unsung,’ no matter to what uses he leaves the dross which he cannot take with him. Of such as
these the public verdict will then be; ‘The man who dies thus rich dies disgraced.”¹⁵

Carnegie was immensely proud of his new article. So was Louise, who forwarded a copy directly to Gladstone.
“We think we have found the true path,” Louise wrote the prime minister, in language a bit more theocratic
than Carnegie might have used. “It is the one we meant to tread—if it commends itself to you we shall be so
happy. Hoping you will find time to read it—With every good wish for your prolonged health and happiness, in
all of which you know my husband most heartily joins me.”¹⁶

The article created such a stir that the editor of the North American Review asked Carnegie to write a
follow-up piece with recommendations on how the wealthy might spend their fortunes to benefit the larger
community. That piece, entitled “The Best Fields for Philanthropy,” was published in December 1889. Carnegie
suggested that the rich dedicate their surplus wealth to founding or funding schools and colleges, libraries,
hospitals, public parks, concert halls, public baths, church buildings, or other institutions as they saw fit.
“The only point required by the gospel of wealth is that the surplus which accrues from time to time in the
hands of a man should be administered by him in his own lifetime for that purpose which is seen by him, as
trustee, to be best for the good of the people.”¹⁷

By fashioning Spencer’s evolutionary philosophy into a high-minded, scientific apologia for capital
accumulation, Carnegie had both persuaded himself and his fellow multimillionaires of the moral worthiness of
their enterprises and offered them a doctrine with which they could do battle with their enemies. The gospel
of wealth provided an ideological antidote to socialist, anarchist, Communist, agrarian, single-taxer, and
labor protests against the unequal distribution of wealth by arguing that the common good was best served by
allowing men like himself to accumulate and retain huge fortunes. The more wealth that landed in wise hands,
the more that could be given away—wisely—by the retired capitalist acting “as trustee and agent for his poorer
brethren, bringing to their service his superior wisdom, experience, and ability to administer, doing for them
better than they would or could do for themselves.”¹⁸

In November 1890, the Nineteenth Century focused the attention of the British public on Carnegie’s article by
publishing a lengthy review by William Gladstone. “It seems like a dream,” Carnegie wrote Gladstone upon
receiving a copy of the review, “that you who was to the little Scotch Lad, something beyond human—should be
attracted by anything he has promulgated & that he should really know you in the flesh.”¹⁹

Gladstone’s review was positive, but tempered. He disagreed with Carnegie most strongly on the question of
inherited wealth, which he found “a good and not an evil thing,” as the “hereditary transmission of wealth and
position” was often conjoined “with the calls of occupation and of responsibility.” Gladstone also dissented
from Carnegie’s call for the rich to divest themselves in their lifetimes of their entire surplus wealth.
Charity was a good thing and the donor, Gladstone argued, should be free to decide how much of his fortune he
was going to give away. He proposed the organization of a voluntary association, each member of which would
pledge, on his “bond of honour,” to give a portion of his annual income to charity.²⁰

In qualifying Carnegie’s demand that the rich give away their entire fortunes, Gladstone was dismissing the
larger point which Carnegie, leaning heavily on Spencer, was attempting to make. The wealthy, Carnegie
insisted, were merely “trustees” for their communities, with no individual right to the money they held in
trust. In his letter to Gladstone, Carnegie asked if he and Mrs. Carnegie could “be enrolled as Members [of
the voluntary association]—I presume we who hold that all surplus should be bestowed may nevertheless be
eligible as Members of a Society, or Brotherhood, which asks that its adherents only bestow a part—the greater
should include the less.” In the rebuttal he wrote for the March 1891 issue of the Nineteenth Century,
Carnegie ignored Gladstone’s “association of givers,” focusing instead on the prime minister’s defense of
inherited wealth. Poverty, he claimed, not wealth, was the “only school capable of producing the supremely
great, the genius.” Inherited wealth robbed the inheritors of their self-respect and blocked the “fittest”
from advancing. No society could reach its highest potential if it gave the rich an advantage over the poor in
attaining positions of leadership and responsibility.²¹

The month after Gladstone’s review, the Nineteenth Century continued the debate by publishing three more
reviews of Carnegie’s “Gospel,” the most damning by the Reverend Hugh Price Hughes, a Methodist bishop. Hughes
believed Carnegie to be “personally a most estimable and generous man…entirely worthy of Mr. Gladstone’s
hearty praise. But when I contemplate him as the representative of a particular class of millionaires, I am
forced to say, with all personal respect, and without holding him in the least responsible for his unfortunate
circumstances, that he is an anti-Christian phenomenon, a social monstrosity, and a grave political peril.”
Carnegie’s gospel was based on the premise that the accumulation of wealth in the hands of the few was both
“natural” and salutary. Hughes argued, to the contrary, that millionaires were “the unnatural product of
artificial social regulations [like the protective tariff]…. Millionaires at one end of the scale involved
paupers at the other end, and even so excellent a man as Mr. Carnegie is too dear at that price.”²²

Carnegie counterattacked vigorously in his rebuttal, published in the Nineteenth Century in March 1891.
Millionaires were good for society, he declared unambiguously, as they created the wealth that made its way,
disproportionately of course, into everyone’s pocket. The industrial era had not witnessed growing
impoverishment of the masses; on the contrary, “poverty, want and pauperism are rapidly diminishing
quantities.” Workingmen, whether employed “at the shipyards of Glasgow, the iron and steel mills of Sheffield,
the coal-mines of the Midlands, or at industrial establishments generally,” were receiving “much greater
compensations for their services than they ever did.” The greater the number of millionaires in any society,
the better the “condition of the masses.” There was far more abject poverty in China or Japan or India, where
there were no millionaires, than in Russia, where there were one or two, Germany, where there were two or
three, or England, where there were more than on the entire Continent combined. Millionaires were in greatest
abundance in the United States, where, Carnegie declared, “the skilled artisan…receives more than twice as
much as the artisan of Britain.” Here was proof positive that the “masses” benefited from economic and
political systems that encouraged rather than fettered the accumulation of millions in the hands of the few.²³

Bishop Hughes had attacked the millionaire as “anti-Christian,” but had not John Wesley, the founder of
Methodism, admonished his flock to “gain all you can by honest industry,” and if, after providing for “your
wife, your children, your servants and others who pertain to your household,” you accumulate an “overplus, do
good to them that are of the household of faith. If there be still an overplus, do good to all men”? Far from
being “anti-Christian,” Carnegie declared with no false modesty that his “gospel of wealth seems founded” on
Wesley’s sermon. “Indeed, had I known of its existence before writing upon the subject, I should certainly
have quoted it.”²⁴

Developing and forcefully articulating an argument that big business would make use of for the next century,
Carnegie declared that millionaire industrialists were community benefactors because they provided “steady
employment to thousands, at wages not lower than others pay…and steady employment is, after all, the one
indispensable requisite for the welfare and the progress of the people.” There was nothing unique in this
argument: Rockefeller would make it in his Random Reminiscences of Men and Events, as would dozens of other
rich men, but none as forcefully as Carnegie. For he was the only one who argued that the millionaire
benefited his community twice: once in making his fortune and providing employment and cheaper goods in doing
so; and then again by wisely distributing the fortune he had earned.²⁵

Having answered his critics, Carnegie dismissed them—and their arguments—and took to preaching his gospel
whenever he could. “There is scarcely a day,” he proudly wrote Gladstone in March 1892, “I do not have an
opportunity to expound the doctrine.”²⁶

 

CARNEGIE, having now publicly declared that he would give away his fortune, set to work doing so. He began in
Pittsburgh.

In 1881, he had offered the city $250,000 to build a public library, with the stipulation that the city
provide funds for books, maintenance, and staffing. Because there would not, until 1887, be a law in
Pennsylvania like the one in Britain giving municipalities the right to levy taxes for such purposes, the
Pittsburgh city officials turned down his request. In December 1889, only days after the publication of his
second “Gospel of Wealth” article, the Pittsburgh City Council dispatched a committee to ask Carnegie whether
he might be willing to renew his offer of funding for a library. Carnegie answered that he was not only
willing, but intended to increase the size of the donation from $250,000 to $1 million: $700,000 for a central
library, with $300,000 for branch libraries. His conditions were relatively few: he wanted decisions on siting
and construction of the buildings and control of the library put into the hands of commissioners, the majority
of whom he would name. He also demanded that the city allocate an annual $40,000 for maintenance of the
library.²⁷

The obvious location for the new library would have been in the triangle of land between the rivers where the
majority of Pittsburgh’s working people still lived and worked; but Carnegie had no intention of squeezing his
new library into a densely populated business district or a run-down working-class neighborhood. His sights
were set instead on the fashionable suburbs in the East End, which had been annexed in 1868.

Frick involved himself in the site selection, as he did in all Carnegie’s projects. On February 28, 1890, only
four days after Pittsburgh had formally accepted Carnegie’s offer, Frick wrote “regarding site for Library; it
is a most important question.” He suggested that Carnegie consider a piece of land in the East End owned by
Bobby Pitcairn, now a major Pennsylvania Railroad executive. Frick warned Carnegie, however, that should they
select Pitcairn’s land on the East End “or any other site near to it, it would raise a tremendous howl at
first, but I believe would be eventually indorsed by every one.”²⁸

As it became known that Carnegie’s library might be built on the East End, probably in the Oakland area, the
“howl” reached a crescendo, with angry letters in the newspapers, and a protest to Carnegie from the Central
Trades Council that the library should be built in the “heart of the city,” where it could “confer the
greatest good on the greatest number.” Carnegie, anticipating such battles, had prepared for them by
establishing a library commission, well insulated from political pressure.²⁹

There were many reasons why it made sense to build the library in Oakland, which Carnegie believed would soon
be the residential center of the city, connected by horsecar and trolley with downtown. The year before, Mary
Schenley, one of the city’s largest landowners, had donated 300 acres for a park. Carnegie hoped to get her to
donate land adjacent to what would become Schenley Park for his library. In July 1890, Carnegie paid Mrs.
Schenley a visit—she lived in England—thanked her for her generous gift to Pittsburgh, and laid out his
proposals for a library. On July 9, he wrote his former business associate James Scott, now the president of
the library board and chair of the building committee, to suggest that he approach Mrs. Schenley about
donating an additional 100 acres for the library. “The best way to present the matter to her, in case she has
not already acted, is to show that the ground in question is absolutely necessary to make the Park she has
given available. And that being established, I think she will give it upon the same terms as she did the other
one-hundred acres.”³⁰

The following October, the land for the library was secured—on 19, not 100 acres, purchased from Mary
Schenley. The national competition to design the new library building, with space for a music hall, natural
history museum, and art gallery, was, so the architectural historian Franklin Toker tells us, “the most
heralded contest in American architecture up to that time [with] 102 entries and 1,300 drawings from 96
architects in 28 cities.” The commission was eventually given to the firm of Longfellow, Alden & Harlow, whose
principals had ties to Stanford White and H. H. Richardson. The design selected was in the Beaux-Arts
monumental style that American architects and city builders had become so fond of in the years leading up to
the Chicago Exposition of 1893. The Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh was to have everything a grand building
should: mass, height (two decorative towers on either side of the Music Hall), late Gothic windows, a
red-tiled roof, elaborate surface decorations, a curved exterior in front—where the Music Hall would be
located. The library proper would be housed in a classically symmetrical building with an almost square
footprint; the art gallery and museum would be placed, in rectangular-shaped wings, along each side.³¹

This was to be Carnegie’s gift to the city—and to himself—and he wanted it to be perfect. In March 1891, he
notified James Scott that he intended “to spend a whole week, if necessary, in Pittsburgh, if you can stand me
so long,” to help with the planning.³²

Fearing that the smoke which permeated Pittsburgh might do damage to a granite exterior, Carnegie suggested
that his library be constructed of brick, which was cheaper and more durable. “The more I think upon the
subject, the more I am inclined to believe that brick of a proper shade will make a far richer and finer
effect than granite under the smoky conditions which will exist. Of course I am willing to give the extra
one-hundred thousands dollars if necessary to make a creditable building, but as I feel at present, I am not
willing to pay extra for granite; on the contrary I think it would be better to pay a little more for brick.”
In the end, Carnegie was prevailed upon to donate the additional $100,000 needed for the stone exterior.³³

The Music Hall, which was probably modeled after Charles Garnier’s opera house in Paris, occupied the front of
the building. It was—and is—a marvel all its own, with remarkable acoustics. “You will not have as perfect a
hall as we have in the Music Hall here,” Carnegie wrote James Scott from New York in late 1893, “but as you
will have the best hall in Pittsburgh, people will think it perfect, and it will only be when you honor us
with a visit to New York, and sit in our Music Hall that you may then feel that perfection is not to be found
anywhere else, but we shall try to console you in other ways.”³⁴

 

CARNEGIE had been extraordinarily generous in providing Allegheny City, Braddock, and Pittsburgh with
first-class music halls attached to his public libraries. In conversations that extended over several summers,
Walter Damrosch made the case for a freestanding music hall in New York to accommodate the city’s two symphony
orchestras and the Oratorio Society. The Metropolitan Opera House at Thirty-ninth Street was barely suitable
for opera, and totally unfitted for orchestral music, as was the aging Academy of Music on Fourteenth Street.
The other major recital halls were in the showrooms of the city’s major piano manufacturers, Steinway Hall on
Fourteenth Street and Chickering Hall on Eighteenth Street.

Carnegie, an habitué of all of these halls, did have to be convinced of the need for an all-purpose “music
hall,” but he declined to donate any money for one. His “admiration for music in its simpler forms,” Damrosch
wrote in his memoirs, “never crystallized into as great a conviction regarding its importance in life as that
he had regarding the importance of science or literature, and though always generous in its support, his
benefactions never became as great as in other directions…. He always insisted that the greatest patronage of
music should come from a paying public rather than from private endowment.” He donated the money for music
halls for Pittsburgh, Allegheny City, and Braddock because he owed these communities something. New York City
was a different matter. “He built Carnegie Hall,” Damrosch recalled, “but he did not look upon this as a
philanthropy, and expected to have the hall support itself and give a fair return upon the capital
invested.”³⁵

In New York, as in Pittsburgh, Carnegie sited his Music Hall in a relatively underpopulated, underused part of
the city, “uptown” on Fifty-seventh Street and Seventh Avenue, just south of Dickel’s Riding Academy on
Seventh Avenue, in an area of stables, coal yards, and vacant lots. He organized a stock company to run the
hall, loaned the company the money it needed in return for 90 percent of its stock, put himself and Damrosch
on the board, and approved the selection of William Tuthill, a thirty-four-year-old architect who was
secretary of the Oratorio Society board and known more for his singing than his buildings.

The Music Hall company purchased several lots and put up three connected buildings. The largest and grandest
was the six-story, caramel-colored brick and terra-cotta building with the mansard roof that housed the
auditoriums. It did not look much like a concert hall, but could have been mistaken for an ornate bank or
office building in the style of the Italian Renaissance. On the main floor was an auditorium which sat around
2,800; beneath it was a recital hall seating about 1,000; on the top floor were the so-called “lodge rooms,”
which, it was hoped, would be leased at a profit. When that proved impossible, the mansard roof was ripped off
and replaced with larger studios that earned a bit more money, but still not enough to make the Music Hall
self-sufficient.³⁶

The cornerstone for the building was laid in May 1890. A year later, the “MUSIC HALL, founded by ANDREW
CARNEGIE,” as it was formally designated by the board of directors, opened with a six-concert festival of
orchestral and choral works, presented by the Oratorio Society and the New York Symphony Society, and
conducted by Damrosch.³⁷

The draw of the festival was Pyotr Ilich Tchaikovsky, who discovered upon his arrival that he was, as he wrote
to friends in Russia, “on the whole…much more of a big shot here than in Europe.” The festival sold out
rapidly, with scalpers cornering the market for the better seats. “Everyone here pampers, honors, and
entertains me,” Tchaikovsky wrote home. Still he spent much of his time in New York wishing he were elsewhere.
His letters and diaries are packed with complaints about his full schedule, the strangers who besieged him at
his hotel, the ladies who gaped at him during intermissions, the bad but abundant meals, and the “coarse”
performance of the second-rate pianist engaged to play his concerto. Through it all, however, he never ceased
to be amused by his host, Mr. Carnegie, “a rich, old man possessing thirty million dollars who resembles [the
Russian playwright] Ostrovsky.”³⁸

On the Sunday evening, after the conclusion of the festival, Tchaikovsky was invited to dinner at the
Carnegies’. He was astounded to find that

this ultra-rich man lives no more luxuriously than others…. Carnegie [has] remained a modest and simple man,
never one to turn his nose up—[he] inspires in me unusual warm feelings, probably because he is also filled
with kindly feelings for me. During the whole evening, he showed his love to me in an extraordinarily peculiar
way. He clasped my hands, shouting that I am the uncrowned but still genuine king of music; embraced me
(without kissing—men never kiss here); he stood on tiptoe and raised his hands up high to express my
greatness; and finally threw all the company in delight by imitating my conducting. He did this so seriously,
so well, and so accurately, that I myself was enraptured. His wife, an extremely simple and pretty young lady,
also showed her sympathy for me in every way. All this was pleasing and somehow embarrassing at the same
time.³⁹

The opening festival was a grand success, but Carnegie’s attempt to organize a corporation to operate a
self-sustaining music hall was doomed to failure. In Europe, such halls and orchestras were generously
subsidized by the government. Tchaikovsky was quite surprised when he learned that the Music Hall whose
opening he was celebrating had been “built from music lovers’ money” and that these “same rich lovers of music
maintain a permanent orchestra. There is nothing of the kind with us!”⁴⁰

Carnegie had not intended to name the new hall after himself. As he would later explain to Charles Norton
Eliot, the president of Harvard, he had wanted to call it “The Music Hall” after Boston’s major concert and
lecture hall. Unfortunately, the term “music hall” had a different connotation in London, and when the board
discovered that foreign artists were turning down invitations because they believed the New York hall was for
cheap variety artists, the name was changed. Carnegie insisted to Eliot that he had been in Europe when the
name change occurred and had never approved of it.⁴¹

 

ANDREW CARNEGIE had achieved no small amount of fame for his philanthropy by the late 1880s, a full decade
before his retirement. His biography in the 1887–89 edition of Appleton’s Cyclopedia noted that he had
“devoted large sums of money to benevolent and educational purposes.” What was not known was that Carnegie
would have given away even more had he been able to. Although his accountants reckoned his net worth in
January 1890 as in excess of $14.8 million, more than 90 percent of it was in stocks, bonds, or partnership
interests he could not liquidate. His share of Carnegie Brothers and Carnegie, Phipps (which owned the
Homestead works) was valued at almost $11 million; his stock and bonds in H. C. Frick Coke at $1.6 million;
his Keystone Bridge stock at another $720,000. He retained smaller investments in the newspapers he had
purchased in Britain, in a few bridge companies and railroads, including the Texas & Pacific Railway, and in
the Columbia Oil Co., which had long ago ceased to be profitable.

His liabilities totaled over $700,000, including $21,000 on the Fifty-first Street house, which was in
Louise’s name; $429,000 owed to Carnegie Brothers; $13,217 to the Allegheny library; $54,393 to the Edinburgh
Carnegie Library; and $146,000 to the “trust accounts” he had set up for dozens of family members, former
associates, friends, and colleagues, including John Champlin, Walter Damrosch, Louise’s mother, and a
mysterious Madame Ximenze. Against these liabilities, he was owed $928,000, including a probably unrecoverable
$247,000 he had loaned his cousin Dod and $108,000 loaned to some thirty individuals and small businesses.⁴²

We don’t know what his annual income was, though Gladstone noted in his diary that in 1887 it was about
£370,000, or $1.8 million. Whatever its size, it was eaten up by the expense of maintaining a home and stables
in New York City, leasing Cluny in Scotland, and for his coaching trips, winter vacations, gifts, loans, and
entertaining and transporting family and friends back and forth across the Atlantic.

Carnegie might have increased his income and made his partners quite happy by authorizing larger distributions
of profits, but he was unwilling to do this. So he did the best he could, spending whatever money he had on
his libraries, and on more than one occasion making promises without any present means of meeting them.

Early in 1896, after dedicating his Pittsburgh library, he received a request to give money to Cornell
University. Carnegie responded at length that he could not do so because he had decided that his “first duty
was to [Pittsburgh] the great community to which I owe so much.” More important, he didn’t have any more money
to give away. “You notice in reading the proceedings of the Opening of the Pittsburgh Library [which he had
included with his note], I have to spend five millions in and around Pittsburgh. I have yet two millions of
that to make, because I have not accumulated a dollar since I gave up daily attention to business. When it is
made and spent I shall hope to see clearly the next field which it is my duty to take up. I am happy in being,
as it were, a rich poor man largely in debt, as you see. I intend to keep always promised ahead, as one seems
then to be in the position of dependence upon Providence, as it were…. At present I am in the condition of Mr.
Vanderbilt, who once said to me, ‘I am invested up to two years ahead.’”⁴³

## TWENTY-ONE

## Surrender at Homestead, 1889–1890

It becomes the duty of the millionaire to increase his revenues. The struggle for more is completely freed
from selfish or ambitious taint and becomes a noble pursuit. Then he labors not for self, but for others; not
to hoard, but to spend. The more he makes, the more the public gets. His whole life is changed from the moment
that he resolves to become a disciple of the gospel of wealth, and henceforth he labors to acquire that he may
wisely administer for others’ good. His daily labor is a daily virtue.¹

“THE GOSPEL OF WEALTH” was not simply a defense of capitalism, it was an exhortation to the businessman to
work harder to accumulate more profits. The end was all that mattered: the means were not to be questioned.
The workingmen at the Edgar Thomson steelworks at Braddock had been the first to bear the brunt of Carnegie’s
new resolve. Having succeeded in guaranteeing future profitability by dramatically cutting labor costs,
Carnegie was ready to do the same at the steel plant he had purchased at Homestead in 1883. He had inherited
there a facility with a history of labor militancy, a union contract, several well-organized Amalgamated
lodges, and a rail mill that competed with his own at Edgar Thomson. He had, on taking control of the works,
curtailed rail production, and, in 1884, built a new mill to manufacture from steel the same kinds of
structural shapes—columns, beams, and girders—that had been produced at the Union Iron Mills in Pittsburgh. As
the recession of the mid-1880s receded, he and his partners poured more and more money into a massive
retooling of the Homestead works. The centerpiece was the construction of a new “universal mill” and a “119
inch plate mill.” The “universal mill” rolled gigantic 30-ton steel ingots into slabs, which were then
transported to the plate mill, reheated, lifted by cranes onto a 363-foot table, rolled into 119-inch-wide
steel plates, then cooled and sliced by hydraulic shears, 29 feet high, weighing 150 tons.²

The new mill had been designed to manufacture steel plates thick, wide, and strong enough to serve as armor
for American battleships. William Whitney, Carnegie’s New York neighbor and former partner in the South
Pennsylvania venture, on being appointed secretary of the navy by President Cleveland in 1884, had discovered
that no American steelmakers were capable of manufacturing the steel a modern navy required. In 1886, he had
suggested that Carnegie enter the armor business.³

Carnegie, who spent much of that winter deathly ill at Cresson, replied to Whitney that he was “afraid my
illness will interfere with our going into armour…. Of course,” he added, “we have the largest and best plant
and best position to make it, and machinery which we are now about to erect for other purposes our managers
assure me would make armour.” Having assured Secretary Whitney that his new Homestead plate mill was capable
of making the best armor in the country, he then reversed course and argued against producing any.

To tell the truth I am more than ever opposed to every dollar spent by our Republic upon instruments of any
kind destined for destructive purposes. We have no need of any defenses. Nobody wishes to attack us, nor could
they injure us much if they did. Our ships of war in various places in the world are so many challenges—chips
on our shoulders which we go round the world asking people to do us the favor to knock off. They are bad
nurseries for young men of our country. You and I differ about this; but if I were in public life the only
issue I would make against your [Democratic] party today is that you are fast transforming a peaceful republic
into a warlike power, degrading it to the level of monarchies of the old world. My feeling is that if Carnegie
Bros. and Co. cannot earn a living by making instruments of peace they will conclude to starve, rather than
make those of war. But of course I will not override the voice of all my partners if they conclude otherwise,
even although I hold a majority of the stock. I only give you my individual opinion, and are always, your
friend and well wisher.”⁴

The eventual decision not to bid on armor contracts was made on purely business grounds. Carnegie was prepared
to proceed if his partners thought it best to negotiate the contracts with Whitney. He was relieved when they
decided not to submit a bid. “We have decided that our present business increases fast enough and we’ll not
offer for armour and guns,” he wrote Louise a month before their wedding. “I never quite liked the idea of
making these barbarous instruments of destruction anyhow. Am quite rejoined that my partners agree to give it
up—aren’t you?” Louise wrote back that she, too, was “perfectly delighted” that “the Washington business” had
been abandoned. “It would be so inconsistent for such an advocate of peace as you are to make horrible guns,
even for self-defense. It is so much nicer to let someone else make them.”⁵

 

BY 1888, the plate mill which Carnegie had bragged about to Whitney was up and running, as were four
open-hearth furnaces to feed it molten steel. Gigantic as it was (the building which housed it took up several
acres), only eight men were required to heat the slabs and another seven to work the rollers and shears. The
Homestead works, with their newly installed labor-saving machinery, employed about 1,600 men, two thirds of
them unskilled day laborers. There was a clear ethnic division in the workforce as there was at Edgar Thomson
and every other steel mill. The skilled workers were native-born or first-or second-generation Germans, Irish,
Welsh, or Scotsmen. The unskilled day laborers were almost all Eastern Europeans, mostly Slovak, though they
were referred to as “Hungarians,” “Huns,” and “Hunkies.” They were paid by the day for “loading and stocking
the furnaces and converters and moving raw and finished materials between the mill and the yard.” The men on
the stocking crews at the new plate mill earned fourteen cents an hour (about three dollars an hour today in
purchasing power).⁶

The retooling of Homestead resulted in increased productivity and labor efficiency. Carnegie, however,
remained dissatisfied because the skilled workers earned more than at other plants. This was not, he believed,
because they worked any harder, but because the labor-saving machinery he and his partners had installed had
increased their productivity and they were paid by the ton. Carnegie wanted to put into operation a wage
formula, which would adjust rates downward as improvements pushed worker productivity upward. The union, he
knew, would resist any such attempts. Skilled workers, it insisted, were entitled to share fully in the
profits that came from their enhanced productivity. Without their labor, there would have been no capital to
reinvest and no one to operate the new machinery that capital purchased. The Amalgamated was not opposed to
modifying the wage rate structure. But it held fast to its core belief that labor was not a commodity to be
bought and sold as cheaply as possible, but a full-fledged partner of capital. The skilled workmen, the
Amalgamated argued, were entitled not only to a share of the profits but to a measure of control over the
workplace. This Carnegie was not prepared to concede.

Carnegie was committed to doing whatever was necessary to bring down labor costs. Cutting costs protected
market share and profit margin, but it also, he was convinced, served the common good. The lower the prices on
basic and consumer goods, the greater the portion of the community that might use and enjoy them. Unions that
interfered with the natural downward spiral of prices by pushing up costs blocked evolutionary progress. Their
power had to be confined or eliminated. They acted on behalf of the particular interests of the men they
represented; Andrew Carnegie acted on behalf of the larger community.

 

THE ANNUAL Amalgamated contracts for iron and steel firms in the Pittsburgh region expired on June 30, 1889.
(Only at Edgar Thomson, which the Amalgamated had abandoned to the Knights, did labor contracts expire on
December 31.) In years past, the Amalgamated had submitted its terms to the Carnegie firms, as it did to the
other steel-and iron makers in Pittsburgh; the manufacturers came back with a counter-offer; and the two sides
negotiated a final contract. In 1889, Carnegie instructed his managers and accountants not to wait to hear
from the Amalgamated, but instead to design a new sliding-wage scale, such as he had instituted at Edgar
Thomson, and present it to the union. The new scale was to be based on the price of steel billets, not pig
iron, as was traditional, and structured to take into account the fact that workers at Homestead were turning
out more product per shift than their counterparts elsewhere.

While Carnegie and his partners prepared for the June negotiations at Homestead, the Amalgamated was fully
occupied at Duquesne, just five miles away, where a new steelworks, Allegheny Bessemer, had been erected. The
owners of the new works were determined to run non-union. The result had been a “violent strike,” with the
owners calling in Pinkertons and policemen to protect their property and the strikers seeking and receiving
support from the Amalgamated lodges at Homestead.⁷

Carnegie silently cheered on the new owners in their battle against the Amalgamated. “Upon the whole we shall
reap a good deal if Allegheny succeeds,” Carnegie wrote Frick in April 1889. It would be difficult for the
Amalgamated at Homestead to insist on higher wage rates if a non-union plant just five miles away paid its
skilled workers much less.⁸

While rooting for his competitors in their battle with the Amalgamated, Carnegie did all he could to sabotage
their efforts to enter the rail business. There were already, to his mind at least, too many steel mills in
the country. The best way to destroy the competition was by excluding it from the “rail pool” and then pricing
it out of the market. On April 12, less than a month after the first rails had been rolled at Duquesne,
Carnegie invited two officers of the Louisville & Nashville Railroad to dine with him and learned from them
that Allegheny Bessemer had offered to sell them rails at $26 per ton. The next morning, he telegrammed Frick:
“There is but one way for you to do. Put your price at $26 and then go to $25.50 or $25 or lower if necessary.
Allegheny can’t run regularly unless you let her take more orders…now put your figure at $25—take all [orders
available]—you bring Allegheny to stop in less than six weeks or so…the issue is before you—put Rails where
Allegheny can’t…take $100,000 lost now may prevent years of annoyance.”⁹

 

SEMIRETIRED, living in New York City, a full day’s journey from Pittsburgh, and preparing to take his wife on
their first tour of the Continent together, Carnegie was not about to take his eyes off his prizes. Almost all
his capital was invested in his steel plants and it was from them that he expected to reap the profits he had
pledged to administer on behalf of the larger community.

In late April, after consulting with Captain Jones on strategy for the upcoming negotiations with the
Amalgamated at Homestead, he wrote William Abbott, one of his young protégés who had risen through the ranks
to become chairman of Carnegie, Phipps.[*][1] He instructed Abbott to call in the Amalgamated’s executive
committee for a meeting, submit our proposed scale and say, “If you agree, all right—If not, it is fight to
finish…. If they don’t agree, then our consciences will be easier—We shall have offered fair and agreed not to
break with organized labor…. Meeting could take place Tuesday 6th or Wednesday 7th. I’ll be presentuntil
Friday night—Then give them until a certain date to say Yes or No. Of course we must be prepared to say—No
means we go ahead anyway.”¹⁰

On Sunday, Carnegie wrote again. He had, he told Abbott, “upon reflection,” decided it would “be best for me
not to meet” with the Amalgamated’s executive committee, “but keep in reserve if needed later.” He had just
learned that Judge Ewing in Pittsburgh had “settled Allegheny strike” and that the Duquesne works would
operate as a non-union shop. Abbott could now seize the high moral ground in his negotiations with the
Amalgamated. “You can put out your flag and win easily.” The executive committee should be told that while
Carnegie and his partners would have preferred not to cut wages, they now had no choice if they were to meet
the Duquesne competition. Carnegie had been pilloried in the Pittsburgh press the year before because of the
lockout at Edgar Thomson. This time he expected to win the battle for public opinion. He was offering his
Homestead workers the best possible deal he could, given the existence of a non-union mill just five miles
away. “Men can’t stand against it—It’s so clear, so fair—our money good as any other’s money—Labor to blame
not Capital.”¹¹

In early May, Andrew, with Louise and their personal servants, traveled to the Universal Exposition in Paris,
which had been organized to mark the centennial of the French Revolution. The French had erected the Eiffel
Tower in honor of the exposition and invited the nations of the world to exhibit industrial products, consumer
goods, scientific achievements, and artworks. The 1889 Exposition, with the Eiffel Tower as its centerpiece
and more than 60,000 exhibits, 1,750 of them from the United States, was the most spectacular world fair held
to that point. Carnegie had been appointed a “Commissioner” by the governor of Pennsylvania. “Paris crowded,”
Carnegie wrote his Pittsburgh partners. “The Exhibition dwarfs every thing ever done of the kind—such
magnificence in building & decoration.”¹²

On May 31, while Andrew and Louise were visiting the exposition, news reached Paris that the dam at the South
Fork Fishing and Hunting Club had collapsed, sweeping away tons of water, debris, railroad cars and tracks,
horses, wagons, two-story wooden houses, and drowning survivors down the Little Conemaugh River to Johnstown,
destroying the town and killing more than two thousand people. Carnegie, a member of the South Fork Club, knew
Johnstown well—it was only fourteen miles from Cresson. “That South Fork calamity,” he wrote Frick, “has
driven all else out of our thoughts for past few days.”¹³

The steel industry was a closely interwoven one: chief executives, salesmen, managers, foremen, and skilled
workers knew their counterparts at other plants and consulted with them regularly. The ties between the
Cambria mill in Johnstown and Edgar Thomson were particularly tight. Captain Jones had worked at Cambria and,
upon leaving for Braddock, had taken with him several department heads. On June 4, Dod wrote to tell Carnegie
that Jones, having received “some message from Johnstown,” had taken a crew of laborers to the city to help
with the rebuilding. “I am staying here [at Edgar Thomson] pretty much all the time—So many of our men have
lost relatives that there is some danger of disorganization amongst them, or rather there has been, everything
seems now to be pretty well settled down…. I do not know when the Captain may come back, but he will no doubt
do his duty as he sees it.”¹⁴

Carnegie did what he could to aid the relief effort from Paris. At his suggestion, the American ambassador,
Whitelaw Reid, called a meeting of Americans, at which Carnegie introduced resolutions expressing “profound
and heartfelt sympathy from the brethren across the Atlantic.” Carnegie donated $10,000, and that fall, on his
return to the United States, publicly pledged to spend whatever was necessary to rebuild the library. It cost
him, in the end, about $55,000 ($1.2 million today).¹⁵

 

FROM PARIS and everywhere else he traveled that summer, Carnegie remained in touch with his partners in
Pittsburgh. From London, where he and Louise arrived in mid-June, he wrote Frick with news of his recent
dinner with “Mr. and Mrs. Gladstone” and then responded to the issues Frick had cabled about. Regarding
matters at Edgar Thomson, he agreed that the man in charge of accounting should be fired. He had been given
numerous chances to shape up and had failed each time. “It is as sad a case as I know. Nothing can be done for
him I fear.” His main concern remained the contract talks at Homestead and the possibility that the men would
go out on strike. “Should take this chance to change and get down to least number of men—very important. I
have no fear of result at Homestead, will come much sooner than expected—We have right on our side…. Don’t be
alarmed at bluster at Homestead. In their hearts they know that the game is up and that we are forced to ask
and get same rates as [Duquesne] on plates [and] Cambria, etc. on other things—This knowledge prevents any
earnest fight. They only will make a show of it to scare other manfrs.”¹⁶

Carnegie’s letters to Frick were rather avuncular, as if he were trying to curry Frick’s favor and establish
himself as his business mentor. For all his triumphs in the coke industry, Frick was a relative newcomer in
steel. He had been a partner for little more than two and a half years, chairman for only six months. Although
Frick would later acquire the reputation for being the more ruthless of the two, Carnegie worried continually
that his partner might not have the killer instinct required of a chairman of Carnegie Brothers. From
Christiana, Norway (today known as Oslo), he warned Frick to be tough with the Duquesne owners: “I do not
believe Allegheny [i.e., Duquesne] will pull through—& do trust you will give no countenance to anything like
toleration of that blackmailing concern.”[*][2]¹⁷

Having heard nothing to the contrary, Carnegie assumed that all was proceeding as planned in negotiations with
the Amalgamated at Homestead. On May 18, Abbott summoned the union leaders to his office and presented them
with a wage scale, based on the one in place at the non-union Allegheny Bessemer works at Duquesne. He
informed them, as Carnegie had instructed, that there would be no negotiations. The wage proposal was “an
ultimatum.” On June 1, all positions at Homestead would be declared vacant. Workers who wanted their jobs back
would be required to sign the new agreement, as individuals, as they had at Edgar Thomson.¹⁸

Carnegie took great stock in the fact that he had broken the union at Edgar Thomson the year before. As he
would soon discover, however, there was a world of difference between the two plants. At Edgar Thomson, he had
had only the Knights of Labor with which to contend. At Homestead, the Knights were as strong as at Edgar
Thomson, and the Amalgamated, which had been a presence at the plant since its opening, stronger still. Worse
yet, the two unions cooperated with each other (several workers were members of both) at the workplace and in
local politics. Together, they had put union members on the borough council and elected as burgess, or mayor,
“Old Beeswax” Charles Taylor, a former English Chartist who had emigrated to the United States six years
before Carnegie and who had spent a lifetime in labor politics. There were as well social ties between the
skilled and unskilled workers that did not exist at Edgar Thomson. Eastern European immigrants who were
Catholics attended the same church, St. Mary Magdalene, as the Irish Catholic skilled workers and union
leaders.¹⁹

The Amalgamated rank-and-file voted in late June to reject Carnegie’s proposal. The leadership then reached
out to the unskilled common laborers, many of them represented by the Knights of Labor, asked for their
support in the event of a strike, and promised, in return, to do all they could to protect their jobs. Instead
of waiting for the company to bring in sheriff ’s deputies and Pinkertons to enforce a lockout and prepare the
way for scabs, as it had at E.T. the year before, the Amalgamated appointed an advisory committee and
stationed armed guards at “all approaches to the town, allowing no one to enter unless proof was furnished
that he was not a black sheep.”²⁰

The deadline to sign the new agreement came, went, was extended—and still not a single worker put his name to
it. On July 1, the company shut the plant and locked out the workers. Notices were posted in the Pittsburgh
papers and several employment agencies were recruited to bring in substitute workers. Carnegie cabled his full
support from Norway: “I would get hundreds of men [i.e., scab workers], board them around Pittsburgh and then
one day put enough in to run Plate Mill sure—next mill in a while, etc., etc. Overwhelming force of Sheriff
Officers about—and good quarters inside works [to house the scabs], one weeks run of plate mill decides
matters. Of course we have no recourse but to fight it through—am glad of it.”²¹

Abbott had already arranged for about one hundred Pinkertons to secure the works and had housed them in
Pittsburgh until he needed them. They arrived armed and dangerous, a vigilante squad of outsiders, available
to do the dirty work companies feared that local officials would be reluctant to take up. On July 10, with the
Pinkertons in reserve, Abbott dispatched thirty-one strikebreakers by train to Homestead, accompanied by
Sheriff McCandless, who had stood guard with his deputies between the Pinkertons and the Knights at Edgar
Thomson the year before. The scabs were greeted by a crowd of some two thousand Homestead men, women, and
children, who blocked the tracks leading to the steelworks. When the scabs left the train, they were, as the
New York Times later reported, “hooted and hissed, jeered and cursed, until they turned and fled the town,
with stones flying all about them.” Two days later, Sheriff McCandless returned to Homestead with 125
deputies, intent on securing the works. On disembarking from the train, his deputies were dispersed, this time
by an even larger crowd, “as if they had been schoolboys.”²²

The Pinkertons waited in Pittsburgh. There was little doubt that, if called upon, they would be able to open
the mill to receive scabs, though not without violence. “With Pinkerton men guarding the works the hotter the
work the quicker it will be over, at least I hope so,” John Walker, Abbott’s predecessor as chairman, wrote
Frick on July 13. “Hoping to soon read of the collapse of the strike.”²³

Three days later, the lockout was over; to everyone’s surprise, it had been Chairman Abbott, not the
Amalgamated leaders, who blinked first. Contravening Carnegie’s orders, Abbott reopened negotiations with the
Amalgamated and quickly arrived at a settlement. John Fitch, who interviewed hundreds of steelworkers in
Pittsburgh in 1907, claimed that Sheriff McCandless had brought the two sides together. Having tried twice to
secure the Homestead works, McCandless realized that a third attempt would result in considerable bloodshed.
The resistance at Homestead encompassed not just the steelworkers but every element of the town: glassworkers,
shopkeepers, local officials, even the clergy. Fighting through it was not going to be easy.²⁴

The telegram announcing the Homestead settlement reached Carnegie in Berlin early in August. He was distraught
that Abbott had negotiated a settlement with the union, thereby ensuring its continued presence at Homestead
for another three years. “The great objection to the compromise is of course that it was made under
intimidation—our men in other works now know that we will ‘confer’ with law breakers…. I don’t like this
feature at all. Seems to me a curt refusal to have anything to do with these men would have brought matters
right in less time than to you seems possible. Whenever we are compelled to make a stand we shall just have to
shut down and wait as at E.T. until part of the men vote to work, then it is easy.”²⁵

Carnegie had expected that Abbott, with the assistance of sheriff ’s deputies and Pinkertons if necessary,
would secure the works and bring in enough scabs to frighten a majority of the Homestead workers into
abandoning the union and returning to work. Those who continued to hold out would be replaced and the union
would be broken. By bowing to the pressure exerted by the strikers and the townsmen who supported them, Abbott
had handed victory to the Amalgamated. “It’s too bad but we must expect three years or so of trouble now,” he
cabled Frick that same day. “The surrender or conference at Homestead may be right in itself, but the effect
at Beaver Falls [a smaller Carnegie-owned steel mill], Coke Works, Keystone is much too great—and not
favorable—Must do best we can.”²⁶

Rather than acknowledging the strength of the ties that bound the workers to their unions, Carnegie attributed
the collapse of his union-busting plan to William Abbott’s failures as a manager. As Abbott’s stock fell,
Frick’s rose. Anticipating perhaps that Abbott would fail at Homestead and be removed as his only possible
rival, Frick acknowledged to Carnegie on July 25 that he was now prepared to make his career in steel. “As I
become familiar with the Steel business, it becomes more interesting; always something that can be done to
reduce cost; but the business requires close attention, and I will be greatly disappointed if July results are
not good…. Many other matters should like to write you about, Homestead…etc., but we make our cables full, and
all those matters can be gone over on your return. The important thing is to neglect nothing here.” In a rare
display of charm, he jokingly apologized for his curt, unpolished letters, so different from those he received
from Carnegie. “I am nothing of a ‘literary cuss’ any way, which is probably as well, as we have no lacking of
it in our concerns. Glad you are enjoying yourself. When I get to be 50 I want to retire and do the same. Kind
regards to Mrs. Carnegie.”²⁷

Carnegie was delighted with Frick’s note. “Yours of 25th rec’d just now—very satisfactory indeed. I am so glad
the steel business is fascinating you. It is the greatest of investments in the U.S. in my opinion managed as
it can be.”²⁸

Frick answered as Carnegie had hoped: “I could not and would not remain the official head of any concern that
was not well managed. I cannot stand fault-finding and I must feel that I have the entire confidence of the
power that put me where I am, in a place I did not seek. With all that, I know that I can manage both Carnegie
Brothers and Co. and Frick Coke Co. successfully.”²⁹

 

BY EARLY SEPTEMBER, Carnegie could rein in his anger and disappointment with Abbott no longer. In an open
letter to his partners, he announced that he had summoned Abbott for a personal interview after receiving a
“startling letter” in which Abbott had suggested that the firm should sell the steel plant at Beaver Falls
because it was losing money. If Beaver Falls were not turning a profit, Carnegie insisted, it was only because
the right man had not been found to manage it. The Carnegie partners were becoming too complacent. In the
past, one of them would have volunteered to “reside at Beaver & sleep with that business” until it was turned
around. “If we are to admit that…anybody else can manage & we can’t, let us make up our minds to be driven
point by point out of manfg business…. We have hitherto been a buying never a selling party & this is no time
to sell any works—After a period of depression we are entering one of activity…. If Mr. Abbott is ready to
admit that Oliver [a possible buyer of the plant] can manage better than he…he might as well admit others can
manage Union Mills better & prepare to sell these, then Homestead’s turn will come next—gentlemen just count
me out in this disgraceful roll to ruin. I would blow up every works we have in turn before I would
acknowledge that any competitor could beat us—at Beaver Falls or anywhere else.” Since receiving Abbott’s
letter, he claimed he had “been able to think of little else—This is a crisis in our affairs—We must face a
serious situation—Mr. Abbott has assured us from time to time that at Beaver Falls we were holding our own….
Now he calls upon his partners to make a loss of $300,000…. The loss with interest added is about $1000 per
working day.” Even more upsetting than the monetary loss was the fact that it came as a surprise to the
managers who were supposed to be keeping track of the books. “I give you all my views freely—It is evident a
new leaf must be turned over…. Perhaps you will find me at fault about the remedy & can devise a better
policy. So be it. It rests with you. Only don’t give me any more surprises. Let us all know month after month
promptly where we are going. I can stand losses with you, but object to be deluded.”³⁰

The following day, Carnegie wrote Frick a personal note confirming that, from this moment on, he would be his
number one man in Pittsburgh, with no number two to compete with. “Let me express the relief I feel in knowing
that the important departments of our extended business are in the hands of a competent manager. Phipps & I
exchanged congratulations upon this point—Now I only want to know how your hands can be strengthened…. Good
night. Take supreme care of that head of yours. It is wanted. Again expressing my thankfulness that I have
found the man…. P.S. Abbott made one good point. He said I did the best thing for the concern in getting
you—so there’s hope for him yet.”³¹

On arriving back from Europe in late summer, Carnegie took to the road again, first to Bar Harbor, Maine, for
a week with the Blaines, then back to New York City for a few days, before he was in his carriage again and
off to the West Side piers for the ferry to New Jersey and the daylong trek to Pittsburgh via Philadelphia,
with a stopover in Cresson and a short trip to Johnstown to survey the damage and pledge his support for a new
library.

Arriving in Pittsburgh, he met with his partners at their downtown offices and crossed the Allegheny River to
check on the progress of his new library and music hall in Allegheny City. At the sight of the new building,
the business cares that had preoccupied him were washed away. “If ever there was a sight that makes my eyes
glisten it was this gem,” he wrote Louise. “A kind of domestic Taj, its tower a pretty clock, so musical in
tone too, for it kindly welcomed me as I stood feeling—‘Yes, life is worth living when we can all forth such
works as this!’…The big words Carnegie Free Library just took me into the sweetest reverie and I found myself
wishing you were at my side to reap with me the highest reward we can ever receive on earth, the voice of
one’s inner self, saying secretly, well done!”³²

Theodore Dreiser, the future novelist, worked in Allegheny City in 1894 as a reporter on the “city hall and
police” beat for the Pittsburgh Dispatch. He spent many long lunch-hour breaks in Carnegie’s library. “What
pleased and impressed me most about this institution was its forty or fifty thousand volumes so conveniently
arranged that one could walk from stack to stack, looking at the labels above and satisfying one’s interest by
looking into and nibbling at the various subjects…. The place had most comfortable window nooks and chairs
between stacks and in alcoves, and in one of these, behind a leaded window which looked out upon the street
and the park, I frequently established myself.” The library building, “a very handsome affair
architecturally,” also housed a music hall with “‘one of the largest if not the largest’ pipe organs in the
world.” On Sunday, Wednesday, and Saturday afternoons, an organist paid by the city entertained “the public
with a free recital. And so capable was he that seats were at a premium and ‘standing room only’ the rule,
unless one arrived far ahead of time.” Dreiser, upon moving to Pittsburgh, had become one of Carnegie’s most
severe critics, and was taken aback by the gifts the tycoon had bestowed on the people of Allegheny City.
“This particular manifestation of interest on the part of the public pleased me greatly and somehow qualified,
if it did not atone for, in part at least, Mr. Carnegie’s indifference to the living welfare of his employees
elsewhere.”³³

 

THE DAY OF Carnegie’s visit to the new library began brightly, but ended in mourning. While Carnegie was in
Allegheny, Captain Bill Jones was on duty at the Edgar Thomson steelworks. Blast furnace C had been blocked by
cinder and he was helping to clear it when the furnace wall gave way, showering flames, hot cinders, ore, and
coke on the men below. More than a dozen furnace men were injured. Jones was almost buried by the avalanche of
smoldering, half-burnt material that swept him off his feet into the casting pit. He died on Saturday night,
two days after the explosion.

He was succeeded by twenty-seven-year-old Charlie Schwab, a handsome lad from Loretto, Pennsylvania, whom
Carnegie counted as a protégé. Schwab had worked his way up the Carnegie organization from assistant to
surveyor to superintendent of construction for the Edgar Thomson blast furnaces. Two years earlier, on Captain
Jones’s recommendation, he had been appointed general superintendent at Homestead. He was now recalled from
Homestead to Edgar Thomson to replace his mentor.

The death of Jones had a profound—though short-lived—effect on the senior partners. Harry Phipps, who like
Carnegie had his fortune tied up in Carnegie Company stock, was increasingly worried that their investments
might not be safe. He proposed that he and Carnegie either sell their interests in the Pittsburgh firms or
consolidate them into a new trust. Carnegie forwarded Phipps’s plans to Frick, though he assured his younger
partner that he had done so only “for fun—to show how he is figuring—of course there’s nothing in it.”
Unfortunately for Phipps, who wanted to cash out his investments, the value of his and Carnegie’s stock had
grown so large that there were few capitalists anywhere who could afford to buy them out. “Parties wouldn’t
pay my price nor could they give security satisfactory,” Carnegie wrote Frick. “The thing is dead anyhow for
no combination of various works is possible…. I would have nothing to do with Trust—If I went out of business
would go out clear & clean & if I stayed in would run with you & our own boys. Good enough for me.”³⁴

 

THE STEEL industry continued to rake in huge profits through the 1880s and into the 1890s, due in no small
part to the beneficence of the federal government. There was very little laissez-faire in nineteenth-century
capitalism, no matter what the capitalists might say. The steel industry was doubly dependent on state and
national governments for the generous loans and subsidies that fueled railway expansion and rail purchases and
the protective tariffs that enabled the manufacturers to keep their prices—and profits—higher than would have
been possible had they been compelled to compete with European steelmakers. If, in the beginning, as Carnegie
had argued, the tariff had been needed to nurture an infant steel industry, by the mid-1880s that infant had
become a strapping, abrasive youth, who kept on growing. Why then, one might inconveniently ask, was there
need for a protective tariff? Because, as Carnegie argued in the North American Review in July 1890, the steel
industry was not yet fully grown and would have to be protected until it was.³⁵

On the issue of the tariff—as on few others—Pittsburgh’s workingmen were in agreement with Carnegie. They
voted Republican in large numbers because the Republicans were the guardians of the protective tariff, and the
tariff, they believed, protected their wage rates.

The argument linking the tariff and wages in the manufacturing sector was a compelling one in the industrial
states, but nowhere else. As the Democrats took great delight in pointing out, high tariffs led to high prices
for all consumers. Through the mid-1880s, a rising tide of outspoken opposition to the tariff, especially in
the agrarian states, made unqualified support a significant political liability. Carnegie recognized this of
course and supported gradual and moderate downward adjustments in the schedules. What he was unwilling to do
was to let the politicians make the final decisions by themselves on an issue so vital to the well-being of
the industrial sector. The legislative process in the states and in Washington, he feared—and he was certainly
not alone in this—gave too great a voice and vote to the enemies of industrial progress. This distrust of
legislatures compelled the steelmakers, individually and through their lobbyist, James Swank, to spend an
extraordinary—and increasing—amount of time, effort, and dollars on making their voices heard and their
influence count.

The Republican candidate for president, Benjamin Harrison, had been elected in 1888, though he had polled
fewer popular votes than his Democratic rival, Grover Cleveland. Cleveland had won a great many of these votes
by making tariff reduction the major plank in his platform. Bowing to the inevitable, the Republicans
attempted to remove the tariff as a future Democratic campaign issue by sponsoring their own reform
legislation. “Tariff work in Washington soon to be done,” Carnegie wrote Frick in January 1890. “I’m to see
the leaders next week.”³⁶

Ohio congressman William McKinley was delegated by the Republicans to head up the committee to write new
tariff schedules. Carnegie was already on the best of terms with McKinley, having instructed Frick in July
1889 to “write him a private note & send him $5000 from me saying that his speech on silver pleased me so much
& I wished to show him he had friends, etc, etc—It is best I don’t write direct I think.” The McKinley tariff
bill, when reported out of committee, proposed only minor adjustments in the iron and steel schedules, thereby
virtually guaranteeing that tariff reform would remain a major issue in upcoming political campaigns.³⁷

When, in July 1891, William McKinley ran for governor of Ohio, James Campbell, his Democratic opponent,
assailed him on the tariff issue. The year before, Campbell reminded voters, the Republicans had guaranteed
that the McKinley tariff, by “protecting” the steel industry, would protect the wages of steelworkers. This
had not occurred. On the contrary, the Carnegie firms had cut the wages of the Homestead workers. McKinley
personally wrote to ask Frick if this was indeed the case. Frick denied it, but provided no data. “We, of
course, would prefer that our business should be brought into politics as little as possible.”³⁸

 

FRICK’S POLITICAL connections—and his skill at playing politics—were invaluable to Carnegie on the local
level. Almost as deftly as Tom Scott and far more discreetly, Frick had entangled the Carnegie firms in a
complicated web of political partnerships, woven of favorable business deals, campaign contributions, and
bribes to influential politicians.

These connections came in very handy when, in the winter of 1889–1890, Carnegie tried to secure additional
land at Homestead to expand his works. The retooling of the plant—and the construction of the massive new
universal and plate mill buildings—had taken up most of the unoccupied land on the site. Fortunately, the
property which comprised about 90 acres abutted the 144-acre city poor farm, poor house, and home for the
insane. Well-placed bribes had persuaded the Pittsburgh city councils to put the land up for sale and build
new facilities for the poor elsewhere. Frick had hired an intermediary, a Mr. McCook, to buy the land, but he
had not been able to close the deal.³⁹

In January 1890, Frick suggested to Carnegie that, bribery having failed to push the matter along, they try a
new approach. “I think we have gone about securing the Poor Farm in the wrong way from the very start. A fair,
open offer to the Council, I think, would bring the matter to a conclusion very soon. We are in position to
make a much more attractive offer than any other party, and it is rather a dangerous proceeding to allow
anybody to use any portion of what we want to pay for the property to bribe officials who claim to control the
matter. I want to discuss this fully with you on your next visit here, together with very many other things I
can not well write about.”⁴⁰

The following week, Frick modified his new approach by suggesting that they seek the assistance of “A. F.
Keating, who is a power in councils.” Carnegie agreed that this was the best way to proceed. “If Mr. Keating
will do us the great favor we may no doubt…be in position to show him some day that we stick to our
friends.”⁴¹

Unfortunately for Carnegie, Frick, and Keating, the real power in Pittsburgh remained Christopher Magee, the
Pittsburgh city boss of whom Lincoln Steffens later wrote that it was his idea “not to corrupt the city
government, but to be it, not to hire votes in councils, but to own councilmen.” By 1890, nothing much got
accomplished in Pittsburgh, certainly nothing that involved city monies or resources or property, without the
explicit approval of Boss Magee.⁴²

After months of spinning their wheels, Carnegie and Frick dispatched their attorney, Philander Knox, to meet
with Magee. “Mr. Knox called on me this afternoon,” Frick wrote Carnegie on March 19, “and I think we will now
get down to business on the City Farm matter. Magee agrees now to put the matter through, but wants to know
our price and just what we will agree to pay him. We have a week in which to give him his figures; in the
meantime I shall look carefully into the matter and probably see you.”⁴³

Carnegie told Knox how much he was willing to pay for the land. Knox and Frick then met with Magee on the
Saturday morning before bids were due. Magee had arranged for a dummy bidder—it would not have looked good if
the Carnegie firms tendered the only bids—to offer $2,775 per acre for the land and suggested that Carnegie
put in a bid for $2,805. When the bids were opened, Frick was surprised to find a third bidder at $2,903. “At
present,” Frick wrote Carnegie, “it looks as if the Boss has taken us in…I may be, and I hope I am, all wrong
about Magee, but he has served other people just that way.” In the end, Carnegie had to pay Magee his
agreed-upon bribe and then shell out more to buy the land from the highest bidder, who had business dealings
with the Boss. Even with these off-the-books expenses, the land was a bargain. “I kept several parties from
bidding on the farm,” Frick proudly informed Carnegie, “who were abundantly able to have purchased it; among
others Mellons, who think the farm worthy very much more than $3000.00 per acre” Carnegie had paid for it.⁴⁴

 

BEGINNING in the spring of 1889, with a Republican back in the White House and his good friend James G. Blaine
secretary of state, Carnegie had more occasion than ever to spend time in the nation’s capital. On taking
office, Blaine had organized a Pan-American Conference between the United States of America and the republics
of Central and South America, and appointed Carnegie one of the American delegates.⁴⁵

Carnegie was delighted. When the delegates arrived in Washington for the conference in October 1889, he
volunteered his services as tour guide and social secretary, arranged for them to visit Pittsburgh in
November, and, in February 1890 hosted a lavish dinner at the Arlington Hotel in Washington. The New York
Times reported the event on February 26 in a front-page story, headlined “CARNEGIE’S DAINTY FEAST. THE WHOLE
EARTH SEARCHED FOR DELICACIES FOR HIS GUESTS.” It “was one of the most elegant affairs of the kind ever given
in Washington…. The bill off are consisted of oysters on the shell, clear turtle soup, broiled sole from
England, with cold cauliflower; broiled breasts of Spring chickens from Louisiana, with hot asparagus; roasted
Spring lamb from Scotland; teal ducks from Currituck Sound, North Carolina, and the usual desserts.”

Carnegie was assigned to the committee on patents and trademarks which made its final recommendations in early
March 1890. We have no idea how much, if anything, Carnegie contributed to the deliberations. From this point
on, however, he would regularly preface his comments and pronouncements on hemispheric relations with the
reminder that he knew what he was talking about because he had “sat four months with the representatives of
the sixteen South American Republics.”⁴⁶

Carnegie spent a great deal of time in Washington that winter lobbying congressmen on the tariff and the
secretary of the navy on new contracts for steel armor. In 1886, he and his partners had declined to bid on a
contract for steel-plated battleship armor because the terms were not particularly good. Now, three yaers
later, they were invited by the new Republican secretary of the navy, Benjamin Tracy, to bid on a much larger
contract and agreed to do so. Carnegie was still opposed to naval rearmament on moral and political
grounds—and would spend the rest of his life speaking and writing against it, but as a capitalist who had
invested millions of dollars in a new plate mill at Homestead—and as the author of the “Gospel of Wealth”
essays which had proclaimed that it was the duty of the businessman to make as much money as he could so he
would have more to give away on retirement, he was unwilling to turn down the chance to earn millions.

The Harrison administration had, with the enthusiastic support of the Congress, committed itself to building a
new generation of steel-armored cruisers to replace the nation’s almost laughably outdated fleet of wooden
ships. From Washington in March 1890, Carnegie wrote Frick, playfully addressing him as “My dear millionaire.”
“There’s a possible fortune in Navy Dept’s attitude toward us—and I am to confer with Secy Tracy next week. So
glad we can oblige him by rolling a trial plate with 1% nickel. He will pay us same as he did for one
abroad—He wants nothing said about this.” Carnegie sent the same message to William Abbott, who, though
disgraced, remained nominally in charge of the Homestead facility. “There may be millions for us in armour. To
one man should be assigned ‘Armour’ and he should read up and keep up on the subject.”⁴⁷

The legislation authorizing the expenditure of millions of dollars for steel armor required that much of it be
made of a nickel-steel alloy. Carnegie opposed the use of nickel, which, in his opinion not only did not
strengthen steel, but had to be imported from Canada at considerable cost. He may also have feared that, as no
American steelmaker had as yet produced nickel-steel armor, Tracy might, in the end, decide to buy from
English firms with experience in manufacturing it.

In a rather transparent attempt to get Tracy to change his mind, Carnegie informed him that he had on his own,
as a loyal citizen, examined the “inferior facilities for Armour-plate making” in England and come away
convinced that his Pittsburgh works could produce higher-quality pure steel armor than the nickel-steel
variety turned out in England. Feigning disinterest in the financial benefits his company would reap should it
be permitted to manufacture its steel armor without the nickel added, he asked the secretary to keep his
letter secret. “This is strictly a personal letter; is not to go on file in the Department. It is for yourself
and Commodore Folger [Tracy’s ordnance chief] alone; for as you can well understand, I am a steel
manufacturer, and do not wish to antagonize my interests whatever. I thought it my duty, however, to tell you
all I know and think upon the subject.”⁴⁸

The prospects of government contracts were almost too good to be true. The Homestead mills were already
earning a small fortune supplying steel for the first generation of Chicago skyscrapers, a bridge in Brooklyn,
and a significant section of New York’s elevated railways. Armor production made use of the same open-hearth
technologies and could be rolled in the same plate mills. Though the start-up costs were enormous (more than
$3.3 million), the potential for profits made the risk worthwhile. “No doubt…it can be made the most
profitable of all our branches of manufacture, if we go into it thoroughly,” Carnegie wrote Frick from
Scotland on July 15, 1890. “No make-shifts. It will take a full year to get us fairly started, even with
energetic pushing.” Concerned that Frick was less than enthusiastic about the project because of the huge cost
for retooling, Carnegie wrote him another cheerleading letter in early August: “Armour—No specialty can be had
equal to this. Further study of the situation convinces me that we can easily succeed…. I think we can average
a million per year out of this Dept, with ease—Nobody will follow us.”⁴⁹

As loyal Republicans, Carnegie and Frick had anticipated friendly treatment from Washington and were mildly
surprised when Secretary Tracy informed William Abbott that the contract for armor he was offering would be
less lucrative than the ones his predecessor, William Whitney, had signed with Bethlehem Steel. Frick wrote
Carnegie that he had advised “Mr. Abbott to go and see the Secretary, and say to him that we could not accept
his offer, nor would we like to accept any offer before your return in October. Ninety days is a very short
time, and I take it that the Secretary is a very reasonable man, but this whole matter must be managed with
great care, or, as you say, we may get into serious complications with the Government. Mr. Abbott seems to
think that one of the reasons the Secretary desires us to furnish Armor at 12¹/2 % less than Bethlehem prices,
is in order to do better than his predecessor, Mr. Whitney. I cannot see why he should make capital at our
expense. It certainly will be our fault if he does.”⁵⁰

Carnegie agreed entirely and telegrammed Secretary Tracy in Washington that while he wanted very much to “help
you out with Armour,” he could not “risk taking one iota less” than what Bethlehem had received on its
contracts. If the secretary was ready to sign off on a contract for “five thousand tons [at the] Bethlehem
price, shall order necessary tools and go ahead otherwise must decline. Armour making no child’s play.”⁵¹

Tracy agreed to meet Carnegie’s terms. On November 20, 1890, the contract for 6,000 tons of nickel-steel armor
was signed.

Having invested more than $3 million to retool Homestead, Carnegie hoped to market his armor overseas. He had
no expectation of ever winning contracts in Britain, France, or Germany, which had their own steel
manufacturers. His objective was the Russian government, which was eager to build a modern navy, but lacked
any domestic steel manufacturers. In the summer of 1890, touring Europe with Louise, Carnegie made sure to
visit Russia where, in addition to attending choral concerts and meeting Tchaikovsky, he inspected the ships
of the new Russian navy, which had been equipped with English-manufactured armor. Determined to wrest the
contract from the English, Carnegie enlisted the help of his friend, Secretary of State James Blaine: “It
occurs to me that the great Empire of Russia should no longer plate its war ships with such miserable stuff as
I saw there, received from England…. I wish we could get a contract to supply the Russian government with such
plates as those which have just proved their superiority, and if you can speak to your friend, the Russian
Minister upon the subject, I shall be greatly obliged. Russia and ourselves have always been such good
friends, that it does seem a pity to have her defrauded upon the vital point of armor for its war ships.”⁵²

Blaine apparently did as he was asked. In March 1892, Carnegie wrote Frick that he had received “a note from
our friend in Washington about the Russian matter, which progresses favorably.” In July, he received
additional assistance with the Russian contracts from another friend, former Cornell University president
Andrew White, who had been selected by Blaine as “envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary at St.
Petersburg.”⁵³

It was not going to be easy to break into the Russian market, which was tightly controlled by the British, but
Carnegie, convinced that he could produce steel as tough and as cheap, refused to give up. In April 1894,
almost four years after he had first apprised Frick of the potential market for Russian armor, he wrote him
again, suggesting that he send someone “to Russia promptly, with note to President White [now ambassador to
Russia] who can aid us. An interpreter can easily be provided there, by him…. He should then go to Italy on
same errand. Unless we get a foreign business our armor plant is certain to be idle for a time. The demands of
England for armor are enormous and I do not think her manf ’s can meet it and do work for Russia and Italy.
Here is our time.”⁵⁴

Six months later, in the aftermath of the first Sino-Japanese War, in which the Chinese northern fleet lost
eight of its twelve warships, Carnegie sought to extend his market further into Asia. “The destruction of the
Chinese and Japanese fleets, which is reported,” he wrote Frick from Scotland, “will bring both of these
nations into the market for armor-ships, which will be contracted for by English builders…. I cannot but feel
there is an opening for us to sell armor to builders here. My plan would be to see the leading ship-building
people and receive an offer from them for so much armor.”⁵⁵

Carnegie’s dreams of business expansion always exceeded his grasp. Frick, knowing this, deferred appointing a
representative to do business exclusively in Russia and Italy or China and Japan. Bethlehem Steel eventually
secured the contract for the Russian armor, but because Carnegie and Bethlehem’s president, Robert Linderman,
had from the beginning agreed not to compete but to share government contracts, Carnegie felt no embarrassment
in asking Linderman to “divide” the Russian order. “There is not much money in the order, but there is a great
deal in the armor-making plants working in perfect union…. As to the future, we are together, and that is all
right, as far as armor is concerned.” Though Linderman declined, he agreed to pool subsequent foreign armor
contracts.⁵⁶

Having won rather lucrative contracts for armor in Washington, Carnegie began to look longingly at government
contracts for guns. He would have preferred—and continued to argue so in print and in person—that the United
States and the other nations of the world put away their guns and battleships; as this was not yet the case,
he saw no reason why his companies should not secure the profits that came with government contracts. Better
that the profits from arms and armor production go to Homestead, to be redistributed to the larger community,
than to other firms.

Bethlehem Steel, which had entered the armor and armament business because it could not compete on other steel
products, had, by the early 1890s when Carnegie was ready to bid on gun contracts, virtually cornered the
American market. “Bethlehem’s three and one-half million-contract for guns is a ‘stunner,’” Carnegie wrote
Frick in August 1891. “With one more tool,—a Boring Mill—we should be ready to compete for next lot.” The
following month, certainly not by accident, Carnegie reported to Frick that one of his houseguests at Cluny
was none other than Commander F. M. Folger, chief ordnance expert and adviser to Secretary of the Navy Tracy.
Two weeks later, Carnegie wrote to tell Frick that he had sent Abbott and Dod Lauder off to “visit Krupps and
decide upon finishing tools” needed to manufacture guns at Homestead.⁵⁷

Despite Carnegie’s continued enthusiasm—and the vastly inflated estimates he offered of the size of the
market—the Carnegie firms did not, in the final analysis, go into the armament business in any significant
way. Through the mid-1890s, Carnegie would try several times to convince his partners to retool for armament
production, but they resisted. In the fall of 1894, having read in the newspapers that Bethlehem and Midvale
Steel had submitted a new bid for naval guns, Carnegie sent the clippings and a note to Frick, who forwarded
them to Charles Schwab, who was at the time the general manager of the Homestead plant. “I am under the
impression that you do not agree with Mr. Carnegie in this,” Frick wrote Schwab; “if we could secure a
contract such as referred to, it would require a large expenditure to get in shape to take care of the
contract. Am I correct in this?”⁵⁸

In the end, Schwab and Frick agreed to disagree with their chief stockholder and mentor and stay out of the
gun-forging business. The investment required was too great; the potential rewards far too risky. Homestead
would, through the 1890s, turn out millions of dollars worth of steel-plated armor for the U.S. Navy, but it
would stay away from armaments on economic grounds, not moral ones.

[1]: footnote18.html
[2]: footnote19.html

## TWENTY-TWO

## “There Will Never Be a Better Time Than Now to Fight It Out,” 1890–1891

THE THREE-YEAR sliding-scale wage agreement that had been forced on the Edgar Thomson workforce, with the help
of the Pinkertons, in the spring of 1888 was due to expire on December 31, 1890. “Any advance of wages these
times is out of the question,” Carnegie wrote Frick on December 9, 1890, anticipating that the workers would
seek an increase. “It seems to me, now is a good time to tell this to the men. Explain how we are trying to
give them work to do by rolling rails for which we do not get paid till next spring.” With no union to
represent them, Carnegie expected that the men would in the end continue to work at the old wage rates. He was
wrong.¹

On December 30, the day before the old contract was to expire, Frick wrote from Pittsburgh with bad news:

Blast furnace men, particularly stock fillers have notified Schwab that they will stop work on morning of
January 1st unless their hours of labor are reduced to eight; it is a question of hours he says more than
wages but of course means the same thing in the end. It is a serious matter to bank [shut down] furnaces[*][1]
but it looks as if there was no other alternative. Any advance in wages or reduction in hours of labor it
seems to me at furnaces is certainly not to be thought of now in view of the depressed condition of business
and gloomy outlook for 1891 and even if trade conditions favored it we could not well entertain a change in
the present scale. Managers will meet in an hour to fully discuss it, in the meantime would like to have your
views. The matter did not look serious until this morning, and I thought we would get through without
troubling you with it at this time. Will have Schwab [general superintendent at Edgar Thomson] and [James]
Gayley [head of the furnace department] in at noon. It seems to me we should instruct Mr. Schwab to call the
men together and ask them to send a committee to furnace plants of other steel concerns at our expense,
particularly eastern ones to investigate for themselves. In meantime the men to continue at work on the
present scale. In this way our plant might be kept going until we are ready to stop for repairs and the men by
that time brought to realize that business is really very much depressed.²

Carnegie had no intention of returning to an eight-hour day at Edgar Thomson for anyone, including the furnace
men. The puddlers who worked the ovens at the Union Iron Mills in Pittsburgh endured twelve-hour shifts. Why
shouldn’t the skilled workers at the Bessemer ovens? The reasons were self-evident to the Bessemer furnace
men. Iron puddlers put in a twelve-hour shift, five and a half days a week; because they managed their own
furnaces, worked in two-man teams, spelled one another on a regular basis, and took breaks when they needed
them, their twelve-hour turn never involved more than ten hours of work a day or fifty a week. The Bessemer
blast furnaces, to the contrary, operated continuously twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, spewing out
raw material to be converted into steel and then cut, molded, rolled, and shaped into blooms, ingots, slabs,
bars, beams, and the like. The men who tended, stocked, and stoked the ovens worked a full twelve hours a day,
seven days a week, with no breaks, no one to spell them.³

Frick tried to keep Carnegie out of the loop as the situation spiraled out of control at the Edgar Thomson
furnaces. He was intent on taking over full operational management of the Carnegie firms and, for the time
being at least, it appeared that that was what Carnegie wanted as well. In December 1890, Louise had been
brought down by a severe case of influenza. Carnegie was frightened, as frightened as he had ever been. Every
letter to and from Frick referred to her condition.

On New Year’s Eve, Carnegie cabled his response to the news of the furnace men’s walkout, then followed up
with a handwritten letter.

Advance in wages or cost at present time of course impossible…. Would have Schwab say to men at a time when we
are trying every means to get orders even at a loss…when Eastern mills have reduced wages we are asked to
increase cost. It is not in our power to do so…public sentiment will be with us. [Pittsburgh] Dispatch might
help by a judicious article—saying to labor this is not time to ask advance. Trouble cannot be serious if met
vigorously…the more all of our men can be told of the position and made to realize the truth the easier the
trouble will be over—besides this furnace men should be told boldly that the firm will not be taken by the
threat without notice and any man that deserts his post will not be employed again—this is really the
strongest and best check you can give—decline to treat with men who threaten such conduct.⁴

Frick wrote back that he didn’t think there would be any trouble at the furnaces because the troublemakers
were unskilled Eastern Europeans who could be easily replaced. As the work in the steel mills had gotten more
dangerous, as the eight-hour day was scrapped for twelve, and the workweek lengthened to eighty-four hours,
the English-speaking boys who had once begun their careers in the mills as common laborers, began looking
elsewhere for employment. They were replaced by unskilled immigrants who, without savings or language skills,
had few alternatives but to work in the mills. The majority of the Eastern Europeans in the Pittsburgh steel
mills came from the western parts of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Most intended to remain only a few years,
earning as much money as they could before returning to their villages to pay off mortgages or buy a piece of
land. Few got the chance. Wages were higher in America, but so were the costs of living.⁵

The new immigrants kept largely to themselves, lived in boardinghouses with their own people, ate their own
foods, drank in their own taverns, read foreign-language newspapers, shopped in stores owned by their
landsmen. But they also made accommodation to the new world they now inhabited by learning a bit of the
language and joining or cooperating with unions organized and led by English-speaking skilled laborers. They
were willing to work long hours for pennies an hour, but when pushed too hard, shoved back.

Even without a union to represent them, the furnace men at Edgar Thomson had decided that they were not going
to accede to the firm’s ultimatum, even when it came sugarcoated with lengthy explanations as to why wages
could not be raised or the workday reduced to eight hours. On New Year’s Eve, the first to walk off their jobs
rather than accept the new contract, with no reduction in hours or increase in wage rates, were the stockyard
fillers, who delivered iron ore, coke, and limestone to the blast furnaces. When Schwab, who lived nearby in
company housing, received the message at midnight that the “Hungarian element were organizing at the corner of
13th street, near Wolfe’s saloon,” he drove to the works in his carriage and, as he reported to Frick in a
3:00 A.M. telegram,

arrived there about the same time the mob did, there being about 60 in the crowd. They immediately went down
to the Stock House and of course after considerable skirmishing managed to chase all the men away from there.
They then turned their attention to the men unloading material on trestles and succeeded in cleaning these men
out. The crowd was made up largely of drunken fellows with whom you could neither reason, nor induce to leave
by any argument and inasmuch as our force at the works was comprised of but a few foremen it was impossible to
do anything with them…. They went down into the Stock Yard and commenced doing injury to our property by
upsetting barrows, etc., when our loyal men…made an attack upon them and succeeded in beating them off from
the stock house. I do not know that we have gained anything by this, but at this writing, 3 A.M., stock yard
is entirely clear.⁶

Schwab hoped things would cool down overnight, and to help the process along, he asked Mr. Wolfe to close his
saloon, which he did. It made no difference. On January 1, 1891, an even larger “posse” descended on the
furnace department and drove out the few men still working there. Schwab suggested that the Pinkertons be
brought in to get the furnaces started up at once. Frick disagreed. He had already dispatched Philander Knox,
the company’s chief lawyer, “to see the Sheriff and to find out whether the Sheriff will agree to protect our
property. Mr. Knox thinks he will; and that if he says he will undertake to do it that it will be done. Should
we get a favorable decision from the Sheriff this will certainly be much better than employing Pinkerton men….
In case the Sheriff will not consent to protect our property and the men who are willing to work, we will have
to adopt the second method which you propose. This I hope will not be necessary.”⁷

Later that day, Frick wrote to tell Carnegie that the sheriff had agreed to intervene, which was a great
relief to both of them. Frick was convinced that the matter would now be swiftly settled and the furnaces back
at full blast. “This is certainly not anything more than a drunken Hungarian spree, and I do not think can
lead to anything else; no reason why it should…. A little nerve and patience will certainly bring this matter
through all right.”⁸

The sheriff, as requested, took the next train from Pittsburgh to Braddock. Schwab met him at the Edgar
Thomson plant and then “called together all the workmen who were then at the works [only the furnace
department was being struck]; brought them into the office; addressed them, saying it was simply ridiculous
for three thousand honest workmen to allow four or five hundred Hungarians to deprive them of work which they
so much desired doing. I told them that the Sheriff was here and would swear them in as Deputy Sheriffs.”⁹

With the sheriff’s approval, Schwab then armed twelve of his best men with “Winchester Rifles (repeating)
[and] a large number of other men…with small arms and clubs.” If the “Huns” attacked again—and Schwab was
certain they would—“they will meet with a pretty lively reception as I am determined to drive them out, no
matter at what cost or sacrifices…. My plan now is, to appeal to the sympathy of the other men, get them to
come to work, be sworn in as Deputies.” He planned to start up the furnaces right away, “protecting ourselves
all the while…. If, in this manner, I can get our men to stand right by us, I would much prefer this to
getting Pinkerton detectives.”¹⁰

Frick endorsed the strategy but cautioned James Gayley, the superintendent of the furnace department, to
“exercise great care as to who you give these revolvers to. They must not be given under any circumstances to
any except” those deputized by the sheriff. Frick also alerted Schwab that there was “a rumor that the Huns
are arranging in Homestead to go to Braddock tonight in full force. I think it is all idle talk but thought it
best to give it to you to be used for what it is worth.”¹¹

With the sheriff now in place at the head of a small army of armed “deputies,” the second battle of Edgar
Thomson was won without a shot having to be fired (and without the violent confrontations that might have
ensued had the Pinkertons been brought in). The “Hungarians’” threatened attack on the newly deputized
sheriffs never materialized. No intruders arrived from Homestead. The furnaces were, within days, again at
full blast. With no union to bridge the cultural, language, and economic differences between unskilled
“Hungarians” and skilled English-speaking workers, no strike fund, and no way of transmitting their grievances
to the larger public, the Edgar Thomson workforce was easily divided and conquered. Carnegie’s decision to
drive the Knights out of Edgar Thomson in 1889 had been worth all the trouble it had taken.

By late January, the protests at the Edgar Thomson furnaces were a distant memory. The business downturn Frick
and Carnegie had expected—and on which they had predicated their refusal to raise wages—never occurred. On the
contrary, orders and revenues continued to pour in. “Money is becoming quite easy in Pittsburgh,” Frick wrote
Carnegie only weeks after crushing the aborted furnace men’s strike. “The combined concerns have on hand
something over a million and a quarter in cash.”¹²

Carnegie was delighted with the news from Pittsburgh, but worried still about his wife’s recovery. After
another relapse, she appeared to be gathering strength, but slowly. Carnegie had remained at her side through
her illness and was getting increasingly restless. “I begin to feel as if I should like to get out of the
hospital for a few days,” he wrote on January 26, “and see no reason why I can not leave this day week, and
spend a few days in Pittsburgh and talk over all the points with you.” Two weeks later, still marooned in New
York, he wrote Frick that Louise preferred that he not leave “until as she says she gets on solid ground,
which means solid food. She tastes an egg today, first morsel and is gaining daily. I’ll wait and visit you in
a few days.”¹³

Carnegie and Frick had solved the labor problem at Edgar Thomson in January, but there was more to come. In
February 1891, 10,000 coke workers went on strike in Connellsville against the H. C. Frick Coke Company, in
which Carnegie held a majority interest. Frick had anticipated the strike and laid in sufficient supplies of
coke for the next several months. By mid-March, however, with no sign of compromise from the strikers, he
decided to force a confrontation. “It looks as if the time has about arrived,” he wrote Carnegie on March 20,
“when we should post up at the coke works the scale of wages we are willing to pay, and make an effort at
several of the works to start.” As at E.T. in 1888, there would be no negotiations over wage rates. The men
would be invited to return to work at the posted wages. If they chose not to work at these rates, they could
expect to lose their jobs to the substitute workers the company planned to bring in to replace them.¹⁴

Carnegie, knowing that there was no immediate need for fresh coke deliveries, suggested that Frick wait a bit
before issuing any ultimatums. The longer the men stayed out of work, the hungrier and more desperate they and
their families would become, and the easier it would be to break their strike. “To announce terms and try to
start ovens is a very serious step to take. It should be postponed until the last day possible, as every day’s
idleness will render starting easier. I should not think of making a move this month…. I do not like the idea
of your thrusting it upon them. It would show too clearly your desire to start.”¹⁵

Carnegie agreed with Frick that the unions in the coke regions had to be busted—no matter what it took. The
only difference between the two was timing. Carnegie suggested that Frick wait until April or later before
forcing any confrontation. Frick and his general manager in the region, Thomas Lynch, wanted to move at once.
On March 26, Lynch posted the new wage rates, announced that the coke works would be opened at once, and
ordered the men back to work. The Connellsville coke workers responded by organizing themselves into
quasi-military units and marching on the coke works, which were defended by private police and sheriff’s
deputies. Seven strikers were shot dead and dozens injured.

Carnegie, on learning of the events in Connellsville, dashed off a handwritten letter to Frick. The battle had
now been joined and Carnegie urged him to fight it to the finish:

Stand by the scale. Refuse all conference. [Declare that you are] going to run works free from all Labor
organizations, etc. Try every means to start and force the Governor to send aid to keep the peace. Seems to me
Sheriff can apply to Gvnr saying civil power exhausted “and upon you I throw responsibility.” No Governor can
stand who declines to take charge and keep the law—and peace. The issue should be clearly made with the
Governor…. There will never be a better time than now to fight it out. Advances asked for are obviously
ridiculous. Men are in the wrong…. You have a great advantage in the men having broken the law—you are
entrenched. I believe this is the time to settle matters in the coke region and am willing to stand the cost
to the end.”¹⁶

Frick answered that same day that “all parties here feel just as you do, that now is the time to settle all
difficulties in the coke regions…. Your suggestions as to the policy from now on will have careful
consideration…. The strike certainly cannot last much longer.”¹⁷

A week later, with Louise now nearly recovered, Carnegie arrived in Pittsburgh on his annual visit prior to
sailing for Europe. Asked by reporters about the coke strike, he made a point of explaining that he had “taken
no part in the coke question and don’t intend to take any. There is a man at the head of the concern who made
it, and I don’t know anybody in the world who can attend to its affairs as well as Mr. Frick. Besides he is my
boss now, and he has only to tell me how I can assist him to secure my support.”¹⁸

Frick’s optimistic predictions about a quick end to the strike were entirely off base. As the strike dragged
on, Carnegie, frustrated with the lack of progress, couldn’t help but gently suggest that had his advice been
taken and the confrontation postponed, the men might have been enticed to return to work peacefully. “My idea
of beating in a dispute with me is always to shut down and suffer, let them decide by vote when they desire to
go to work—say kindly ‘all right gentlemen let’s hear from you, no quarrel, not the least in the world,’ until
a majority vote (secret ballot) to go to work—have a good time—when a majority vote to start, start it is. I
am satisfied that the Employer or firm who gets the reputation of adhering to that rule never have a prolonged
stoppage, or much ill feeling. We did it at E.T. but Abbott failed at Homestead and we have lost ground to
recover.” It was easier to starve the workers into submission than to do battle with them. The battle having
now been engaged, Carnegie insisted that it was necessary “to go ahead to the end.”¹⁹

Frick, with the assistance of the sheriff’s deputies, counterattacked in an attempt to resecure the coke works
and evict those who lived in company-owned housing. When the sheriff’s deputies were driven off by the
strikers, Democratic governor Robert Pattison, who had been reluctant to intervene, sent in the state militia
to restore order but refused to permanently station troops at the coke works so that scabs could be brought
in. Frick arranged instead “for 100 Pinkerton men at Leisenring No. 2,” the center of union activity. “Sheriff
of Fayette County agreed to deputize them. They will reach here tomorrow morning…. With that protection at
those works, I think we will be able to get them started, as there are without doubt a large number of men
willing to work if properly protected. To-morrow we will begin to evict at a number of places.”²⁰

On April 21, 1891, Frick cabled Carnegie with the news that he had successfully “landed the hundred Pinkerton
men at Leisenring No. 2 about 1:30 to-day, and they were immediately sworn in as deputy sheriffs. A special
[train] with fifty Italian miners, secured in the Punxsutawney Region, left here [Pittsburgh] at four o’clock
for the same place. I trust with this protection, and this number of men to start with at that works, that we
may succeed in running them full before long. We are holding our own at all other places, and gaining a little
at some. We must keep at this persistently and patiently, and I am satisfied we will, before many days, get in
pretty good shape.”²¹

The coke workers were able to hold out for another month, but no longer. On May 20, Frick wrote that
production at the coke works was “satisfactorily increasing.” On May 27, the strike was called off.²²

In less than three years, with Captain Jones’s and Frick’s assistance, Andrew Carnegie had broken strikes—and
busted unions—at the Edgar Thomson works at Braddock and at Connellsville. But there remained still more to do
before the Carnegie works were freed forever of union interference.

In late June, six months after the furnace men and stock fillers had been beaten back at E.T. and less than a
month after the coke strike had been called off, word reached Frick through his network of spies that trouble
was brewing at the Duquesne works, which he had purchased for Carnegie six months earlier. The skilled workers
who had struggled, unsuccessfully, to organize a union under the old management were at it again. In early
July, they quit work and announced that they would not return unless paid according to the wage scale
negotiated by the Amalgamated for the iron mills in the Pittsburgh region.²³

Carnegie had argued in his 1886 articles that it was always preferable to close down a plant than bring in
scab workers. But he had discovered, at Edgar Thomson in 1889, that long-term lockouts were too costly to be
sustained in boom business periods. Rather than wait indefinitely for workers to return, he had brought in
Pinkertons to secure the plant and prepare the way for scab laborers. This was Frick’s plan for Duquesne in
1891, with one important distinction: He intended to use the sheriff’s office, instead of the Pinkertons, to
break the strike.

“The Sheriff will go up on the 10:40 train with ten Deputies,” Frick wrote Tommy Morrison, the general manager
at Duquesne (and a distant cousin of Carnegie). “I feel satisfied that we can depend upon the Sheriff giving
us all the protection we ask for, if needed; at least he has promised our Attorney Mr. Knox that he would do
so…. We will fight this strike to the end and start the works on exactly the same terms as they were running
heretofore. After they are once started we will formulate a sliding scale of our own and insist on every
employee signing it. This, however, is a matter that we had better keep to ourselves for the present.”²⁴

Frick was not content with simply breaking the current strike; he was determined to find and eliminate the
organizers. Company spies identified the union men, who were fired at once. “The following named persons,”
Frick wrote the superintendents at Edgar Thomson and Homestead on July 3, “have been discharged from Duquesne
Works. Will you kindly see that they are not employed at Homestead or any other works of Carnegie, Phipps, and
Co?” To make sure they would not return to Duquesne, an injunction was taken out against them. “I send you
herewith copy of form necessary to be used to get injunctions against the men who are interfering with our
operations,” Frick wrote Morrison on July 6. “Please read it over carefully and see what it will be necessary
to swear to, and whenever you can give the names of the parties acting against us as stated therein we will
have no difficulty in getting to Court to enjoin them; Should they then continue to interfere with our
employees or with men that want to go to work there will be no difficulty in having them sent to jail.”²⁵

Carnegie, like Frick, worried less about the strike at the Duquesne works—it would be quickly broken—than on
the effect it would have on the Homestead workers. On July 14, Frick assured him there was nothing to worry
about. The Homestead workers wanted very much “to see the men at Duquesne organized,” but his swift action in
breaking the strike would, he thought, “deter the Amalgamated Association from being led into the fight.”²⁶

He was right. The Amalgamated leadership decided not to support any organizing effort at Duquesne or endorse
any sympathy strikes at Homestead or Carnegie’s other iron or steel mills. With the sheriff’s deputies on site
and no support from outside, the Duquesne strike was stillborn. Frick’s and, to a lesser degree, Carnegie’s
close ties with Allegheny County Republican officials were paying off handsomely. The company had only to
whistle—and the sheriffs came riding to the rescue. Their support had been indispensable in breaking three
separate strikes against Carnegie firms in 1891 alone. If, as Carnegie would later declare in his
Autobiography, “Labor is usually helpless against capital,” it was because capital, at least in Allegheny
County, had the state on its side.²⁷

 

IN HENRY CLAY FRICK, Carnegie had found the battlefield lieutenant he required to run his companies. Like
Harry Phipps, Frick was a master accountant, with his eye firmly fixed on the bottom line. Like Captain Jones,
he was resolutely anti-union and a master strategist in labor disputes. Like Tom Scott, he was politically
savvy and politically connected. Carnegie was already relying on him more than he had relied on any of his
other partners and managers. In early 1890, as a sign of his increasing faith in Frick’s ability, Carnegie
notified him that he had decided to spend more time abroad. “Have got Cluny for next year. Sail May 21st…. We
shall probably spend next winter in Italy, chiefly at Rome and not return until following winter and then only
for short time. Am now getting all arranged as I planned.”²⁸

Frick, anticipating Carnegie’s retirement, declared his availability to succeed him. “Am now satisfied,” he
wrote Carnegie in March 1891, “should like to continue my connection…but want to be more largely interested,
if still agreeable in every respect to you, and satisfactory to all.” Carnegie had earlier suggested that if
Frick wanted to own a larger share of the steel company, he would sell him some of his own stock. Frick
indicated he was now ready to take him up on the proposal.²⁹

“I am delighted you think you can now go in and increase your interest,” Carnegie responded. “You ought to for
there’s no business in this world that I know of which will make more money or give your talents greater
scope…. My hope is you will then concentrate upon this business and make it the greatest ever seen…I’ll fix it
all with you next week or when I go to Pgh.”³⁰

Over the next year, Carnegie increased Frick’s interest in Carnegie, Phipps and Carnegie Brothers to 11
percent, not the 14 percent Frick had requested, but an interest equal to Phipps, and second only to Carnegie
himself. Frick was not expected to pay a penny in cash for the securities. Carnegie lent him the money, with
the principal and capital to be paid back out of future dividends. He also agreed to Frick’s proposal that
Carnegie, Phipps, which owned the Homestead plant, and Carnegie Brothers which owned Edgar Thomson and
Duquesne, be consolidated into one new company, Carnegie Steel, and that Frick be made chairman of the new
company. The consolidation was to take effect on July 1, 1892, not coincidentally the date on which the
Homestead labor contract was to expire.

Though Carnegie had done what Frick had asked for, the relationship between the two remained fraught. Carnegie
needed more from Frick than the younger man was prepared to give him. Carnegie wanted Frick’s loyalty and
friendship; he wanted to be appreciated, respected, admired, even loved by the younger man.

Frick worked too hard, played too little, and was in danger of wearing himself out. Like an anxious parent,
Carnegie prodded the young man to take better care of himself. “Sorry the grippe has reached you at least,” he
wrote during the influenza season of January 1890. “If any of you feel the least touch of it do be warned. Go
to bed and figure upon ten millions surplus and take a hot whiskey toddy at night. I was well next day after
my attack but foolishly went out next day and exposed myself. Walker Blaine’s death [James Blaine’s son] is a
warning to you all…. Be careful.”³¹

Whereas Carnegie’s letters grew warmer, more intimate, and more personal, Frick’s remained coldly
businesslike. He shared little personal news or gossip and no reports on his health. As his
great-granddaughter and biographer would later write, Henry Clay Frick “constructed the fortress of his
privacy well: he was taciturn, brusque in his personal relationships, committed virtually nothing of a
personal nature to paper, and guarded most of his feelings—although his anger was famous and never forgotten
by those who experience it.”³²

Frick was delighted to be Carnegie’s business partner, but he had no intention of becoming his confidant or
friend, let alone surrogate son. Unlike Carnegie’s other partners—young and old—Frick neither idolized
Carnegie nor paid special tribute to his business experience and acumen. On the contrary, he considered
himself Carnegie’s equal, and in some ways his superior. He too had built a successful business empire from
the ground up, become the key figure in a vital industry, and acquired a fortune in doing so. He was young,
ambitious, and, as Carnegie had recognized in naming him chairman, the man best suited to be in charge of the
Carnegie empire.

Having arranged for Frick to increase his share of the businesses, Carnegie sailed for Britain in May 1891.
Frick, as always, kept him informed by letter and coded cable on the progress of their multiple business
dealings: in real estate, railroads, coke, iron ore, iron, and steel.

Unbeknownst to anyone, Frick’s daughter, Martha, born in August 1885, had swallowed a pin at age two and
suffered since then from a series of internal injuries and infections. By the summer of 1891, on the eve of
the labor difficulties at the Duquesne mills, she was near death. The doctors, not knowing what ailed her,
were unable to offer remedy or hope. Frick decided, as a last resort, that the mountain air and medicinal
springs of Cresson might somehow help to heal her. He wired Carnegie in London to apprise him of the
situation. “We have had a very sick little girl for two weeks past,” he wired Carnegie. “We…hope to be able to
move her to Cresson some day this week.”³³

Frick spent the month of July commuting back and forth between Cresson, where Martha lay dying, and his office
in Pittsburgh, managing Carnegie’s business interests, mopping up after the Connellsville strike, and leading
the battle against the Duquesne militants. Nowhere in his letters—or at least those that have been left
behind—was there a word of complaint or an echo of self-pity or, indeed, any further mention of his daughter’s
illness. Yet he was close to the breaking point. When Carnegie, sent a document for signature, casually asked
for more information before signing, Frick took offense. “It is to be regretted,” he wrote Carnegie at Cluny,
“that a feeling has been created within you, cautioning you to be more careful in signing papers presented,
and that you should think it necessary to exercise more care in the matter. I know nothing that should have
engendered that feeling.”³⁴

Carnegie’s response was solicitous. “Yours rec’d,” he wrote on July 23, after getting his detailed reports in
the post, “all very satisfactory except that you are to be denied your Holiday this year as last—It is really
too bad & gives me many twinges of regret—No man can long stand continued pressure such as you work under & I
do trust that next year you will feel you can leave business for a long trip.” Carnegie had planned to take
another of his coaching trips that summer, but now decided against it. “Without you its hardly worth while—We
shall reserve it till next year.” Toward the bottom of the letter, after a few short, chatty paragraphs on
business matters, Carnegie mentioned Martha’s illness for the first time: “We have been alarmed about little
Martha, hope your decision not to leave home is not owing to her—Where are you for the Summer, Cresson
probably—at least your wire was from there—Caught the best basket of Trout Monday last that I ever did—such
beauties.”³⁵

Four days later, he wrote Frick again in much the same tone. “Having a fine summer—I’m fishing every day or
two and resting between—In very good trim…. Take care of yourself.”³⁶

As Martha’s condition continued to deteriorate, Frick sent for Dr. Garmany, who had helped save Carnegie’s
life five years earlier. It was too late. Martha died on July 29, 1891, one week short of her sixth birthday.

Frick accepted an invitation from a friend and business partner to move his family to Fishers Island, in Long
Island Sound, off the Connecticut coast. Writing his partner on August 14, Carnegie closed a lengthy business
letter with a brief reference to Frick’s tragedy. “I am glad you have to run backward and forward to Fischer’s
[sic] Island, which will give you some needed change. Have been thinking that you should take a holiday after
the year starts. A trip to Italy for instance, could not fail to keep you interested…. I hope you and your
family will come with us after January for a trip to Italy. Think it over.”³⁷

On September 9, having no response from Frick, Carnegie tried again. “Do not work yourself to death, and do
arrange to take that trip abroad that I spoke of.”³⁸

Frick continued to work like a demon. That winter, he moved his family to New York City and commuted regularly
to Pittsburgh. His wife was pregnant again and expecting in August, close to the anniversary of Martha’s
death.

 

DESPITE his concern for Frick, Carnegie was in a particularly euphoric mood. Louise had fully recovered from
her lengthy illness and Cluny was more beautiful and peaceful than ever. He was, he wrote Frick, fishing every
day or two “and resting in between.” One of his guests that summer was John Champlin, whose passage Carnegie
had paid. Carnegie, the most amiable of hosts, assured Champlin that he need not worry about having too much
baggage—he would send a van to fetch it at Newtonmore, the nearest train station. “You will need it all—plenty
of warm things…. send it all here—plenty of room.”³⁹

Carnegie was right to urge Champlin to bring “warm things.” Photos of their picnic excursions that summer of
1891 show everyone bundled head to toe. Carnegie, looking very much like the grandfather of the group,
occupies the center of each group photo. Sensitive about his height, Carnegie never allowed himself to be
photographed standing, but always sought the higher elevation, the top stair, or arranged for the group to be
photographed sitting down. High-heeled boots with thick soles helped a bit, as did the variety of hats, from
pith helmets to formal top hats.⁴⁰

Carnegie’s otherwise idyllic summer of ’91 was marred only by his inability to get much writing done. “It does
not seem possible for me to get to work,” he wrote Champlin; “really I don’t feel able to sit down and apply
myself.” This was to be a recurrent problem for Carnegie, who had hoped to spend more time writing now that he
was semi-officially retired from business.⁴¹

Always the most self-satisfied of men, Andrew Carnegie was, despite his minor writer’s block and his worries
about Frick, quite pleased with himself that summer. Never had business been better. The steel firms—Edgar
Thomson, Homestead, and the Duquesne works—were, by 1891, the dominant force in the nation’s fastest-growing,
most significant industrial sector. Carnegie had guessed right in putting his money into steel rails in the
mid-1870s and then diversifying into other steel products in the 1880s. In 1880, almost all the steel had been
rolled into rails; by 1890, half of it was being used for other products: beams, bars, angles, sheets, rods,
pipes, nails, plates, and structural shapes for bridges, buildings, skyscrapers, and ships. His early start in
rails, then in structural steel, had put him in a position to profit, as no one else could, from the
quarter-century economic boom that began in the mid-1870s. From 1880 to 1890, pig iron production in the
United States increased from 4.3 million to 10.3 million net tons and steel production from 1.2 to 4.1 million
tons.[*][2]⁴²

The Carnegie firms were at the forefront of the peculiarly American system of manufacturing described by
Robert W. Hunt, the first historian of steel manufacturing in the United States, as “American push.” While the
Americans made use of British patents and processes in their mills, they “pushed” their machinery and their
workers far harder than the British did. The English industrialist Sir Lowthian Bell, who visited the United
States in 1890, was appalled by the “recklessly rapid rate” at which Americans drove their blast furnaces.⁴³

Carnegie’s hard-driving policies were legendary. Carnegie, Phipps, Captain Jones, Frick, and Charlie Schwab
pitted department against department, mill against mill, superintendent against superintendent in an ongoing,
never-ending race to increase productivity. The results were evident in the blast furnaces, which year after
year dramatically increased their efficiency and productivity. Between 1880 to 1889, Carnegie allocated funds
to construct five new furnaces on site to provide additional pig iron for the Edgar Thomson Bessemer
converters. Each furnace turned out more pig iron more efficiently than the one preceding it. The one erected
in 1889 turned out three and a half times more iron than the original Lucy furnaces, while burning one-third
less coke.⁴⁴

The danger inherent in such rapid expansion was that production would outstrip demand. And Carnegie well
understood this. To lessen the impact of the cyclical crises of overproduction, Carnegie and his fellow iron
and steel manufacturers organized informal “pools” to allocate market share and set minimum prices. Beneficial
as these pools might have been in curbing price competition, excessive loyalty to them, Carnegie preached to
Frick and his partners, was no virtue. There were times, especially in business downturns, when the pools had
to be broken. In January 1892, to cite but one example, Carnegie suggested that Frick consider leaving the
beam pool. Although the Carnegie firms were guaranteed 30 percent of the allocation, firms outside the pool
were selling below the minimum price and scooping up new business at an alarming rate. “If our business is
being cut into by those outside the pool, it would be best to strike vigorously, sweep away all pools, and run
awhile until we get the business into fewer hands, just as we have done with rails.”⁴⁵

Because the Carnegie firms remained so vitally strong, relatively debt-free, and diversified into many product
areas, they could afford to periodically break the pools, lower their prices, expand market share, drive the
weaker firms out of business, and then organize new pools, in which they would have a larger share of the
market. The strategy of joining, then breaking, then reorganizing the pools was a recipe for continued
success, the only downside being that such a policy might be in violation of the 1890 antitrust law that bore
Senator John Sherman’s name.

The Sherman Antitrust Act forbade “combinations in the form of a trust or otherwise in restraint of trade.”
Unfortunately, the legislation never made clear what was meant by “restraint of trade,” or whether informal
pools set up by manufacturers were outlawed “combinations.” In 1912, Carnegie told a congressional committee
that it had never entered his mind that the steel pools might be illegal. He believed that the antitrust
legislation applied not to manufacturers but to railroads. This was indeed the opinion of the Supreme Court in
a pivotal 1895 case. It was not until 1898 that the Court would reverse itself and apply the Sherman Antitrust
Act to manufacturing concerns.⁴⁶

While Congress and the courts tried to determine what was meant by “combinations” and “restraint of trade,”
Carnegie proceeded to join and leave the various steel pools at will, without fear that his firms would be
indicted for violation of the antitrust laws. At the same time, he did his best to ensure that neither he nor
his colleagues in the steel industry incited the politicians to take action against them. Just as he carefully
guarded all information about the enormous profits his companies were making, so too did he urge his fellow
steelmakers to keep secret the workings of the pools. On July 15, 1890, two weeks after the passage of the
Sherman Antitrust Act, Carnegie informed Frick that he had written President Joseph Wharton of Bethlehem
Steel, with whom Homestead divided the armor business, “more than once, urging that the allotment farce be
stopped, otherwise, that there would be trouble in the Senate. It is so silly to incur public odium, and be
classed as a combination controlling product, when there is no truth whatever in the charge. The organization,
of course, should be kept together…except that the public would not be regaled with statements of allotments
every month, which are without the slightest practical bearing upon the acts. I hope you will carry this
point.” Because the allotment system was informal, non-binding, and did not prescribe the prices the companies
had to charge for their rails, it was not, Carnegie insisted, “a combination.” Still, he thought it best not
to advertise the fact that the largest steel manufacturers met regularly, shared patent information, took
orders together, and regarded one another as colleagues rather than competitors.⁴⁷

Carnegie refused to be beholden to anyone and repeatedly turned down suggestions that he might combine or
merge with his competitors. When Frick suggested a “closer alliance” between the Carnegie firms and Illinois
Steel, Carnegie dismissed the idea out of hand. “We must never think of any consolidation or merging of the
concerns, because our property and business is on the rock and invulnerable, and we understand it and can
manage it. With the others it is not so.”⁴⁸

 

THOUGH HE TOLD everyone who asked—and many who did not—that he was retired from active business, that was only
partly true. He remained tied to Pittsburgh by an umbilical cord as long as the Atlantic cable. Success in
business acted on him like an addictive drug. He had always enjoyed the thrill of the game, the competition
for profits, the exhilaration of winning an especially lucrative contract. Once he had decided to give away
his fortune—and publicly proclaimed as much—he discovered additional reasons to remain a steelmaker. The money
he accumulated now—and the much larger sums he intended to add to his fortune in the future—were not for his
use, but for the community. The more he earned, the more he could give away, and he was earning more than
ever. Profits had increased from under $2 million in 1888 to $3.5 million in 1889 to $5.3 million in 1890.
They would, he predicted, climb even higher in the years to come.⁴⁹

The gods were smiling on Carnegie and his partners. Everything appeared to be going their way, even the
weather.

“The crops in Europe are evidently, even worse than the authorities care to acknowledge,” Carnegie wrote Frick
from abroad in 1891. Crop failures in Europe meant higher prices for American wheat, which would, in turn,
mean more money for the midwestern states, a fair portion of which was bound to find its way into new
construction—of steel rails, steel bridges, and steel structures of every kind. “It is not more than an even
chance the sunshine will come,” Carnegie gloated to Frick. “If not, our crops will bring higher prices than
expected. Of course, the advance in produce and stocks, will soon be reflected in iron and steel, and next
spring, I believe, we shall have a boom.”⁵⁰

 

CARNEGIE went out of his way to solicit interviews and indulge the journalists who appeared at his doorstep.
He was immensely proud of all that he had accomplished and wanted the wider public on both sides of the
Atlantic to share in his joy. During his 1891 stay at Cluny, the editor of the Musical Courier, one of those
honored with such an invitation, arrived to find his subject “seated in a very large chair, in a very small
study, busily engaged opening letters from a pile…. Many of them were begging letters. If wealth brings its
pleasures it also brings its trials and one of the greatest trials of the ‘Iron King’ are these appeals by
beggars…. Beside Mr. Carnegie was his secretary…working away at a typewriter, as if to maintain his employer
in bread. Table, covered with books, newspapers, etc., and a fire—and that was all.” The journalist, like all
visitors encountering Carnegie for the first time, could not get over his tiny stature—and large intellect.
“One discovers at once that although comparatively small of body, Mr. Carnegie is mighty of brain. One quickly
realizes that he is in the presence of a man of immense force of character, masterful resource, and
determination, with an intellect as alert as his body is active.”⁵¹

The publication of Triumphant Democracy, followed by his “Gospel of Wealth” essays, had firmly established his
credentials as an author and intellectual. Even the president of the United States saw fit to pay him tribute.
In the fall of 1891, he shipped President Harrison “a keg of what is said to be best Scotch Whisky in the
world” from John Dewar & Sons and received a personally written note acknowledging the gift: “It was very kind
of you to think of me as likely to need a ‘brace’ this winter in dealing with the new Congress.” Harrison
proceeded to lavish on Carnegie exactly the kind of praise the little Scotsman lived for. “If your Gospel of
Wealth should lead you to turn over to unbelievers the large fortune which you have accumulated by your
marvelous industry and skill in manufacturing, I think you could earn a living with your pen. I know you will
not think me a flatterer when I say that I have been surprised and very greatly pleased to notice how one, who
has led so busy a life in trade, could get so large a view of political questions, and the command of so
forcible a style.”⁵²

Carnegie celebrated his fifty-sixth birthday in November 1891, and was, as everyone who visited him felt
obliged to remark, in remarkably fine fettle. His marriage was a grand success; his multiple careers as
steelmaker, man of letters, public speaker, and philanthropist were thriving; a Republican was in the White
House; Frick was at the helm of his Pittsburgh business empire; and Carnegie himself was where he wanted to
be—in the public spotlight. There were no clouds on the horizon, only limitless profits to be made and spent
for the greater welfare of the greater community.

[1]: footnote20.html
[2]: footnote21.html

## TWENTY-THREE

## The Battle for Homestead, 1892

FOR TWO and a half years, Carnegie had been preparing for the summer of 1892 and his next showdown at
Homestead. He had tried, but failed, to break the Amalgamated at Homestead in 1889; he expected, with Frick’s
assistance, to succeed in 1892.

The past years had been profitable ones. Carnegie had made millions of dollars and poured much of it back into
retooling the Homestead works. In the spring of 1889, the Homestead workforce had been about 1,600; a year
later, it was up to 2,600. By the spring of 1892, with armor manufacture in full swing, almost 4,000 men were
employed at the works. Homestead had replaced Edgar Thomson as the most technologically advanced steel mill in
the nation. The overhead cranes, rolling tables, hydraulic shears, and gigantic, iron-roofed plate and beam
mills were larger than those anywhere else. The open-hearth furnaces routinely turned out 50-ton batches of
molten steel (double that of the Bessemer furnaces at Edgar Thomson). The site was grid-ironed with tracks on
which materials were pulled through the 100-acre complex by nineteen locomotives. Homestead had its own
repair, blacksmith, and carpentry shops; a brick and stone office standing on a hill overlooking the mills;
“eight handsome residences” for managers; forty more houses for master workmen; and “a handsome clubhouse for
the accommodation of guests and officers.”¹

The town had grown with the works, from a population of about 2,000 in 1880, when the plant opened, to 12,000
in 1892. In 1890, after “Beeswax” Taylor’s retirement, “Honest John” McLuckie was elected burgess (the
equivalent of mayor), outpolling his three opponents by 811 votes to 5. McLuckie worked in the converting
mill, was an active member of the Amalgamated, and had played a role in the defense of the town in 1889.

The 1889 settlement with the company was regarded as a victory for the Amalgamated. The wage rates of most of
the skilled workers had been cut, but with increased productivity they were soon bringing home more than they
had under previous contracts. Unskilled laborers still earned about fourteen cents an hour. The Amalgamated
remained the bargaining agent for all the men on the job. Its 800 dues-paying members, enrolled in eight
different lodges, made it the strongest local in the region. Its 24,000 members nationwide made it the largest
metalworkers union in the world.²

 

ON JANUARY 30, 1891, Carnegie, studying the previous year’s figures on labor costs and productivity,
discovered that the former were rising more rapidly than the latter. He now understood, he wrote Frick, why
the profits at Homestead were not as high as they should be. He asked for “a thorough investigation of
Homestead labor forces. There is certainly $300,000 a year [in labor costs] unaccounted for.” Homestead, he
feared, had too many workers, and he was paying them far too much.³

Frick hired William Martin, a former steelworker, union activist, and editor of the Amalgamated’s page in the
National Labor Tribune to compile an industrywide comparison of Homestead wage rates with national averages.
Martin sent out questionnaires to firms across the country, discovered what they were paying each category of
skilled workman, then compared tonnage and day rates for these firms with figures for Homestead. His findings
confirmed Carnegie’s suspicions that skilled workers at Homestead were receiving more than the industry
average. Martin was then put to work designing a wage scale for Homestead that was comparable to that of
Carnegie’s non-union competitors.⁴

The current labor contract was not due to expire until July 1, 1892, but Carnegie was eager to begin work at
once. “It has occurred to me,” he wrote Frick in December 1891, “that if the labor question could be taken up
at Homestead soon, the same months you are spending in negotiating now, might save stoppage in July, when I am
certain we shall not wish one day’s delay.” He suggested that Frick ask his brother-in-law, Otis Childs, a
manager at Homestead, to intimate to the Amalgamated leadership that if the skilled workers did not
voluntarily agree to wage reductions now, the firm might have to “transfer all the trade…from Homestead” to
the lower-priced, non-union Duquesne mills. “If Childs and one other, or, perhaps, Childs alone were
instructed to take the subject up now, and show that we expected reductions, and that it would be to the
interest of the men to give them, perhaps much good would be accomplished. Please think this over.”⁵

In January 1892, John Potter, who had replaced William Abbott as general superintendent at Homestead, invited
the Amalgamated to submit proposals for a new contract for four of the plant’s ten departments. The other six
departments, he explained, would operate under the old contract until new machinery was introduced, at which
time a new wage rate might be negotiated.

Over the next month, the Amalgamated formulated a wage proposal which differed little from the one signed in
1889. In early February 1892, the union representatives took the train to Pittsburgh to present their
proposals to Potter. He rejected them and distributed instead the ones William Martin had worked up. The most
striking element in the firm’s substitute proposal was a reduction in the minimum rate from $25 to $22 a ton.
(The minimum was the rate the company would pay no matter how low the price of a ton of unfinished steel
fell.) The company’s proposals, Potter insisted, were more than fair as they provided for wage reductions for
skilled workers in only four departments, a mere 325 workers out of the 3,800 at Homestead. What Potter didn’t
call attention to was that the firm reserved the right in the new contract to revise the scale downward for
other skilled workers “in the event of the introduction of new methods and appliances.” The meeting was
adjourned without a date set for another negotiating session.⁶

On April 4, just before he left for Scotland, Carnegie prepared a notice to be posted at Homestead in his
absence. The notice, on Carnegie’s personal letterhead, declared that as all three Carnegie steel plants were
being consolidated into one firm, Carnegie Steel, as of July 1, “there had been forced upon this Firm the
question Whether its Works are to be run ‘Union’ or ‘Non-Union.’ As the vast majority of employees [all those
at E.T. and Duquesne] are Non-Union, the Firm has decided that the minority must give place to the majority.
These works therefore, will be necessarily Non-Union after the expiration of the present agreement.” Carnegie
assured his Homestead employees that they would be treated fairly as non-union workers. “A scale will be
arranged which will compare favorably with that at the other works named; that is to say, the Firm intends
that the men of Homestead shall make as much as the men at either Duquesne or Edgar Thomson.” As further
improvements were made at Homestead, Carnegie admitted that jobs might be lost, but he pledged to find work
“for desirable employees” at his other plants. He concluded by stating somewhat provocatively, given the
contents of the notice, that “this action is not taken in any spirit of hostility to labor organizations.”⁷

Carnegie sent his draft to Frick, with a note that “Mr. Potter should roll a large lot of plates ahead, which
can be finished, should the works be stopped for a time.” Instead of posting the notice, Frick “pigeon-holed”
it, according to George Harvey, his authorized biographer, because he was not yet ready to publicly announce
that Carnegie Steel was going to be a non-union company. After a face-to-face meeting with Frick in New York
City, Carnegie left for Britain on April 13, fully satisfied that Frick would succeed at Homestead without too
much difficulty. “I know that you will be sharp now after Homestead costs,” he wrote Frick just before
sailing, “and I venture to predict that about this time next year, some surprising results will be seen.”⁸

When he arrived at Coworth Park, the English country estate in Berkshire County, where he and Louise spent the
first part of their holidays (Cluny had no central heating and was not quite fit for habitation until later in
the spring), a letter from Frick was waiting for him. “The wage question at Homestead is a most series [sic]
one,” Frick warned, “and it may become necessary to fight it out this summer. No better time can be selected
or expected. We will get ready for a fight immediately. If it be unnecessary, all the better. It may be a
stubborn one, but if once gone into, without regard to cost or time, it will be fought to a finish.”⁹

On May 4, after consulting with Phipps and Lauder, who were also vacationing in England, Carnegie got back in
touch with Frick. He recognized now that his excitement at taking on the Amalgamated had gotten the better of
him and that the notice he had asked Frick to post about Homestead going non-union had been needlessly
provocative. “You remember I gave you a type-written slip which I suggested you might have to use. It is
probable that you will. But I hope you will make this change in it: I did not get it quite right, because I
think it said that the firm had to make the decision of ‘union’ or ‘non-Union.’…We need not meet that point,
and we should not. We simply say that consolidation having taken place, we must introduce the same system in
our works; we do not care whether a man belongs to as many Unions or organizations as he chooses, but he must
conform to the system in our other works.” Carnegie closed by again expressing his faith—and that of his
partners—in Frick’s leadership. “One thing we are all sure of: No contest will be entered in that will fail….
We all approve of anything you do, not stopping short of approval of a contest. We are with you to the end.”¹⁰

There was no doubt in Carnegie’s mind that with Frick overseeing day-to-day operations and making necessary
tactical adjustments, the strategy that had worked so well at E.T. in 1888 and at Connellsville in 1891 could
not help but succeed at Homestead. The firm would make impossible demands. When the union rejected them, the
company would cut off negotiations, close the works, lock out the workers, secure the plant with sheriff’s
deputies and/or Pinkertons, and then, after an indeterminate pause, reopen under armed protection. The workers
would be invited to sign individual contracts and return to their jobs; those who refused would be replaced by
scabs. “No doubt you will get Homestead right,” he reassured Frick on May 23. “You can get anything right with
your ‘mild persistence.’”¹¹

One of the reasons Carnegie was less concerned about a work stoppage at Homestead than he might have been was
that 1892 was not turning out to be the banner year he had predicted the summer before. With orders slow and
prices slack, the company would not suffer much if it had to shut down Homestead for a few months. “There is
altogether too much capacity in every branch, and the turn can come only after a good many works are closed,”
Carnegie wrote on May 24. “There is no hope of things mending until things get even worse.”¹²

Confident that Frick would be able to secure a decent labor contract at Homestead, Carnegie turned his
attention to more pressing matters, namely, the reorganization of Carnegie Brothers and Carnegie, Phipps into
a new company: Carnegie Steel. Frick, who would emerge as the third major stockholder, was the architect of
the reorganization. George (Dod) Lauder, who owned 4 percent of the stock in the two Carnegie firms and would
be the fourth-largest stockholder in Carnegie Steel, was prepared to agree to whatever Carnegie wanted. The
only holdout was Harry Phipps, who, Carnegie wrote Frick in a long letter on May 13, was “troubled upon
several points.” Phipps was particularly “afraid of the ‘iron clad’ agreement,” which, Carnegie commented, was
“rather curious, inasmuch as he had it prepared. He does not like his own medicine.”¹³

Phipps had designed the “ironclad” arrangement in the winter of 1886–87 during Carnegie’s convalescence from
his near-fatal illness. To enable the firm to buy back the shares of deceased members without bankrupting
itself, Phipps had set the “book value” of the company’s stock below the market value and stipulated that the
firm had to pay only this “book value.” The “ironclad”—so named because it was considered unbreakable—further
stipulated that at any time, for any reason, an individual partner could be expelled from the firm and
required to sell back his shares at “book value,” if a combination of three quarters of the partners, holding
three quarters of the total stock, requested him to do so. It is not exactly clear what Phipps’s objections
were to the “ironclad,” but he may well have feared giving his partners the right to expel him from the firm
at some later date.

Carnegie did his best to persuade Phipps to sign the new agreement. Phipps finally agreed to do so, only to
back off again. He was not willing to sign an agreement, he told Carnegie, which gave any number of active
partners the right to expel retired members and compel them to sell back their stock to the company at “book
value,” which was less than market value. Carnegie was inclined to agree with his old friend. “As we never put
any one out except for cause it doesn’t seem important.”¹⁴

While Carnegie was inclined to let Phipps off the hook, Frick was adamant that every partner, including
retired ones like Phipps, sign the new agreement. “It is absolutely necessary, in order to make it binding,
that it should be signed by all partners, and it is very important for the interests of every one that such an
agreement should be binding.” Phipps should have been assured that he would never be thrown out of the
company. Because Carnegie owned more than 50 percent of the stock, no combination of partners without him
could secure the three-fourths necessary to expel anyone. “No one but yourself can put any one out,” Frick
assured Carnegie, “that is to say, it requires your vote in order to do so, and certainly Mr. Phipps would not
think for a moment that you would join in putting him out. As we all look forward to being retired partners
some day, it surely would be short-sighted policy to ever think of trying to put a retired partner out.”¹⁵

Carnegie, in the end, sided with Frick against Phipps. His and Frick’s relationship had continued to evolve to
the point that when they disagreed, Carnegie was as likely to give in to his junior partner as vice versa.
Carnegie remained very much a force to be reckoned with, but he had reconciled himself to playing more of a
subordinate, advisory role than a dominant, supervisory one when it came to matters having to do with the
day-to-day operations of his businesses. He had tried, for almost twenty years, to get away from Pittsburgh,
but with his money and his ego tied up in his iron and steel plants, had not been able to do so. Now, for the
first time, with Frick in charge, he saw an opportunity to concentrate more of his time and energy on his
writing and his philanthropy.

The old guard, the men who had built Edgar Thomson from the ground up, were, except for him, dead or retired.
The key to the future, he realized, lay in the reorganization of his firms into one concern and Frick’s
willingness to run it as chief executive officer and chairman of the board. Whatever tools Frick needed
Carnegie would supply, even if it meant coaxing his old friend Harry Phipps into doing something he feared.
“Of course, Iron Clad is essential to maintenance of our prosperity,” Carnegie wrote his “dear Pard” Frick in
mid-June. “H. P. sees this now. I asked him to consider how powerless we should be [without the ironclad] in
case of another Moore [a former accountant whom Frick had had to let go]; told him about our efforts to get in
new blood, etc…. He thought we had been too fast giving away interests [to new partners] and I pled guilty,
and told him he needn’t fear you would blunder in this way,—10 years service probably condition hereafter,
etc…. He is cranky,—very, in some things, but a dear good heart is his, at bottom. Away from you and all
naturally he begins to feel like an outsider. Now his family are leading him into ‘Society.’ They go to
‘Ascot’ tomorrow, etc. This new life may interest him and give a happy old age, which I hope for him. He
deserves it so well. We must be patient with him,—all will come right.”¹⁶

No matter what the primary topic, the letters back and forth between Frick and Carnegie that spring of 1892
always included some reference to Homestead and its future. “I am not sanguine about Homestead Labor,”
Carnegie admitted on May 30. He was concerned that Frick at the last minute might, like Abbott before him,
agree to negotiate with the Amalgamated. His anxieties were occasioned by his own unarticulated fears that if
he were in Frick’s place, he might not be able to stand tough. It was easy, he had admitted to Abbott three
years earlier, to be “brave” at a distance, far more difficult to do so when one was in the line of fire. He
emphasized again how essential it was that the Amalgamated be defeated at Homestead. If it survived, it might
well be emboldened to move on to organize Duquesne and Edgar Thomson. If it were stopped at Homestead, it
would mark the beginning of a glorious new era for Carnegie Steel in which management would be free to do
whatever it thought necessary to cut labor costs and increase productivity.¹⁷

The problem at Homestead was, he reminded Frick in a June 10 letter, “not only the wages paid, but the number
of men required by Amalgamated rules which makes our labor rates so much higher than those in the East.”
Having informed the union representatives what the company was prepared to pay, Frick must refuse to
negotiate, compromise, or arbitrate. “Of course, you will be asked to confer, and I know you will decline all
conferences, as you have taken your stand and have nothing more to say. Potter will, no doubt, intimate to the
men that refusal…means running only as Non-Union. This may cause acceptance, but I do not think so. The
chances are, you will have to prepare for a struggle, in which case the notice should go up promptly on the
morning of the 25th [of June]. Of course you will win, and win easier than you suppose, owing to the present
condition of markets.”¹⁸

Carnegie need not have worried about Frick’s resolve. On May 30, Frick took the train to Homestead to meet
with John Potter and give him final instructions on the negotiations. Potter was to summon the Amalgamated
representatives to a meeting and present them with the company’s non-negotiable wage scales. The tonnage rates
for the skilled workers in the open-hearth furnaces, the plate mill, and the slabbing mill “would be reduced
by 15–18 percent for most workers, and by as much as 35 percent for some.” The minimum rate at which the
skilled workers would be paid would be reduced from current $25 per ton to $22. To make the terms of the new
contract even more unpalatable, Potter was instructed to announce to the union that the new contract would
remain in effect until December 31, 1893, instead of June 30, 1893. The union had until June 24 to accept
these terms. If it did not do so, the firm would, as it had at Edgar Thomson, bypass the union and ask the
workmen to sign the contract as individuals.¹⁹

There was, of course, no way the Amalgamated could agree to this. On June 4, the Pittsburgh Post reported that
the firm’s ultimatum was “almost certain to be rejected. Developments now indicate that Homestead will be the
scene of a great conflict between capital and labor.” Among the most dangerous elements of the new contract
was the December 31 end date. As William T. Roberts, the chief negotiator for the Amalgamated, explained on
July 13, 1892, to a House of Representatives committee investigating conditions at Homestead, the steelworkers
feared negotiating a new contract in winter as “the burnt child dreads the fire. We know from past
experience—at least, I do—that when winter time comes around and our contract ends in the winter…they take
that opportunity at that time of the year to starve us into submission. They have done it on every
occasion.”²⁰

Frick and Carnegie, on either side of the Atlantic, prepared for the confrontation they had provoked. The best
scenario for the company was that the lockout[*][1] would last no longer than a month or two. If that were the
case, Frick promised to take up Carnegie on his offer of a vacation in Scotland. “I note you have taken a
place in Scotland,” Frick remarked in his June 2 letter. “Have no doubt it is a very fine one, and I might
take a notion to run over for a short time the latter part of August, say thirty-day trip, if everything
should be going all right.” Frick was anticipating that by this time his wife, who had become pregnant within
weeks of Martha’s death the year before, would have delivered her baby and he would be free to leave for a
brief vacation.²¹

On June 10, Carnegie asked his cousin Dod, who was in St. Petersburg on armor business, to return to Britain
to recruit English and Scottish machinists as possible replacement workers should they be needed at Homestead.
“Have wired Lauder to St. Petersburg to come here and get you the men desired. Will, of course, handle very
carefully. I do not think anybody but he can do it. No reply from him yet. He may have left Petersburg this
morning.”²²

In mid-June, as both sides prepared for the confrontation, Carnegie reminded Frick that he had not forgotten
about his “orchestrion”—an elaborate, expensive automatic instrument that Frick had asked Carnegie to purchase
for him. Inside the “orchestrion” were a piano, two ranks of organ pipes, a triangle, a cymbal, and some
drums. The instrument was operated by changeable perforated paper rolls that contained melodies from opera and
the orchestral repertoire. Carnegie wanted to know whether Frick wanted his “finished in light or dark wood.”
Almost as an aside, he added to a letter filled with other items that “perhaps if Homestead men understand
that non-acceptance means Non-Union forever, they will accept.”²³

Frick was, at the time, more concerned with the looming battle at Homestead than with the finish of his
orchestrion. “There is really nothing new to report. The indications, however, point to a strike,” he reported
on June 20. “Regret to say that it does not seem to me that there is any other course open for us. We would
better make the fight and be through with it, expensive though it may be. However, a few days may change the
outlook.”²⁴

In a report mailed two days later, Frick informed Carnegie that a committee of non-union mechanics, which
claimed to represent one thousand boilermakers, engineers, machinists, pipefitters, carpenters, tinners,
painters, riggers, and other mechanics who were paid by the day, had agreed to continue working for three
years under the terms of the old contract. The only concession that Potter had made was to agree that the new
contract would expire in June, not January. The agreement, Frick thought, was sure to “demoralize the
Amalgamated more or less…. We will not be trifled with, and are prepared to carry out the policy we have
adopted. It may be that we will win without much difficulty, although I am not yet prepared to believe that we
will win without a pretty severe struggle, and am not sure, even with the agreement on the part of these men
to work, that they will do so, provided we find it necessary to bring in guards. It may be that a very few
men, if any, will report for work at first.”²⁵

While Frick remained doubtful that anything would be settled by late August, Carnegie now appeared almost
certain of it. He was delighted to hear that Frick was seriously considering running “over for a month. This
would be so wise that I doubt your doing so…. Bring a companion along. Choose the one you will most enjoy.”
Andrew White, the former Cornell president and now ambassador to Russia, planned to visit late in the summer.
Carnegie suggested that the two might travel together. In the meantime he was, “getting on well with my book.
Will promise not to bore you with it if you come. In Scotland we only play.”²⁶

On June 23, the day Frick received Carnegie’s cheery letter and a week before the Homestead labor contract was
to expire, he deviated from Carnegie’s instructions and met with union representatives at 10:00 A.M. at his
office in Pittsburgh. The meeting, he reported to Carnegie the next day, had not resulted “in anything. Of
course we could have talked all day with them, but made it as brief as possible…. They had the impression that
Potter got us to consent to changing the minimum to $23.00, but we would make no other changes…. We are now
preparing for a struggle…. It may be, of course, that they will yet propose to accept our ultimatum, but we
will have no more conferences with them.”²⁷

On Saturday, June 25, which was payday at Homestead, Frick, following Carnegie’s directive, posted notices at
the plant and throughout the town declaring that, the Amalgamated having turned down its final offer, the firm
would have nothing more to do with it. Construction was already underway on what would become known as “Fort
Frick.” The mill was barricaded behind 11-foot-high fences, with portholes just large enough for guns to stick
through. On top of the fence were 18 inches of jagged barbed wire. Giant searchlights of 2,000-candlepower
each and fire plugs “with an enormous water pressure in each” were erected at the entrances.²⁸

There could be only one reason, the Pittsburgh Post reported, for the barricades, barbed wire, and
searchlights. The company had decided to bring in scabs. “This open preparation for battle has a demoralizing
influence upon the men, who have been preparing to conduct a strike, if there be any, peaceably and without
violence. They do not relish the red rag of defiance flung right into their faces…. The coolest of the men do
not deny that there will be grave trouble if the firm attempts to introduce into the mills non-union or scab
labor.”²⁹

The Homestead workers, especially the skilled ones, had an ownership stake in the mills. They were proud to
work in the nation’s most technologically advanced steel mill—articles in the National Labor Tribune were as
celebratory as those in the Iron Age—but they regarded their right to remain at their jobs as sacrosanct. They
would not give up their positions without a fight.

There were other reasons, every bit as significant, why the Amalgamated men could not allow substitute workers
to take their places. Homestead was a company town—there were no other jobs available for the men who worked
in the plant. Should they lose theirs, they would have to pull up stakes and leave the town and mill they had
built.

“The feeling of ownership,” Pittsburgh journalist Arthur Burgoyne would write the year after the strike, “had
a place in the reasoning of these simple people. Many of them had bought and paid for their homes and were
pillars of the borough government. Some were still paying for their dwellings…. It was clearly impossible that
men of substance, heads of families, solid citizens of a prosperous municipality could be rooted up, as it
were, out of the soil in which they were so firmly planted and beaten to earth by the creature of their
labor—for without labor, it was argued, capital would be impotent and valueless.”³⁰

The day the notices were posted, confirming the rumors that the men were being locked out of their jobs and
their plant, Frick wrote Robert Pinkerton to reconfirm an earlier arrangement made with him on June 2 to
dispatch “300 guards for service at our Homestead mills as a measure of precaution against interference with
our plan to start operation of the works on July 6th, 1892.” When asked later why he didn’t use sheriff’s
deputies to protect his property, Frick stated plainly that three years earlier the company had called on the
sheriff for protection at Homestead, but that the sheriff and his deputies had been outmanned by the strikers.
“We did not propose this time to be placed in that position.”³¹

On Tuesday, June 28, Frick shut down the plate mill and one of the open-hearth furnaces, locking out the
workers two days before their contract expired.

On Wednesday, he shut down the remaining departments at Homestead, completing the lockout. That afternoon, the
Amalgamated presented Carnegie and Frick’s final offer to 2,800 Homestead steelworkers, skilled and unskilled,
at a meeting at the opera house. A motion was made to close the meeting to outsiders and reporters, but it was
defeated. The steelworkers had nothing to hide. They were breaking no laws, only exercising their rights as
citizens, union members, and workers. It was clear from the barricades being erected around the plant that
Frick was preparing for battle. They had no choice but to defend themselves and their jobs. When a union
member stepped forward and declared that he had information that three hundred rollers were en route to
Homestead from Philadelphia, “there was,” the Pittsburgh Post reported the next morning, “dead silence, but
only for a moment, and then the uproar broke loose. One man yelled: ‘Let them come; we’ll roll them,’ and
various other threats were made.” The meeting was adjourned, and the Amalgamated executive committee went into
closed session.³²

Worried about preventing violence, the executive committee elected an “advisory committee” of fifty, with
representatives from each of the eight lodges, to coordinate resistance and keep the peace during the lockout.
Burgess McLuckie was chosen as a member of the committee; Hugh O’Donnell, a heater at the 119-inch plate mill,
was elected its chairman. O’Donnell was a thirty-year-old Irishman, a former newspaperman, a great speaker,
and was reported to have the prettiest wife in Homestead. A striking-looking but not handsome man, thin, his
hair thick on top and closely cut on the sides, with a full walrus mustache, O’Donnell took immediate charge
of the advisory committee. “Special committees were appointed to patrol the river stations and all entrances
to the town,” Burgoyne wrote. “The patrols were directed to cover their beats night and day and report to the
advisory committee. Arrangements were also made to have the river patrolled in skiffs, and the steamboat
‘Edna’ was secured to aid in this service.” The advisory committee, not willing to supplant the local
government, but rather to serve as its adjunct, offered to put at Burgess McLuckie’s disposal as many men as
were needed to keep the peace. “The saloons were visited and the proprietors requested to use special
precautions against the promotion of drunkenness and disorderly gatherings, under pain of being required to
close their establishments.” Determined that the workers would not be the ones to initiate violence, the
effigies of Frick and Carnegie that had been strung up all over town were torn down.³³

On Sunday, July 3, a drizzly, damp day at Homestead, attendance at church was light as the locked-out
steelworkers took their positions as pickets and lookouts along the river, the roads, and the railways leading
into Homestead. “We do not propose,” McLuckie told a New York World reporter, “that Andrew Carnegie’s
representatives shall bulldoze us. We have our homes in this town, we have our churches here, our societies
and our cemeteries. We are bound to Homestead by all the ties that men hold dearest and most sacred.” The
Carnegie companies might have succeeded in importing scab workers into their other plants, but “they never
have imported a man into Homestead, and…they never will. We shall not permit it…. Our people here are
hard-working, peaceable, quiet, progressive. There is not a better class of people in any town of this state….
We are asking nothing but our rights, and we will have them if it requires force to get them.”³⁴

On Monday, which was the Fourth of July, “peace reigned at Homestead,” the Pittsburgh Dispatch noted, as those
steelworkers not on duty as lookouts joined their families for a day of “picnics, excursions, and the shooting
of fireworks…. The town was alive with rockets and Roman candles. The great works up the river were dark and
silent, and the guards of the Amalgamated Association make their rounds and keep their watch.”³⁵

In Pittsburgh, Frick formally requested the assistance of the Allegheny County sheriff in clearing Amalgamated
pickets from the perimeter of the works. He also wrote Robert Pinkerton to finalize plans for the delivery of
the detectives: “We have all our arrangements perfected to receive your men at Ashtabula [Ohio], and to
conduct them to Bellevue Station, a few miles below this City on the Ohio River, where they will be
transferred to two boats and two barges…manned with reliable men, and will at once start for our Homestead
works, and should arrive there about 3 oclock on the morning of the 6th. The boats are well provisioned, all
the uniforms etc. that you have had shipped…are on board the boat. There will also be on board the boats the
sheriff’s Chief Deputy who will accompany and remain with your men. We have taken all possible precaution to
keep the arrangements quiet, but, of course, it is more than likely that we will not be successful in this.”³⁶

“My time,” Frick wrote Carnegie that Fourth of July,

has been very much occupied for several days past looking after all matters pertaining to the Homestead labor
trouble. I think we have everything in about as good shape as it could well be.

The workmen seem to be well organized, and have things, so far, very much their own way, that is to say, are
guarding every avenue to the works; stopping all who may, or try, to get in the works. This is rather in our
favor in view of our arrangements. We have a thorough understanding with the Sheriff. Notice, as per enclosed
copy, has been served on him today, and we are having 350 proclamations such as he put up at Duquesne last
year, printed for him, which he will, tomorrow, take to Homestead, and distribute and post, at the same time
distributing around our works as many Deputy Sheriffs as he can secure.

Tomorrow night, about 11 o’clock, 300 watchmen obtained from Pinkerton, will leave the cars at Bellevue
Station on the Fort Wayne Road, and take passage on two barges, and two boats that will be there ready to
receive them. They will go at once to Homestead, reaching there, we hope, about three or four o’clock on the
morning of the 6th. The barges are well fitted up, and well provisioned, as are also the Boats. The Boats
contain the uniforms, the arms, the ammunition, etc.

Potter, with 5 or 6 of his men, will join these guards or watchmen, at Ashtabula tomorrow afternoon at 5
o’clock, and be with them until they land at Homestead. One or two Deputy Sheriffs will go down to Bellevue
Station tomorrow evening, and accompany the guards or watchmen, on the boats to Homestead. We expect to land
our guards or watchmen in our property at Homestead without much trouble, and this once accomplished we are,
we think, in good position.

We have numerous applications from men who are anxious to go to work at Homestead, whom we can, by the use of
the boats, deliver from time to time, into the works, where we have everything prepared to receive them and to
care for them. Having secured the hearty cooperation of the Sheriff and such watchmen, we think, that we will
be able to afford protection to all the men who are willing to work for us. The best information I can get
leads me to believe that we have the sympathy of our men at Bessemer [i.e., Edgar Thomson] and at Duquesne,
although I get some reports to the contrary….

Homestead seems to be the centre of attraction, and I do not think anything has been left undone towards
securing for us a complete victory at that place. Doubtless by the time this reaches you it will be
uninteresting, at least I trust so…. The new organization [Carnegie Steel, which, as of July 1, 1892, was the
corporate owner of all the steel plants] started off without any friction, there is but one fly in our
ointment at present, and that is the Homestead trouble. The newspapers, as usual, are inclined towards the
enemy, and doubtless will raise a great howl when they discover that we have the audacity to attempt to guard
and protect our property. I had the article [Carnegie had earlier urged him to get his side of the story to
the newspapers], written by Mr. Weeks [editor of Iron Age and a publicist for the steel industry] from data
furnished by us to him, reproduced in all of the morning and evening papers of this City, so that I think our
position is well defined. We shall, of course, keep within the law, and do nothing that is not entirely legal.

Mailed you a cable to New York to be sent from there tomorrow, giving about as much information as I well
could.³⁷

The cable would reach Carnegie within hours of transmission; the letter would take ten days to two weeks. Had
he found any of this objectionable he could have cabled a response that would have reached Frick in hours.
There is no record of any such message having been sent.

It is clear from the matter-of-fact nature of his report that Frick was confident that Carnegie would take no
issue with what he had done—or expected to do. They had gone over strategy for breaking the strike in New York
and confirmed or amended their plans in numerous letters and cables since then. Carnegie would spend the rest
of his life declaring in one form or another that he would have handled the Homestead strikers differently had
he been on site. This July 4 letter is evidence that he knew from the very beginning that Frick intended to
call in the Pinkertons and had no objections.

On July 5, Sheriff William McCleary of Allegheny County arrived at Homestead by train. At 10:00 A.M., he met
with O’Donnell’s advisory committee, which offered to provide him with as many men as he thought necessary to
preserve the peace and protect company property. The sheriff turned them down and proceeded to the Homestead
works on his own. He returned a few hours later to the third floor in the Bost Building, where the advisory
committee had its offices. While he confessed to having seen “no signs of disorder any where,” he notified the
committee that he was obligated nonetheless to send deputies to protect the mill. Later that afternoon, he
returned with ten armed deputies, who, getting down from their train, were engulfed by a crowd of townspeople
and escorted back to the Bost Building, where the advisory committee suggested that they leave Homestead. The
deputies were then marched to the steamer Edna, which returned them across the river.³⁸

At ten-thirty that evening, the train from Ashtabula, Ohio, with three hundred Pinkertons on board, arrived at
Bellevue, where it was met by Homestead’s general superintendent John Potter, several of his foremen, and
Sheriff McCleary’s chief deputy. The Pinkertons boarded two barges, pushed by two tugs, one of which broke
down immediately. Inside the barges were uniforms, provisions, ammunition, 300 pistols, and 250 Winchester
rifles.

Frick had hoped that by landing the Pinkertons in the middle of the night, they might escape detection by the
steelworkers’ patrols, but a lookout in Pittsburgh spotted the barges as they passed the “point” where the
Ohio River branches into the Allegheny and the Monongahela and sent a warning telegram to Homestead a little
after 2:30 A.M. on July 6. The advisory committee, on receiving the telegram, dispatched the Edna to intercept
the barges. When the Edna’s captain caught sight of them, he blew the whistle to signal the workers on shore.
That set off a further round of whistles, bells, and men on horseback shouting the news of the coming
invasion.

A crowd of townspeople, workers, women, and children, many of them armed with revolvers, rifles, and ancient
Civil War weapons, upon hearing the alarm, surged toward the riverbank, tearing down the fence that separated
the town proper from the works and pushing past it toward the company’s pier. Among them were Mother Finch, a
white-haired steelworker’s widow who ran a Homestead saloon and claimed to have seen forty strikes in her
life, and Billy Foy, a middle-aged Englishman who had been head of the local Salvation Army and now worked as
a laborer at the mill. As dawn broke, Mother Finch, Billy Foy, the members of the advisory committee, and
hundreds of others watched from the pier as the barges, with the Pinkertons on board, were pushed toward land.
Hugh O’Donnell worked his way to the front of the crowd, where he pleaded with the Pinkertons to turn back.
“We have not damaged any property, and we do not intend to…. In the name of God and humanity don’t attempt to
land! Don’t attempt to enter these works by force!” Captain Frederick Heinde of the Pinkertons announced to
the crowd on shore that he was not going to abandon his mission. “We were sent here to take possession of this
property and to guard it for this company…. We don’t wish to shed blood, but we are determined to go up there
and shall do so. If you men don’t withdraw, we will mow every one of you down and enter in spite of you. You
had better disperse, for land we will.”³⁹

As Captain Heinde walked toward the shore, Billy Foy threw himself across the gangplank, a pistol in his hand.
Heinde slashed at him with his billy club. Other workers surged forward, including Joseph Sotak, a leader of
the Eastern Europeans. Shots rang out. Foy and Captain Heinde fell. More shots were fired from shore and from
the barge. Three steelworkers were killed instantly, including Joseph Sotak, who was hit in the mouth. Dozens
were wounded, including O’Donnell, who was grazed in the thumb. The Pinkertons fared only slightly better;
several were wounded, one of whom would later die. No one knew who had fired the first shot, but it didn’t
matter much anymore. The Pinkertons retreated to their barge. O’Donnell tried to take control of the crowd. It
was not yet 5:00 A.M.

The tugboat Little Bill took the injured Pinkertons to the opposite shore, leaving the Pinkertons on board the
barges to fend for themselves. The crowd on shore hastily erected defenses fashioned from scrap iron to
protect it from the next round of fire from the Pinkertons’ Winchesters. Dozens more townspeople had arrived
by now, many armed with weapons, some with skiffs which they took out onto the river, hoping to surround the
barges. A 20-pound cannon, a relic of the Civil War, was mounted on the opposite shore and fired. It missed
its mark: Shots flew over the barges and landed on shore, killing one of the steelworkers. The advisory
committee members and union officials tried to quiet the crowd, but the presence of the dead and wounded among
them made that impossible. The crowd wanted revenge, revenge for their losses, revenge against the Pinkertons
who had invaded their town.

News of the battle was telegraphed to Pittsburgh, where hundreds of workingmen, some of whom had seen the
smoke or heard the gunfire up river, prepared to march on Homestead in support of the steelworkers. They were
joined by a small army of reporters and illustrators who would file regular updates throughout the days to
come, some of which would make their way, by transatlantic cable, to London and on to Carnegie in Scotland.

At 8:00 A.M., the Pinkertons made another attempt to leave their barges, but were repulsed by gunfire. They
fired back. Three more Homestead steelworkers died and several others were wounded. The gunfight continued,
with a second Pinkerton killed. The crowd on shore, refusing to obey the advisory committee and retreat, and
unable to pierce the shell of the barges and get to the Pinkertons, tried to set the river on fire by
launching toward the barges a raft burning with oil-soaked wood. When that failed, they tried again with a
burning railroad flatcar, then with explosives and fireworks left over from the Fourth of July. Later that
afternoon, several townsfolk, having secured hoses and a hand pump from the fire station, tried to pump oil
into the river and set it afire.

In Pittsburgh, the Allegheny County sheriff spent the day holed up in his office with Boss Chris Magee. With
the violence showing no signs of abating, the sheriff telegraphed Democratic governor Robert Pattison,
requesting that he send the militia. The governor, who owed nothing to Carnegie or Frick, refused, ordering
the sheriff to restore order.

As the afternoon wore on, Hugh O’Donnell and William Weihe of the Amalgamated succeeded in convincing the
crowd in the mill yard and on the pier to allow the Pinkertons to surrender, leave their boats, and be
escorted to the opera house, where they would be held until the sheriff arrived to indict them for murder and
take them away for trial. At 5:00 P.M., the Pinkertons hoisted the white flag of surrender. The advisory
committee dispatched volunteers to lead them off the barges, over the gangplank, and up the quarter-mile
embankment into the yard. The crowd, incensed at being fired at by the Pinkertons all day and furious at the
loss of life on shore, formed itself into a gauntlet, some 600 yards long. As the Pinkertons, easily
identified in their blue uniforms, climbed the embankment, they were marched through and pummeled by fists,
stones, and wooden clubs. The increasingly bloody procession proceeded through the steelworks and exited the
main gate bound for the opera house, where it was met by yet another angry crowd. The newspaper reporters had
a field day describing the bloodthirsty women and men who, “frenzied by the long day of fighting and
bloodshed,” thirsted for revenge. While the Pinkertons “screamed for mercy, they were beaten over the head
with clubs and the butt end of rifles. You could almost hear the skulls crack. They were kicked, knocked down
and jumped upon. Their clothes were torn from their backs, and when they finally escaped it was with faces of
ashen paleness and with the blood in streams rushing down the backs of their heads staining their clothes.” So
wrote a reporter for the New York World. The coverage everywhere was much the same, with images of murderous
steelworkers, shrewish wives, and pistol-bearing children assaulting innocent-looking Pinkertons. Though the
scene was indeed horrendous to watch and report on, the crowd was not nearly as bloodthirsty as the newspapers
described it. While several Homestead workers died in the gunfire that preceded the surrender, no Pinkerton
lost his life in the gauntlet.⁴⁰

[image]

The sheriff and his deputies arrived after midnight on July 7 to remove the Pinkertons. No arrests were made,
no indictments handed down. That same day, the citizens of Homestead buried three of their dead; three more
were buried the following day. The Reverend J. J. McIlyar of the First Methodist Episcopal Church presided
over the funeral of one of the men, John Morris, a twenty-eight-year-old Welsh immigrant who had been a
skilled worker at the mill. McIlyar had no doubt where the blame lay for the dead and wounded of Homestead:
“Somebody employed these men, of course. They didn’t come without orders…. These hired fighters attacked the
men of this quiet, peaceful, order-loving community, and the men of Homestead defended themselves. This
blessed man lying here; this mortal man, an affectionate husband, sober and industrious, gentlemanly in
manner, was killed because a conflict provoked by the Pinkerton clan made it necessary for him and his
fellow-workmen to protect their homes and families.”⁴¹

On July 8, the Pittsburgh Commercial Gazette, no friend of the steelworkers, reported that the streets of
Homestead and the Carnegie works were being patrolled by volunteers of the advisory committee, who had
repaired the fences and damage done in the yards the day before. Though the “strikers” were once again
“masters of the situation,” they exhibited no signs of triumph or exhilaration but waited, fearfully, for the
company to attack again. “In all sides of the long tortuous, and at night dangerous-to-tread streets,” the
reporter noted, “men, women, and children are to be seen sitting on stairs and in doorways. They dread the
coming of another assault of armed men on the works. The anxiety of these people is something terrible. They
have brothers, fathers, sons among the strikers and they momentarily fear the sounding of the alarm, the crack
of Winchesters and the booming cannon that means the death or the wounding of their own loved ones or of
neighbors, friends or shopmates of their own bread-winners…. A Sunday-like quiet has prevailed here all day
and will continue until another attempt is made by the Carnegie company to land men on the mill property.”⁴²

As the last of the steelworkers were being buried in Homestead, Frick sat for an interview with a handpicked
correspondent from the Philadelphia Press. If Frick had learned anything from Carnegie, it was the importance
of getting out the company’s side of the story. The union leaders were masters at this. They had earlier
selected a small committee to communicate with the press. Not an hour passed without some member of the
Amalgamated press committee paying a visit to Harrigan’s ice cream parlor and reading to the reporters who
gathered there from a stack of supportive telegrams and letters.

Frick had no intention of pandering to the press or the public, but he had his own constituencies, including
but not limited to state and federal officials, with whom he needed to communicate. “The question at issue is
a very grave one,” he reported in the Philadelphia Press interview, which was reprinted in newspapers across
the country and in Europe on July 8, 1892. “It is whether the Carnegie Company or the Amalgamated Association
should have absolute control of our plant and business at Homestead. We have decided, after numerous fruitless
conferences with the Amalgamated officials…to operate the plant ourselves. I can say with the greatest
emphasis that under no circumstances will we have any further dealings with the Amalgamated Association as an
organization.” The Amalgamated had broken the law by trespassing on company property and preventing the
Pinkertons from landing and protecting the mill, as they had been hired to do. It was now up to the
“authorities of Allegheny County” to take back the mill from the union and return it to the control of the
company. If the sheriff was unable to accomplish this task, “it is certainly the duty of the governor of the
State to see that we are permitted to operate our establishment unmolested…. While nobody could regret the
occurrences of the last few days more than myself,” Frick had no choice but to do his duty, “as the executive
head of the Carnegie Company, to protect the interests of the association. We desire to, and will protect our
property at all hazards.”⁴³

On July 8, as his interview appeared on the front pages of newspapers throughout the country, Frick’s wife
Adelaide gave birth prematurely to a very sick baby boy, Henry Clay Frick, Jr. That same day, Hugh O’Donnell,
members of the advisory committee, and elected town leaders boarded the train to Harrisburg in a last-ditch
attempt to persuade Governor Pattison not to send in the militia as Frick had demanded. Governor Pattison, who
had earlier resisted, could do so no longer. On July 10, he ordered all 8,470 members of the Pennsylvania
National Guard to Homestead to “protect all persons [i.e., the owners of the Carnegie works] in their rights
[of private property] under the constitution and laws of the State.” The troops arrived in the middle of the
morning on July 12 and took possession of the plant—and the town—from the advisory committee.

Hundreds of thousands of words were daily being written on the battle of Homestead as the armies of reporters
went looking for stories. Preachers, pastors, politicians, steelworkers, union leaders, Pinkerton men, tugboat
captains, Homestead officials, sheriff’s deputies, self-proclaimed poets, and of course H. C. Frick grabbed
their moments in the headlines. One voice was conspicuously silent.

[1]: footnote22.html

## TWENTY-FOUR

## Loch Rannoch, the Summer of 1892

ON JULY 6, as the Pinkertons attempted to land at Homestead, Andrew Carnegie was enjoying his favorite
pastime, being driven “behind four superb grays in the most elaborate coach that Scotland has ever seen upon
its roads.” The night before, after dedicating a new Carnegie library in Aberdeen on the east coast of
Scotland, he had received a telegram from Frick: “Small plunge, our actions and position there unassailable
and will work out satisfactorily.” Late that afternoon (morning on the American east coast), as news of the
battle of Homestead made its way by cable across the Atlantic, he and Louise were met by reporters at Braemar
where they were to spend the night. Carnegie uncharacteristically refused to talk to the reporters. The next
morning, the Carnegies’ carriage stopped at Pitlochry, where he visited the local cable office and responded
to Frick’s message: “Cable received. All anxiety gone since you stand firm. Never employ one these rioters.
Let grass grow over works. Must not fail now. You will win easily next trial only stand firm law and order
wish I could support you in any form.”¹

The Carnegies drove another thirty miles to Kinloch Rannoch, where they left their coach for a noon meal at
the Dunalastair Hotel. Approached by a correspondent from the New York Herald, Carnegie again had little to
say. “The strike is most deplorable, and the news of the disaster, which reached me at Aberdeen, grieved me
more than I can tell you. It came on me like a thunderbolt in a clear sky. I must positively decline to enter
into any discussion as to the merits or demerits of the case. All I will say is that the strike did not take
place in the old Carnegie works, but the difficulty has been entirely in the recently acquired works.”²

Louise and Andrew’s final destination was Rannoch Lodge, in the central Highlands, which they had leased for
the season. No sooner had they arrived than a reporter from the Pulitzer papers appeared at the front door to
request an interview. He was “received by a dignified English servant in blue livery,” who ushered him into a
reception room, lined with twenty-eight pairs of antlers. In the center of the room was a table with “two
newspapers open and articles in them marked.” After a brief wait, “Mr. Carnegie came through the hall with a
quick, energetic step and entered the room. The correspondent asked him if he cared to say anything in regard
to the troubles at his mills, and Mr. Carnegie in the most contemptuous and insulting manner replied: ‘I have
nothing whatever to say. I have given up all active control of the business, and I do not care to interfere in
any way with the present management’s conduct of this affair.’” Asked again if he “did not still exercise a
supervision of the affairs of the company,” Carnegie repeated himself. “I have nothing whatever to say on that
point. The business management is in the hands of those who are fully competent to deal with any question that
may arise.” He admitted to receiving “several cables and among them several asking my interference with the
parties in control.”

Still digging, the reporter suggested that Carnegie might “have some opinion in the matter that you are
willing to express.” “No, sir,” Carnegie answered. “I am not willing to express any opinion. The men have
chosen their course and I am powerless to change it. The handling of the case on the part of the company has
my full approbation and sanction. Further than this I have no disposition to say anything.” Carnegie, who had
remained standing throughout the interview, left the room.³

This interview was carried in newspapers across the country. “MR. CARNEGIE FOUND,” read the headline of the
Pittsburgh Leader story. “A ‘LEADER’ MAN FOLLOWS HIM TO THE HIGHLANDS OF SCOTLAND. IN A CONTEMPTUOUS AND
INSULTING MANNER THE MILLIONAIRE TELLS THE CORRESPONDENT THAT HE IS SATISFIED WITH THE PRESENT MANAGEMENT—HE
IS PAYING $10,000 FOR SIX WEEKS’ USE OF A SHOOTING LODGE—SERVANTS IN LIVERY.”⁴

 

ANDREW CARNEGIE had chosen to spend the summer of 1892 in one of the more isolated spots in the central
Highlands. He had leased the hunting lodge on Loch Rannoch not because it was inaccessible to reporters, as
his critics would later charge, but because he needed a degree of isolation so that he could complete the book
he had been working on. At the time he rented the lodge in May, he believed that Frick had matters well in
hand at Homestead.

He and Louise would have preferred to return to Cluny for the summer, but the Macphersons had decided to make
repairs on the estate. Rannoch Lodge was a worthy successor. The house itself was a rather modest stone
hunting lodge—though with dozens of rooms, a formal garden courtyard in the rear, and plenty of outbuildings
for servants. It was located in one of the lushest and most spectacularly beautiful spots in the central
Highlands, on the western edge of Loch Rannoch, close to Rannoch Moor, an endless sea of heather, bog, and
stunted trees, so porous and swampy no road could be run through it. (The West Highland Railroad, which
stopped at Rannoch station, would not be built until 1894.) On either side of the loch were stands of pine,
larch, and birch trees rising over a ground covering of bracken, heather, and blueberries. Directly behind the
lodge were mountains, steep and inaccessible, which had for centuries served as hideouts for Scottish
nationalists and bandits on the run from the British authorities. The lake and the sky were breathtakingly
blue, the fishing superb, and the isolated setting suited to Carnegie’s purposes.

Though cut off from much of the world, with the nearest telegraph connection at Struan more than twenty miles
away, and the closest train station at Blair Atoll, a few miles further, Carnegie remained in touch with
Frick—by cable and post. Letters from Pittsburgh might take anywhere from ten days to two weeks to reach him,
but cable messages arrived only hours after they were sent.

On July 11, Frick sent Carnegie a detailed report of the lockout, some newspaper articles, and copies of his
correspondence with his lawyers, Robert Pinkerton, and the sheriff’s office. “There is no question but what
the firing was begun by the strikers,” Frick insisted. “All that I have to regret is that our guards did not
land, and, between ourselves, think that Potter was to blame. He did not show the nerve I expected he would.”
Anticipating that Carnegie might blame him for the deaths, injuries, and outpouring of negative publicity,
Frick preempted any such criticism.

Would like to say just here that I had not overlooked the fact that an effort to introduce guards at Homestead
so soon might cause trouble, but was just as well satisfied that it would cause trouble if done at any later
date, and we were only letting our property lie idle awaiting the pleasure of one of the worst bodies of men
that ever worked in a mill, so concluded it was better to have trouble, if we were to have it, at once. We
would so much earlier get our works started and in our own control, and I have not lost any opportunity since
the trouble of urging the Sheriff to give us possession of our property, and, as he was unable, to insist that
the Governor bring out the military. We finally have succeeded in the latter, and think before long we will be
able to resume operations…. We will lose no time in resuming operations at Homestead, but it shall be done
with the greatest care, selecting the best men, and re-organizing that entire works, so that we do not employ
any more men than actually necessary. As you can understand, my time is pretty well taken up, and my letters
consequently will have to be as brief as possible. Feel sure, when you become thoroughly acquainted with all
of the details that you will be satisfied with every action taken in this lamentable matter.⁵

The next day, Carnegie responded in a lengthy letter in his own handwriting, addressed to “My dear Friend.” He
was delighted to receive Frick’s detailed briefing (which had been cabled to him), but was anxious to learn
even more about the situation at Homestead. “All we know here is the repulse of guards, etc.—What your next
step is to be cannot tell. If a waiting game I think you might be let alone furnishing armor for Govt. This
would give you a nucleus and the works would look alive—quite a point.” Carnegie had no objection to Frick’s
bringing back the Pinkertons to secure the works, provided, that is, that Robert Pinkerton was prepared to
fight. “If Pinkerton decides they cannot afford to be beat they can easily win because the striking force will
rapidly dwindle—after the excitement many will clear away fearing more trouble.” As useful as the Pinkertons
might be in the short run, however, Carnegie recognized—as did Frick—that no “private” police force could be
as effective as the state in restoring and maintaining the company’s rights to its private property. The
situation at Homestead was intolerable and would remain so until the strikers had been demoralized, defeated,
and demobilized. “Why the Governor will not be compelled to keep order by public sentiment I can’t see—seems
to me you have only to keep appealing to Sheriff and holding County responsible. No Governor can afford to let
a mob conquer.”

Carnegie suggested that Frick maintain the lockout for “two or three months,” then announce that he was
starting up the plant with a new crew of workers, because it would not be possible, “after recent deplorable
events,” for management and the striking workers to ever again entertain the “pleasant relations” that had
once existed at Homestead. “We assume that men will not desire to work for a firm who has in their opinion so
treated them as to justify them to attack and kill many men who were employed only to preserve peace and
order. Such men must desire to find employers who will treat them better—So be it—The firm recognizes this
fully and the Supt. will give every man a certificate according to his merits, which may enable him to find
satisfactory employment. Without anger and with deep regret the firm now bids its recent tonnage
men—Farewell—Henceforth our paths are separate—we can labor together no more.”

It was an excellent plan—on paper. In reality, there was no way to assuage the anger at Homestead, no way that
the firm could now, after the loss of lives at the hands of the Pinkertons, claim that it still cared enough
for its skilled workers to help them find “satisfactory employment” elsewhere. Carnegie did not want Frick to
think he was dictating anything. He needed Frick in place and in control and feared doing anything that might
anger him. “Think it all over,” he wrote, “anything you do will be right. I only suggest—Am so sorry you have
this load to carry just now—but sky will clear rapidly—just as soon as men realize that they must seek work
elsewhere, no use waiting—they will melt away like snow in the summer.” He agreed entirely with Frick that the
works would have to be totally reorganized. “Even our clerks and Asst. Supts. might all be suspended—this
would show your resolve—nothing but victory, no matter whether this year or next.” As a postscript, he assured
Frick that “dollars don’t count—let pecuniary considerations go.” He then offered one last word of advice: “I
hope you are publishing short statement showing the few men affected—their wages and injustice of these
payments. Keep the public with you—try short statements.”⁶

Carnegie delivered his letter that morning to the nearest post office. When, later in the day, he received
word from Pittsburgh that Governor Pattison had decided to send in the militia, he cabled Frick from Struan
with his congratulations—and a warning: “Governor’s action settles matters. All right now. No compromise.”
Tough as Frick might be, Carnegie was, at least from a distance, tougher still. There would be no
negotiations, no communications, no compromise with the Amalgamated.⁷

 

THE SUMMER of 1892 was, in every conceivable way, going to be a difficult one for Andrew and Louise. Although
the American newspapers, preoccupied with reporting firsthand on the day-to-day drama of life at Homestead,
did not devote much space to the absentee owner, the British press, which had never enjoyed being lectured on
politics and morals by the expatriate author of Triumphant Democracy, seized on the story as a vivid
illustration of American backwardness and savagery. The correspondent for the New York Herald, the first
American newspaper to regularly report European news by cable—and the most adept at it—took notice on July 10
of “the keen delight with which the people of Great Britain view the difficulties at Homestead…. The British
papers have been uncompromisingly critical of Mr. Carnegie’s course.” The “atrocities” at Homestead and the
unwillingness of the federal government to intervene led the Daily Telegraph to suggest “a serious doubt
whether after all home rule in American works satisfactorily in practice.” The Times of London mockingly
called attention to Mr. Carnegie’s “singular” position. “An avowed champion of trade unions and of organized
labour, he now finds himself engaged in an almost ruinous conflict with the representatives of his own views.”
The London Echo headline asked: “WILL MR. CARNEGIE EXPLAIN? Mr. Carnegie is still silent. He continues to
drive about Scotland as though nothing had occurred.”⁸

The news from Pittsburgh remained rather distressing. There was no sign that the men of Homestead were any
closer to accepting the new contract, while their counterparts at Carnegie’s other works were threatening to
go out on sympathy strikes. Although Frick tried to put the best possible face on events, Carnegie prepared
himself for the worst. On July 14, responding to a cable in which Frick had predicted that Homestead “will be
running again soon,” Carnegie made it clear that he wished he “could share this view. The probability is, that
it will not run during this year. We had better make up our minds to this…. The Military cannot stay long with
you, and after they leave you may find it necessary to announce that the works will not run this year except
upon work for the government…. Starting a few months sooner or later is nothing compared with starting with
the right class of men. The only danger is, that you may be tempted to start too soon. Nothing will cure the
disease so thoroughly and give you peace in the future as a long stoppage now. I should be tempted, if in your
place, to announce that the works will be closed, government work excepted, for the remainder of the year if
the military departs and leaves an excited populace.”⁹

Carnegie was worried that Frick, in his desire to start up production and bring in scabs too soon, would make
matters worse. Replying to a letter from his cousin Dod on July 17, he confessed that things were not going
well. “Matters at home bad, such a fiasco trying to send guards by Boat and then leaving space between River
and fences for the men to get opposite landing and fire—still we must keep quiet and do all we can to support
Frick and those at seat of war. I have been besieged by interviewers—cables from New York, etc., but have not
said one word—silence is best. We shall win of course, but may have to shut down for months—Frick cable
yesterday Homestead started slowly—He thinks we’ll soon win.” The men at the Pittsburgh ironworks and the
Beaver Falls mills had gone out on sympathy strikes. “This was uncalled for they had no grievance but we must
not bother with them just now—Concentrate everything on Homestead. Win there—then talk to these foolish
men—all well.”¹⁰

The company’s mobilization of a private army of detectives to battle its own employees, though legal, had been
far from popular. The Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives, responding to outrage across the
country, sent investigators to Homestead on July 12 to interview Frick, Sheriff McCleary, Hugh O’Donnell, the
captain of the tug that had pushed the Pinkerton barges, and a number of union leaders and advisory committee
members. Frick was questioned extensively about the wage dispute that had precipitated the conflict. Why, he
was asked, did the tariff not protect the wages of the workingmen, as the Republican supporters of the tariff
had promised it would? He replied by denying that he had ever asked the government for the tariff. When Judge
William Oates, the committee chairman, asked him directly how much it cost to produce a ton of billets, Frick
refused to answer, on the grounds that doing so would disclose privileged information to his competitors.¹¹

Four days after the arrival of the congressional investigators, Frick declared the Homestead works open and
directed all Carnegie Steel employees who had not taken part in the disturbance to return to the mills. They
were given until July 21 to apply for their old positions and sign the new contract, after which their places
would be filled by others. Recruitment of substitute workers was already well underway. The one hundred new
houses that had been erected within the gates of the plant were, the firm let it be known, for these workers.

Openly advertising for scabs—and building houses for them—was provocative enough. But Frick poured salt into
the wounds by publicly demanding that the sheriff indict and arrest dozens of strike leaders, including Hugh
O’Donnell and Burgess John McLuckie, on charges of treason and the murder of two men, a Pinkerton and the
worker who had been accidentally killed by the cannon fire aimed at the Pinkerton barge. Criticism mounted of
his refusal to negotiate with the union, his use of the state militia as cover to bring in substitute workers,
and his attempt to stifle dissent by arresting union leaders.

Nonetheless, in his letters to Carnegie in Rannoch, Frick insisted that he had the situation under control.
“Looking back over the transactions of this month so far, or previous to that, I cannot see where we have made
any serious blunders, or done anything that was not proper and right as between our workmen and ourselves. We
certainly had no desire to do anything than what was just and right.” He was proceeding, despite criticism in
the press, to do whatever he could to “convict all of the men engaged in the riot and in law breaking.” He
recognized that this was “an uphill job,” as politicians would be reluctant in the end to incur the rancor of
“the men who have the votes.” He was sure of one thing only: “It will all blow over before long, and when we
do get started at our several works they will be all non-union, and if we treat the men as we always have
done, or desired to do, it certainly will be a long while before we will have any more labor trouble, and we
will be in position to secure the best results that will come from close and careful attention to the
business.”¹²

On Saturday, July 23, exactly one week after Frick reopened the Homestead works and began advertising for
scabs, a nervous young man with an accent appeared at his office door in Pittsburgh, sent in his card, and
asked for an appointment, claiming that he represented an employment agency ready to supply substitute
workers. He was told to return at two o’clock, which he did. Informed that Mr. Frick was still engaged, the
man—a twenty-five-year-old self-proclaimed anarchist named Alexander Berkman, who had no connection to anyone
in Homestead and no ties to the Amalgamated or the advisory committee—pushed past the office boy in the
anteroom, rushed into the inner office, pulled a revolver out of his pocket, and fired two shots at Frick at
very close range. John Leishman, Frick’s vice chairman, grabbed Berkman before he was able to get off a third
shot. While being wrestled to the ground, Berkman pulled a dagger made out of a file out of his pocket and
lunged at Frick, wounding him in the hip, on the right side, and the left leg below the knee. Frick was not a
big man, but neither was Berkman. Wounded and bleeding, Frick helped Leishman wrestle Berkman to the ground
and hold him there until the clerks, hearing the gunshots, roared into the room. Together, they subdued
Berkman before he was able to tear open the explosive mercury capsule in his mouth that would have killed him.

The room filled with police who took Berkman away and doctors who tended to Frick. Before agreeing to go to
the hospital, Frick asked that his ailing wife, who had given birth just two weeks earlier, be notified that
he had survived the attack. He then cabled identical messages to his mother and Carnegie: “Was shot twice but
not dangerously.” To Carnegie’s telegram, he added two more sentences: “There is no necessity for you to come
home. I am still in shape to fight the battle out.”¹³

Shaken by Frick’s message, Carnegie cabled his next-in-charge, Leishman. “Early anxiety his recovery…. Close
all works until recovery complete. We regard it as necessary something must be done to save Frick anxiety—his
recovery before all.” Carnegie’s first thought was to return to Homestead and take personal charge; but on
receiving the news that Frick would survive, he backed off. “Too glad at your escape to think of anything,”
Carnegie wired Frick as soon as he could. “Never fear my brave and dear friend my appearing on the scene as
long as you are able to direct matters from house and unless partners call. We know too well what is due to
you. Am subject to your orders. Louise, Stella [Louise’s sister], myself all relieved by cables just received.
Be careful to yourself. Be careful of yourself is all we ask.”¹⁴

Frick’s trials were only beginning. After being patched together at Mercy Hospital, he was sent to recuperate
at Clayton, his Pittsburgh estate, in the room next to that occupied by his bedridden wife, who had barely
survived the birth of their premature son. Eleven days after the shooting, Frick’s son and namesake died,
almost a year to the day after the death of six-year-old Martha. The funeral was held on Thursday, August 4.
On

[image]

Berkman entering Frick’s office, gun in hand, from Harper’s Weekly, August 6, 1892.

Friday, Frick awoke, dressed, breakfasted, and took the trolley car to his downtown office, where he sat down
to answer his mail.¹⁵

Carnegie cabled Frick his “hearty congratulations upon your return to the post of duty. Everything is right
when you and Mrs. Frick are right. Every other consideration insignificant. You owe it to all your friends to
be careful of yourself.”¹⁶

 

IN THE AFTERMATH of the Frick shooting, the reporters came looking for Carnegie again. The first to find him
was from the Associated Press. “Mr. Carnegie received the correspondent with great courtesy,” it was reported
on July 27. “He said he had resolutely refused to see any press representative in regard to the Pittsburgh
troubles, not because he had not the keenest interest in what was happening there, but because, living as he
did, thousands of miles away, he might not fully understand the local situation.” The reporter was convinced
that Carnegie’s “denial of responsibility for the strike trouble was final and that he would not interfere
with the administration of the works nor return to America for a long time.” As he made ready to depart,
Carnegie gave him a written statement to distribute: “I have not attended to business for the past three
years, but I have implicit confidence in those who are managing the mills. Further than that I have nothing to
say.” Reading this account (or any of the others that Carnegie would give to the press or to his friends in
the months to come), one would not have known that he had conferred with Frick before he left for Europe in
April and remained in touch with him, by cable and post, ever since.¹⁷

 

THE YEAR 1892 was a presidential election year. With the two parties evenly matched and Pennsylvania up for
grabs, Republican Benjamin Harrison, running for reelection, could ill afford to concede any workingmen’s
votes to the Democratic challenger, Grover Cleveland. Unfortunately, the events at Homestead did not augur
well for the Republicans come November.

Burgess John McLuckie had, from the very beginning, politicized the strike by reminding his constituents that
Pittsburgh workingmen had “been persuaded to vote the Republican ticket four years ago in order that our wages
might be maintained. As soon as the election was over,” however, manufacturers like Carnegie began to cut
wages. “You men who voted the Republic ticket voted for high tariff and you get high fences, Pinkerton
detectives, thugs and militia!”¹⁸

It was imperative, local and national Republicans believed, to remove the Homestead issue from the campaign as
soon as possible. On July 9, the Pittsburgh papers were reporting, falsely, that Pittsburgh boss Christopher
Magee had cabled Carnegie in Scotland, asking him to settle the strike for the good of the party. What Magee
had done was to arrange a meeting in Pittsburgh between Republican campaign officials and Hugh O’Donnell.
O’Donnell, who feared that with the state militia in place, Frick would have no trouble bringing in enough
scabs to break the strike and bust the union, hoped to broker an agreement before it was too late. Though
under indictment for murder, he was put on a train to New York City, where he met with Whitelaw Reid, the
editor and publisher of the New York Tribune, and the Republican nominee for vice president. O’Donnell told
Reid that he would settle the strike on the company’s terms if the firm would allow the Amalgamated lodges to
stay in place. (He didn’t tell him that he had no authorization from the advisory committee or the union to do
so.) Reid, unable to get Carnegie’s address from Frick’s office, asked the American consul in London to
transmit the cable with O’Donnell’s terms to Carnegie in Scotland.¹⁹

Carnegie did not receive the cable until July 28. While he assumed that Reid was acting on behalf of President
Harrison and the Republican Party, he was confused as to how to respond. There had, in the past, been little
call on him to make a choice between the Republican Party and his business interests, but this was precisely
what Reid was asking of him. If he assented, he would help the party but at the cost of saddling himself with
the Amalgamated for another three years. If, on the other hand, he turned down the request to reopen
negotiations and recognize the union, the party would suffer in the upcoming elections.

Carnegie’s initial response was to welcome Reid’s intervention and cable back his preliminary acceptance of
O’Donnell’s terms. Worried, however, that Frick might take offense and resign if he believed Carnegie was
negotiating a settlement on his own, he sent Frick a coded cable, affirming that Frick was to make the final
decision. “We have a telegram from Tribune Reid through high official London,” he cabled. “The proposition is
worthy of consideration. Replied ‘Nothing can be done. Send H. C. Frick document.’ You must decide without
delay. Amalgamated Association evidently distressed.”²⁰

Carnegie also sent telegrams to Dod and Phipps. The following morning, after hearing from them, he cabled
Frick again with a quite different message. “After due consideration we have concluded Tribune [i.e., Reid’s
proposal] too old. Probably the proposition is not worthy of consideration. Useful showing distress of
Amalgamated Association. Use your own discretion about terms and starting. George Lauder, Henry Phipps, Jr.,
Andrew Carnegie solid. H. C. Frick forever!”²¹

Reid, meanwhile, had dispatched a ranking member of the Republican National Committee, John Milholland, to
meet with Frick in Pittsburgh. Milholland found him “lying in bed when I called, his face and head swathed in
bandages.” Frick listened as Milholland explained why, for the good of the party, it was important that the
Homestead strike be settled at once. Frick then “declared emphatically that he would never consent” to
negotiating with the Amalgamated Association, even if asked to do so by President Harrison himself.²²

Frick was furious with Milholland and Reid, but more so with Carnegie. “I told Mr. Milholland,” he wrote
Carnegie three weeks after the event, “that I did not think the matter had been placed before you correctly or
you never would have entertained, certainly not heartily approve of any proposition to adjust matters with the
Amalgamated Association, and that I was surprised you did not avail yourself of the opportunity offered to
have emphatically told Mr. Reid and Mr. O’Donnell that you did not propose then, or at any time in the future,
to urge your partners here to treat with law-breakers and assassins.”²³

The following week, Frick, still incensed at Carnegie’s interference, cabled to tell him that Secretary of War
Stephen Elkins and Postmaster-General John Wanamaker wanted to meet with him. Convinced that they had been
dispatched by Reid and possibly Harrison to pressure him again to reach a settlement with the Amalgamated,
Frick, before they even arrived, asked Carnegie to cable Reid at once “most emphatically…that we will never
consent to any compromise of any kind…I know they think you will interfere sooner or later in their favor.”²⁴

Carnegie did as he was directed, instructing Reid by cable to “tell [Republican] party no compromise
possible.” The Amalgamated would, Carnegie added, demand as part of any settlement that newly hired substitute
workers be replaced by union stalwarts. This, the firm was honor-bound not to do. Two thousand hands were now
at work at Homestead and “every one of the twenty-three owners would sink works rather than dismiss one
man.”²⁵

Frick, still seething at the old man’s interference, was not yet satisfied. “Frankly, I do not think you sent
the proper message to Reid. You should have said emphatically, in my opinion, that we did not propose
hereafter, under any circumstances, to deal with the Amalgamated Association.”²⁶

Carnegie responded that he thought “I had sent a rattling message to Reid, its form is yours and not mine.” He
reiterated that he had tried to do exactly as Frick had instructed and apologized if he had gotten it wrong.
“You have no idea how much in the dark one is up here among the moors, twenty-three miles from a railway
station, and a wrong word might easily be said, since I am so ignorant of conditions, and just what you wished
to hit at the time and how to hit it.”²⁷

It turned out that Elkins and Wanamaker had no intention of asking Frick to settle the Homestead strike, as he
had feared. They wanted a campaign contribution. Frick met with Wanamaker at Cresson, then, in late October,
took the train to New York City to confer with Elkins at the Holland House. Elkins intimated that Carnegie had
promised $50,000 to the Republicans, but pledged that he would stand up “for the Carnegie interests,” whether
or not any contribution was made. Frick offered $25,000 for the general campaign and another $2,500 for
Virginia. “This pleased him very much,” Frick reported to Carnegie, “and he told me that he had had a long
talk that night with Secretary [of the Navy] Tracy, who was feeling very friendly towards us, and everything
was in good shape.” To protect Carnegie Steel from the imputation that the campaign contribution might be seen
as a quid pro quo for an armor contract (which in fact it was), Frick paid the $25,000 with an H. C. Frick
Coke Co. check and charged it “in a special account against the Carnegie Steel Co. If the election goes
Democratic, we would be in a position, if it were necessary, to take the ground that the Steel Company had
refused to contribute, owing to having had an armor contract with the Government, but that the Frick Coke Co.
had contributed…. Think we have done our duty, and hope Mr. Harrison will be re-elected.”²⁸

 

AS THE WEATHER at Homestead turned colder, more skilled and unskilled men began to drift back to work.
Carnegie’s major worry now was not the strike—which he knew the men would have to call off eventually—but
Frick, who he feared was on the point of breaking down. “I am glad to see from the papers that you took a few
days fishing,” Carnegie wrote on August 29. “Go often. Trout fishing has been my refuge during the last two
months. I caught eight dozen one day with one fly rod. You should be here, and I hope that Mrs. Frick and you
will be with us next summer. With fly-fishing and whist as passions, you will not be badly off for old age
when it comes…. As for your own behavior, the whole public is at your feet, and I am obliged to paint your
history every day; and, of course, you may suspect, I never fail to add ‘that is the kind of fellows our firm
is made up of––the ablest and best set of men in the world’; all not only partners, but friends.”²⁹

Responding to an August 19 letter in which Frick had confessed to “a serious problem at Homestead” getting
sufficient substitute workers to resume production, Carnegie replied only that he was “not surprised.” He had
always expected that the “stoppage” would last for at least three or four months. “Nothing but time will give
you victory; but this will do it, and we know that we have all the time we want.” Indulging again in wishful
thinking, as he did whenever his workers did not behave as he thought they should, he blamed the mess at
Homestead on the lack of a proper on-site general superintendent. Carnegie had convinced himself that the
Homestead workingmen had stood by the union because they had no faith that General Superintendent Potter would
look after their interests. He was not able—and would never be able—to face head-on the magnitude of his and
Frick’s miscalculation about the Homestead workers’ loyalty to their union and antipathy to the company. “An
exceptional manager there would have mitigated the trouble…. Nothing will ever be right at Homestead until a
great manager of men takes charge there…. Skilled workmen are the race horses, laborers the cart horses; the
former have to be driven with a rein although firm, yet gentle. There will never be peace, prosperity or
satisfaction at Homestead until the chief men respect and admire their manager. The new manager will win this
position in half the time if he be one of our own men, and not a stranger.” Frick had hinted that he might
bring in a “stranger” to run the mill. Carnegie made it clear that he considered Charles Schwab the best man
for the job. Never before had any one man run all the Carnegie steel plants, as Frick had done since July 1
and the organization of Carnegie Steel. For his own sanity and the well-being of the company, he urged Frick
again to begin taking time off from work. Carnegie reminded Frick that he’d had the orchestrion shipped to
Pittsburgh. He hoped Frick had received it and was finding “some respite from care in its music.” He
recommended again that Frick take up whist and put together a “whist club to meet at your house, at least once
a week.” Frick might “induce Mrs. Frick and Miss Childs [Frick’s sister-in-law] to take it up. We have been
playing here a little recently, and Mrs. Carnegie is going to make a ‘No. 1’ player. Thanks to you for it was
chiefly to please you that she began…. I caught a trout yesterday that weighed five pounds one and one-half
ounces, had only my light rod, and had to play with him an hour and a quarter up and down the Loch. That’s my
record.”³⁰

Troubled and hurt that Frick wrote nothing about his personal life, he tried, with increasing desperation, to
assure Frick that he cared for him as a friend as well as a partner. “The most important thing of all: You do
not tell me how you are,” he wrote on September 20. “Are you as strong as ever? We do not hear from any one
but yourself. Please do tell us how you are. Would almost like to hear from an impartial source—Leishman, or
Phipps or some one—that you are not overstraining yourself.”³¹

Frick’s cables and letters remained formal and businesslike, often brusque, sometimes almost reprimanding. He
disclosed little about his family, his pain, his suffering, his anxieties. Carnegie tried harder to convince
Frick that he cherished his friendship. At the bottom of the last page of his typed business letters, he added
long postscripts in pencil, intended not for the typist but for Frick’s eyes only. “I think many times a day
how slender the thread is upon which we depend—your good health—any ordinary man would have broken down ere
this—you may not until all is quiet but then you will feel it—I never felt ‘nerves’ until Louise was out of
danger & then I couldn’t walk a few squares—Keep before you a grand tour round the world…. There is nothing so
full of intense interests as a visit to Japan China India. If we don’t go home to New York we may take it
again and go with you, we four or five, or even six.”³²

Four days later, having heard nothing, he begged again for personal news: “Won’t you include in Cables reports
about…your own health & Mrs. Frick’s. Perhaps Mrs. C & I picture you all in much more plight than you
are—distance does distort views—Newspapers exaggerate—and our own minds at a great distance imagine.”³³

Carnegie had been on an emotional rollercoaster all summer. His concerns for Frick and for his businesses were
so intertwined that he could not tell where one began and the other ended. For his own peace of mind, he
needed to know that Frick was well and thriving, that his judgment was as sound as ever, that his personal
travails had not affected or diminished his capacity to run Carnegie Steel.

We don’t know what Frick wrote in the letter Carnegie opened on September 30, but we can surmise from the tone
of Carnegie’s response that his younger partner had, perhaps for the first time, mentioned the effects of his
infant son’s death on himself and his family. Stricken by guilt and shame at being so far distant,
geographically and perhaps emotionally, while Frick had been forced to do battle alone, Carnegie tried to
empathize with and suffer alongside his younger partner.

“Every now and then,” he wrote in pencil, on receiving the letter from Frick,

a flash comes upon your home life and troubles and I feel as if I could sink every mill and mine we own…. We
then think of you and Mrs. Frick and Mrs. Childs and your Home & could just rush off together to be with you—I
wish you would always include in your cables some home news. We have had our trials in all this business—hard
enough in some respects harder to bear standing apart in inaction, than if in the midst of the excitement but
these melt into nothingness compared to your home agonies. I don’t see how you can stand them. If you are like
me you will stand until all is quiet and you are out of it and then give way—I have not been so well the past
two weeks principally because there is less excitement—and besides fishing is over and then HP [Harry Phipps]
has been up for consolation and we have dwelt more upon the crisis—I hope to get my mind somewhat off it, by
rushing through Italy etc—fresh sights do much—one of the earliest moves you make should be to take all your
family direct to Geneva and bask in Italian scenes. I wish you could join us—You know we are good traveling
companions…. Business be hanged—Ever your friend…. We may go to Italy from London about 15th October but our
movements always subject to your wishes.³⁴

There was no response, perhaps because Frick still harbored suspicions as to Carnegie’s motives in continually
inquiring as to his health and suggesting he go on vacation. Frick could not rid himself of the fear that
Carnegie might, at any moment, return to Pittsburgh and take personal control, using Frick’s mental
instability as an excuse for relieving him of responsibility.

Frick’s fears were exacerbated when Dod Lauder, no doubt with Carnegie’s approval and perhaps at his
instigation, cabled from overseas that he “would be glad to come over if he could be of any use in any
position whatever.” “I wired him not to come at present,” Frick wrote Carnegie. “There is a feeling yet that
you will in some way interfere to settle this strike question, and Mr. Lauder’s coming over now would only
give them [the Amalgamated] further hope. There is nothing personal in this matter, so far as I am concerned.
I am, so far as I know, only doing what it seems to me to be for the interests of the owners of the property,
and if we want to get the full benefit of all that we have gone through, there must be no deviation from the
policy we have been pursuing all along. After it is all over, if it is thought somebody else can do better,
the position is open for him. I have never sought responsibility, nor, to my knowledge have I ever shirked
it.”³⁵

Carnegie was disturbed at Frick’s cavalier dismissal of a senior partner’s offer of assistance. Frick seemed
too confident in his own judgment and too resistant to seeking advice. “I am very sorry you misinterpret Mr.
Lauder volunteering to go to you in this crisis,” he wrote at once.

I feel in my case that to appear on the scene would be construed as a reflection upon you by the men and the
public and therefore remained silent and in torment, but we were all ready to take the first steamer should
you break down or intimate a wish to have me with you—so we stand today…. If I were in your place I would like
to have every partner around me and giving me boldly their various views…. HP was here and when he read your
June letter he said ‘Mr. Frick is too touchy. I never could give him my views as I always did give then in the
firm.’…I know how perplexed you must be and make all due allowance but I do hope you will not write again (if
you can possibly help it) about your position being open if it is thought that anyone can do better, etc.
etc…. We are married—all equal but bound to hear, consider and welcome views even contrary to his own, and if
outvoted bound legally to accept them and carry them out…. This is a crisis when we should all draw closer
together not only as partners, but as friends. I know Lauder and HP wish to be both and cooperate with you,
Don’t repel them—

One thing more. I have thought what was best for me to do. My judgment says banish the desire to return to New
York after election—and do Italy as you intended. Mrs. C. has never even been in Rome & I have promised to
spend a winter doing Italy, Greece etc.—perhaps should run over in the spring, holding myself at all times
ready to obey your call, or do anything you think desirable. I wish you would wire what you really think best.
I think Spring arrival best when all over and quiet…. If Homestead Works could only have disappeared under the
ground July 1st how thankful we should all have reason to be. But we must do our duty now. I trust you are not
to break down next. If you do I take the post of duty and do the best I can. If the Doctor tells you any signs
of overstraining appear, don’t let dollars interfere with your taking a round the world trip if necessary let
business go to the rear. You have plenty to keep your family upon.³⁶

The following week, Carnegie wrote again to warn Frick against attempting to take on too much. “This fight is
too much against our Chairman—partakes of personal issue. It is very bad indeed for you—very and also bad for
the interests of the firm…. There’s another point,” he continued, “which troubles me on your account—the
danger that the public and hence all our men get the impression that it is all Frick—Your influence for good
would be permanently impaired—You don’t deserve a bad name, but then one is sometimes wrongfully got—Your
partners should be as much identified with this struggle as you—think over this counsel. It is from a very
wise man as you know and a true friend.”³⁷

Frick was incensed that Carnegie, after spending a lifetime pushing himself into the limelight, should now
accuse his reticent, reluctant junior partner of doing the same. “I am at a little loss to know just why you
should express yourself so…. I am not naturally inclined to push myself into prominence under any
circumstances…. I note the counsel you give, but I cannot see wherein I can profit by it, or what action could
be taken by me that would change matters in respect to that which you mention.” Frick defended himself as well
from the implied accusation in Carnegie’s letters that he had acted too precipitously in trying to reopen the
Homestead plant with Pinkertons, the state militia, private detectives, and a small army of scabs, instead of
waiting for the “old men” to return to work. “If we had adopted the policy of sitting down and waiting, we
would have still been sitting, waiting, and the fight would yet have to be made, and then we would have been
accused of trying to starve our men into submission. This is the way I think. Of course I may be wrong.”³⁸

Carnegie apologized. “It is all right—I should not have written as I did either but truly I have never had
such a trial as during the past four months. Every hour I expected to hear of some catastrophe, such as your
health giving away, or nerves rendering my return imperative. Have been on edge as they say. Now I know (or
feel, which is the same in effect) that matters are in the best shape you can have them—and that it is only a
question of a little time—and calm. We go to Italy and won’t return…. I think your cross and mine must be the
same—for like you I have had to battle all my life with hot blood. I wish I had conquered as completely as
you. I am now saintly to a degree, as you know—one thing I am thankful for. Trifles rouse me soonest—in grave
situations I really grow philosophic. Maybe if we had learned to swear better in faith we might have
experienced relief.”³⁹

The sad truth, which Carnegie now recognized, was that he needed Frick more than Frick needed him. And that
worried him on several counts. He worried that Frick might collapse under the strain of running the company.
But he worried as well that Frick might succeed and, in so doing, push the chief stockholder further to the
sidelines than he wanted to be.

The two were, as he had put it, bound as if in marriage, but it was not a happy union. Frick believed that he
deserved Carnegie’s complete and absolute trust, that he had steered the Carnegie companies through good times
and bad, steadily increasing productivity and profits. He wanted to be left alone to run Carnegie Steel, as he
saw fit. This Carnegie could not allow.

Carnegie was relieved that he had found a manager as capable and tough-minded as Frick, but, as chief
stockholder and with more than two decades of experience in the iron and steel industry, he was not about to
concede full control of his company to anyone, not even the highly estimable Frick. He was, as well, genuinely
worried about the mental stability of his younger partner. Frick had suffered too much at Homestead and from
personal tragedies to emerge unscathed. He had become too high-strung, too quick to fly off the handle, and
too convinced of his own invincibility. He was beginning to forget that the name of the company he managed was
Carnegie Steel, not Frick Steel; it was Carnegie’s capital, Carnegie’s good sense, and Carnegie’s brilliance
as a strategist and talent scout that had made it what it was. Though semi retired, Andrew Carnegie, now in
his middle fifties, was not ready—and would perhaps never be ready—to recede quietly into the background.

## TWENTY-FIVE

## Aftermaths, 1892–1894

IN THE AFTERMATH of the Homestead lockout and strike, Carnegie kept his silence as the attacks on his probity,
his morality, and his sincerity mounted. His English friends tried to cheer him up, but in sending their
condolence letters they only heightened his own sense that he had been the victim of a personal tragedy. To
William Stead, the editor of the Review of Reviews who had written on August 4 asking for an interview, he
announced that his lips were “sealed in regard to Homestead, but some day the story may be told. As you can
well understand, it is impossible for me to know much about it. I hear of events only two days after they take
place…. Anything said today would add fuel to the flame. The proper policy to pursue is silence until peace
and order are restored.”¹

Stead, as a journalist as well as a friend, wrote back at once. “I think that, while it is difficult for you
to know the details about the immediate movement from day to day, you know all about the general question, and
I still think that it would conduce to the clearing of the air if you would talk…. I am rather uneasy
concerning the tendency that there is to run-a-muck at any employer who happens to have a difference with his
workmen. I do not think you could have a better opportunity of putting your own views out than what you would
have in a good square talk with me.” Stead suggested that Carnegie grant him an interview which he would then
convert either into “the shape of a Character Sketch or…a Special Article.”²

Carnegie turned him down again, this time sharply. “Homestead and its deplorable troubles should be allowed to
rest. It would be absurd for me to write upon events which were as much news to me as to yourself.”³

He found himself in a difficult position. He was appalled at the loss of life that had occurred when the
Pinkertons attempted to land at Homestead, appalled at the resistance the men had put up, and appalled that
the lockout and strike had now extended into a third month. But he dared not voice these sentiments for fear
that Frick would take offense and resign. Frick had, it was true, followed the overall strategy Carnegie had
laid out for him; but he had erred grievously, as Carnegie confided to his cousin Dod in mid-July, in trying
to land the Pinkertons by boat, and then erred again by starting up production too soon with scab labor. Frick
had won the war but lost too many battles along the way. Had he shown more patience, the same results might
have been achieved as they had at Edgar Thomson, without loss of life or the avalanche of negative publicity
that was burying Carnegie and his company.

 

THE LETTER that meant the most to Carnegie arrived in mid-September. Carnegie had written Gladstone a note to
congratulate him on his recent electoral victory. Gladstone graciously responded with what amounted almost to
a letter of condolence. “I do not forget you have been suffering yourself from anxieties,” the prime minister
replied on September 19. “I wish I could relieve you from these imputations of journalists, too often rash
conceited or censorious, sometimes ill-natured. I wish to do the little, the very little, that is in my power,
which is simply to say how sure I am that no one who knows you will be prompted by the unfortunate occurrences
across the water (of which manifestly we cannot know the exact merits) to qualify in the slightest degree
either his confidence in your generous views or his admiration of the good and great works you have already
done.”⁴

To Gladstone alone, Carnegie felt obligated to defend himself. In his September 24 letter, Carnegie
constructed the first draft of the narrative he would rely on in the years to come to explain what had
happened at Homestead in the summer of 1892. The explanation he offered Gladstone was telegraphic in its
brevity and its disjunctions, leaping back and forth in short phrases often separated by dashes from Scotland
to Homestead—alternately blaming, then absolving Frick and his partners, all the time assigning to himself the
role of innocent victim in the evolving tragedy. He insisted that he had been kept out of the loop, that the
decisions made at Homestead had been Frick’s alone, that he had played no role in bringing in the Pinkertons
or the scab laborers who followed them.

“This is the trial of my life (death’s hand excepted)—Such a foolish step[*][1] contrary to my ideas—repugnant
to every feeling of my nature. Our firm offered all it could offer, even generous terms. Our other men had
gratefully accepted them—They went as far as I could have wished but the false step was made in trying to run
the Homestead Works with new men. It is a test to which workingmen should not be subjected—It is expecting too
much to expect poor men to stand by and see their work taken by others—Their daily bread.”

In absolving himself of responsibility, Carnegie took on a new persona, that of the old man in retirement,
pushed outside the circle of decision makers, his voice barely audible. He had tried, he insisted to
Gladstone, to make his influence felt—he had even “written sketching the plan” of action he wished taken, but
“alas too late—My letter did not reach.” (There is no record of or reference to such a letter or cable.)
Events spiraled out of control in Pittsburgh. “Feeling had been aroused—sheriff’s aid called in, his Deputies
halted—then other Guards sent for with sheriff’s approval, these attacked & then the Military. All this time I
heard nothing until days had elapsed…. The pain I suffer increases daily. The Works are not worth one drop of
human blood, I wish they had sunk. I write to you freely, to no one else have I written so—I must be silent &
suffer but after a time I hope to be able to do something to restore good feeling between my young & rather
too rash partner & the men over at Homestead.”

He concluded by comparing his own sorry state of inaction with that of Gladstone, now returned to office. “I
hope you are going to succeed in your great work, but you are to be envied whether you do or not, even failure
would be glorious for you are permitted to act. Look at me!—hitherto Master, now condemned to inaction yet
knowing the right, and anxious to carry it.”

“I have one comfort,” he added in a postscript, “self-approval & a second—the support of a wife who is as
strong & as wise as she is gentle & devoted—so I shall sail on & let the tempest howl.”⁵

Carnegie, though overwrought, was genuinely aggrieved. The Homestead works would survive intact and even
prosper, but his proposals for a partnership between labor and management, based on the sliding scale, had
been rejected and his cherished self-portrait as labor’s friend and advocate turned to the wall. His days as
the workingman’s champion now ended, Carnegie struggled to escape becoming labor’s scourge. Fortunately for
him, Frick was still the primary focus of attention. Carnegie, who was both difficult to reach and reluctant
to say anything to reporters, remained a sidebar to the larger Pittsburgh story.

 

AS CARNEGIE had assured Frick, he planned to remain abroad until the strike was settled. In early October, he
and Louise relocated to the Metropole Hotel in London. On October 14, Carnegie submitted to an interview with
an Associated Press correspondent. He had been, he informed the reporter, “busily engaged all during the
Spring and Summer in preparing a new book treating of the industrial problems of the day.” He had retired to
Scotland to complete the book, but news of “the outbreak at Homestead…which had burst upon him like a
thunderbolt from a clear sky [was so disturbing] he had been unable to work much [and had] to lay his book
aside and resort to the lochs and moors, fishing daily from morning to night.” Only now, in mid-October, with,
he predicted, the strike coming to an end, was he able to “go to the Continent and work with a fresh and happy
mind.” Carnegie discussed his forthcoming book at such length that the New York Times, which published an
account of the interview on its front page, headlined it “CARNEGIE WRITES A BOOK.” Carnegie claimed he was a
full-time writer now, no longer a businessman. He was writing his new book “from the standpoint of one who had
long retired from active business and who had been both an employe and an employer and knew how to sympathize
with both.” Having previously lectured millionaires on their obligations to society, he wanted now to explain
to “the intelligent workman” his place in and responsibilities to the new industrial society. “Improvement,”
the workingman had to understand, was inevitable, but as “the result of evolution, not revolution.” With
rather brazen self-confidence, bordering on self-delusion, Carnegie convinced himself that, though an employer
of labor and a capitalist, he had transcended any parochial interests and could speak for the larger
community. Anticipating that he would, in the long run, succeed at Homestead, as he had at Edgar Thomson, in
instituting his sliding scale and establishing a new era of industrial peace and prosperity, he had decided
that spring, before the Homestead troubles, to commit to paper his thoughts on the proper relations of labor
and capital.⁶

He had finished a first, handwritten draft of chapters on wealth, distribution, cooperation between labor and
capital, profit sharing, strikes, and shorter hours while in England. He tried to complete the book at Loch
Rannoch, but with no success. It had become apparent to him, though he did not publicly admit it, that his
reputation as a wise man in matters of labor and capital relationships had been irremediably tarnished, if not
destroyed in the aftermath of the bloody battles with the Pinkertons and the lockout and strike that followed.
It was not a propitious moment for Andrew Carnegie to lecture the nation’s workingmen on anything. The
manuscript was put away; it would never be published.⁷

Carnegie decided instead to bring out a second edition of Triumphant Democracy. The new version read much the
same as the 1886 edition, though the statistics were updated by research assistants to include the 1890 census
figures and some chapters were rearranged. As soon as it was finished, Carnegie began pestering Charles
Scribner to rush it into print. “Your note reached me last evening,” Scribner wrote him on May 4, 1893, after
receiving a hand-delivered message from the author, “and I will do all that I can to hurry the printers. If
you consider the very large number of corrections and the irregular way in which the manuscript was delivered
to them I do not think they have been slow.”⁸

The major difference between the two editions was that Carnegie, in 1893, removed much of the final chapter,
“General Reflections,” replaced his attack on British institutions with a summary of American accomplishments,
then closed with a chapter-length essay, previously published in the North American Review, in which he
advocated what he called the “reunion” of Great Britain and the United States into a great “federation of the
race.” Carnegie did not describe how this federation would be governed or what powers would remain with the
individual nations and what given to the federation. He acknowledged that his vision of reunification was a
bit utopian and he asked his readers to “kindly note” that he had entitled his chapter “A Look Ahead—how far
ahead I shall not attempt to guess; nevertheless it is ahead, and some time, somehow it is to come to pass. I
see it with the eye of faith, the faith of the devotee which carries with it a realizing sense of certain
fulfillment.”⁹

A Scotsman by birth who was equally at home in Dunfermline, London, and New York, Carnegie paid less attention
as the years passed to the political and social differences between Britain and America and more to the
similarities between the two branches of what he now unfailingly referred to as “the English-speaking race.”
It is difficult to know what he meant by this and whether “race,” as he used the term, was determined by
bloodline, culture, history, or language. Like other nineteenth-century nationalists, he often conflated
“race” with “people” and “people” with “nation.”

It was, to his mind—and he said so in the new conclusion of Triumphant Democracy—an unfortunate accident of
history that the American branch of the race had separated itself politically. “Separation,” he wrote, putting
his own rather idiosyncratic slant on the historical record, “was not contemplated by Washington, Franklin,
Adams, Jefferson, Jay, and other leaders. On the contrary, these great men never ceased to proclaim their
loyalty to, and their desire to remain part of, Britain, and they disclaimed any idea of separation, which was
indeed accepted at last, but only when forced upon them as a sad necessity.” It was now, Carnegie proclaimed,
after almost 120 years of separation, time to reunite the “nation.” As a student of political economy, he
feared for the future of Britain, which lacked the population to remain a dominant world power. “Her position
is the most artificial of all nations: islands that cannot grow half enough of food to feed her people, but
which produce double the amount of manufactured articles they can consume. Such a nation, in order to be
secure of her future, must have a market for these surplus articles, and more land from which to draw food for
her people.” Colonies and distant possessions were not the answer, as it was inevitable that Britain would
lose them. And then what? Was Britain destined to become nothing more than an island Belgium?¹⁰

There was but one possibility for Britain—and that was reunification with its errant English-speaking colonies
in North America. He was delighted when a group of Canadian liberals, led by Godwin Smith, organized a
“Continental Union League,” with offices in Toronto and New York, and an impressive list of American members,
including Theodore Roosevelt, John Hay, and Elihu Root. In November 1893, he put his name to a fund-raising
letter, soliciting monies to further the cause of a peaceable American annexation of Canada.¹¹

 

LATE IN October 1892, the Carnegies crossed the Channel to Paris, where they stayed at the Hotel Bristol and
dined with the American ambassador. Carnegie was in a buoyantly good mood. Frick had finally agreed to move
Schwab to Homestead, which Carnegie publicly applauded in a brief interview with reporters in Paris. “Mr.
Carnegie,” the New York Times reported in a front-page story from Paris on October 22, “said to-day that he
was delighted at the return of Mr. Schwab to the management of the Homestead Works, which were most difficult
to manage since the company undertook the making of armor.” The new appointments at Carnegie Steel, Schwab’s
among them, “proved that Mr. Frick was one of the foremost managers of men. Mr. Carnegie added: ‘If any words
from me retain influence with the men at Homestead, I wish to say to them as friends; “All of you for whom Mr.
Schwab provides places, take them promptly, for never will you work for a kinder and abler master.”’”

The arrival of the sheriff’s deputies, followed by the militia, had brought an uneasy peace to Homestead.
Under the protection of the militia, Frick had begun, in August, to import scab workers into the mill. By
October 15, according to the Homestead Local News, there were close to two thousand men employed there, only
two hundred of whom had worked in the mill before the strike. This was not nearly enough to resume anything
close to full production. Carnegie cautioned Frick to “be patient now” and wait for the strikers to return to
their jobs. “Schwab will bring it out all right.”¹²

In November, the strike entered its fourth month, with no resolution in sight. Even Frick was astonished at
the tenacity of the “old men” who, day after day, refused to return, even as their jobs were being given to
scabs. “The firmness with which these strikers hold on is surprising to every one…. This strike, of course,
will cost us a large sum of money, but we will get it all back in the next two or three years, and, as you
know, Homestead has never been well managed, always something going wrong, and a large amount of money has
been wasted by poor management. The mills have never been able to turn out the product they should, owing to
being held back by the Amalgamated men.”¹³

From Paris, the Carnegies traveled south to Florence, then on to Rome and Naples. At every stop along the way,
Andrew continued to receive and send cables and letters to Frick in Pittsburgh. Arriving in Milan, he got news
of the election returns, which, as expected were not favorable to the Republicans. He seemed not to care that
Harrison and Reid had lost the election, nor that he and Frick might have had something to do with the loss.

“Cleveland! Landslide!,” he wrote Frick from Italy on November 9. “Well, we have nothing to fear and perhaps
it is best. People will now think the Protected Manfrs. will be attended to [i.e., that the new Democratic
administration would reform tariffs]—and quit agitating—Cleveland is pretty good fellow.” He appeared not
overly concerned that the return of the Democrats to power meant the removal from office and influence of the
Republicans with whom he had established such cozy relationships. If the Navy wanted to purchase domestic-made
steel armor, as Congress had ordered it to do, there were not very many options outside of Bethlehem and
Carnegie Steel. Still, there was work to be done in courting the new administration.¹⁴

On November 18, after four and a half months without paychecks, with the strike funds nearly depleted, and
winter approaching, two thousand non-union mechanics and unskilled laborers who had until then stood by the
Amalgamated voted to return to work. On Saturday, November 20, the Amalgamated held its regular mass meeting
at the Homestead skating rink, after which the leaders convened a special meeting of the five hundred strikers
who were union members. The next morning, a vote was formally taken to return to work on the company’s terms.
The strike was called off.¹⁵

“Cables received. First happy morning since July,” Carnegie cabled Frick from Florence on November 19.
“Congratulate all around. Improve works. Go ahead. Clear track.” The next day, he followed up with a letter in
which he laid out a detailed list of recommendations and commentaries on personnel, prices, production, pools,
the tariff, furnaces, the price of ingots at Duquesne, the cost of ore, and the possible effects of
Cleveland’s election. He concluded by commending Florence to Frick: “It’s a marvel—prettiest place we have yet
seen—hundreds, yes thousands of villas line hillsides, surrounded with olives and vine—truly exquisite. I hope
you are soon to take a long rest and enjoy yourself doing Italy or some new land. It’s the thing to do.”¹⁶

On a daily basis now, he congratulated Frick and expressed his relief that the ordeal at Homestead was at an
end. “Life worth living again,” he cabled from Florence on November 22, then three days later, wrote in a
letter: “Now for long years of peace and prosperity. I am now interested in Art matters, until your cable my
mind was always running away with me to Pittsburgh.” While Frick must have welcomed the congratulatory cables
and letters, he could not have been happy with the constant references to Schwab who, Carnegie was convinced,
had brought about the final settlement of the strike. “The great compensation for all Homestead trouble and
loss is that you have a Manager there at last. Haven’t we had a blundering time of it ever since we owned
Homestead—just see the difference at Duquesne, you selected the right man and from the first day it is made
the most profitable piece of property we own…. Mark this, I prophecy Homestead this time next year will show
profits worth while—but do get Schwab to become a Homestead man, all over, even if you have to build a palace
for him—might send him one from Venice where you can buy for a few thousands dollars—Have bought some things
here since your cable which will give you all pleasure.”¹⁷

Carnegie, sensitive to the effects bad publicity might have on a company that was hungry for public contracts
and needed tariff protection, hoped that his name—and that of his chief lieutenant—might disappear from the
front pages. But that was not to be. In late November, days after the strike was called off, the American
newspapers called attention for the first time to the fact that the Carnegie companies in Pittsburgh had, in
July, been reorganized into one giant firm, capitalized at $25 million. Though this figure was far below
market value for a company that was making between $4 and $5 million a year in profits, it was still a figure
of grand proportions. Carnegie, usually only too happy to see his name—and successes—highlighted in the
papers, was distressed that this news had leaked out.

“‘Twenty-five Millions’ makes another roar against capital and looks bad,” he wrote Frick on December 2. (As a
proportion of the overall economy, $25 million in 1892 is equivalent to almost $15 billion today.) “I wish I
had held out for the old fashioned modest five millions. We want ‘obscurity’ for a long time. Nothing to
attract criticism. Pray heaven you are not beginning magnificent ‘Carnegie’ Building. [There had been plans
for some time to build a new office building downtown.]…It would give your enemies another handle. Do let that
rest. No explanation would avail…. Alas, our doings have become of National import and we must move
accordingly.” The Republicans were, Carnegie noted, beginning to criticize him, claiming that the events at
Homestead had cost them the election. While Carnegie declared that he personally didn’t “care a cent for this”
criticism, he did “see the value of not further enraging even ignorant public sentiment just now.”

Now that the press had put Homestead on the map, it would be difficult to remove it. In an age of almost
instantaneous cable communication, stories quickly made their way from Pittsburgh to New York to the European
papers. “You have no idea how Europe is excited about Homestead, its awful,” he complained to Frick. In
Naples, where he looked for some respite from the storm of adverse publicity, Carnegie was beset by cable
dispatches from Pittsburgh, reprinted in the European newspapers.¹⁸

Winter was setting in at Homestead and with it increased misery for the jobless and homeless. The strike had
been settled, but the thousands of Amalgamated men who did not get back their jobs were left permanently
unemployed. “In Homestead there are today 1,800 men,” the Pittsburgh Press declared, “most of them with
families for whom no employment can be found. For many of them the Christmas prospect is an empty cupboard and
a cheerless hearth. For many of them there is even now an empty cupboard…. The wolf is at the door; innocent
children, hard-working mothers, fathers who in the majority of cases simply obeyed higher authorities—all are
suffering in the land of plenty.”¹⁹

The suffering was exacerbated by Frick’s decision to close down the plant on December 17, only a few weeks
after the strike settlement, to “put works in thorough order.” Carnegie suggested that the company offer “good
men suffering through strike” an advance on “some part future earnings to tide them over stoppage…. Will
prevent suffering and will show ‘heart.’”²⁰

Carnegie’s initial response to the negative publicity was to keep silent and caution his managers to do the
same. Within a month, he had shifted strategy. He was temperamentally unsuited for a passive approach to any
problem. Though he still regarded “silence” from him as the best policy for the foreseeable future, he urged
his colleagues to take the offensive in the war of public opinion. “The mass of Public Sentiment,” he had
concluded, though reluctantly, “is not with us about Homestead on the direct issue of re-adjustment of the
[wage] scale—people did not understand it, but I observed that Opinion was greatly impressed by the few acts
of kindness…especially of investing savings of men at high rate of interest—this one feature attracted the
most favorable notice. Library came in also.” Carnegie Steel would, in future, compensate its employees for
lower wages by increasing other benefits. “The partner who can devise a new way by which the Firm can benefit
the workmen—improve their surroundings, and make it better for their wives and children, will deserve the
medal next year…. Nothing can be surer than that immense concerns like ours must show a great many advantages
conferred upon the workmen than smaller employers…. Carnegie Steel Co., should lead the way. We have to show
Non-Unionism better for the men than Unionism. In wages paid, we must be governed by the Market of course, but
in things showing thought for the comforts and pleasures of the workmen and their families, we can be our own
masters and deal liberally.” He closed this pep talk, which he presented in the guise of Christmas greetings,
on a personal note. While he had been absent from the scene of battle, he wanted his partners in Pittsburgh to
know that he had suffered with them. “Shall see you all early after the New Year, think I’m about ten years
older than when with you last. Europe has rung with Homestead, Homestead—until we are all sick of the name.
But it is all over now—so once again Happy New Year to all.”²¹

On December 27, he thanked Frick “for copies of valuable correspondence, reports, etc. I sent them to Lauder
and he to the Squire [Phipps] so all the retired…were kept busy. We shall see you sometime next month. Shall
try to elude Reporters New York and live a quiet life. We have been both too much before the public for many
months, and if ever silence was golden it is now.”²²

 

CARNEGIE returned to Pittsburgh in late January 1893. In a statement released to the press and published on
the front page of the New York Times on January 30, he insisted he had “not come to Pittsburgh to rake up, but
to try to bury the past, of which I knew nothing. That is beyond recall, it should be banished as a horrid
dream.” He then made three related points:

(1) He was going to hold on to his stock in Carnegie Steel forever. He had “made his first dollar in
Pittsburgh, and I expect to make my last one here.” Because he had “hoarded nothing, and shall never
accumulate money,” his future security and prosperity, like that of the Homestead workers, depended on the
prosperity of the works.

(2) He had the utmost confidence in Mr. Frick. “His four years management stamps him as one of the foremost
managers in the world—I would not exchange him for any manager I know…. Good workmen or able men, will learn
to appreciate Mr. Frick…. Violent workmen he does not like, and these will not thrive with him.”

(3) He was not now and would never again be in control of the company that bore his name. “I desire now, once
for all, to make one point clear. Four years ago I retired from active business; no consideration in the world
would induce me to return to it…. I believe in retiring and giving younger men a chance…. I hope after this
statement that the public will understand that the officers of the Carnegie Steel Company, Limited, with Mr.
Frick as their head, are not dependent upon me or upon any one, in any way, for their position, and that I
have neither power nor disposition to interfere with them in the management of the business; and, further,
that I have the most implicit faith in them.”

His statement was riddled with contradictions—as majority stockholder he most certainly had a say over who ran
the company—but it served its purpose. He had come to Homestead to publicly affirm his support for Frick and
to pronounce the tragic events of July over and done with. And that had been accomplished. But try as he
might, he could not remove the memory of those events from the collective consciousness. Too many men had been
killed and wounded and too many were suffering through a long winter, still without work. For as long as he
lived, and longer, Homestead would remain a symbol of all that was wrong with industrial America.

Having declared the incident at an end, he refused to speak of it again.

During the strike, he and Frick had placed an embargo on interviews. Now that the strike was over, they
tightened rather than lifted it. When in April of 1893 a reporter infiltrated the Homestead works, John
Leishman, Frick’s second in command, could only apologize for the breakdown. “While we have done everything
possible to prevent articles in regard to our operations etc. from getting into the paper,” he wrote Carnegie,
“even to the extent of telling the Superintendents to discharge any man that they found retailing our business
to the newspapers we do not seem to have been able to stop the nuisance. We are so prominent and the
newspapers here so hard up for news that it would be a very hard thing to shut them off entirely, and unless
we went to the expense of paying the different papers to keep us out it would not be possible, and even then I
am afraid they would make a slip occasionally in order to cater to the working man’s vote. Notwithstanding the
above discouraging facts will continue our efforts to prevent any newspaper publications.”²³

Five months later, there was another breach in the security wall, this one more serious as journalist Hamlin
Garland, accompanied by an illustrator, snuck into the works through a hole in the fence. They published their
observations in the June 1894 issue of McClure’s. There had been portraits of life and work at Homestead prior
to this, and there would be many later, but none would resonate with the larger public as Garland’s did.

“The town was as squalid and unlovely as could well be imagined, and the people were mainly of the discouraged
and sullen type to be found everywhere where labor passes into the brutalizing stage of severity. It had the
disorganized and incoherent effect of a town which has feeble public spirit.” Garland had secured as a guide
“a young man whose life had been passed in Homestead and who was quite familiar with the mills and workmen.”
Together, the guide, Garland, and the illustrator toured the works from the “finished beam” yard to the
converting furnaces and the rolling and finishing mills. “Everywhere were grimy men with sallow and lean
faces. The work was of the inhuman sort that hardens and coarsens.” There were, Garland observed, no “old men
here.” Work in the mill “shortens life…. The long hours, the strain, and the sudden changes of temperature use
a man up…. The worst part of the whole business,” he was told, was that the work “brutalizes a man. You can’t
help it. You start in to be a man, but you become more and more a machine, and pleasures are few and far
between. It’s like any severe labor. It drags you down mentally and morally, just as it does physically. I
wouldn’t mind it so much if it weren’t for the long hours…. Twelve hours is too long.”²⁴

 

WHAT BOTHERED Carnegie more than the adverse publicity or the name-calling was the recognition that from this
moment on, everything he did would be subject to a new level of moral review. Because he had never intended or
considered his philanthropy as expiation for his sins as an industrialist, he was surprised, then dismayed,
when others did. It was, he believed, grossly unfair—to him and to the recipients of his gifts—to draw
connections between the methods by which his money was accumulated and the purposes to which it was donated.

The protests against Carnegie’s “tainted money” began with the arrival of the Pinkertons. On July 9, the
Philadelphia Press had reported that the Window Glass Workers Lodge No. 300 had already inaugurated “a
movement…that promises to spread. This idea has been rampant since the Homestead outbreak, and to-night found
vent at a large meeting of the glass workers. A resolution couched in severe language in its reference to Mr.
Carnegie was passed, asking City Councils to repeal the ordinance by which the Carnegie Library gift [to
Pittsburgh] was accepted. The resolution stated among other things that the proposed library would only be a
monument to Mr. Carnegie, while the men who keep up the library will not derive any benefit from it.”²⁵

[image]

forty-millionaire carnegie in his great double role. as the tight-fisted employer he reduces wages that he may
play philanthropist and give away libraries, etc.

Two days later, a resolution was presented to a special meeting of the Pittsburgh City Councils, calling for
rejection of Carnegie’s gift. The resolution was blocked by Boss Christopher Magee, who claimed that as the
gift had already been accepted, it couldn’t be returned. Ever the politician, Magee declared that while he
would not defend Carnegie, he could not imagine how working people would gain anything by giving back the
money he had dedicated for a library. “No matter how Mr. Carnegie got this money, he has it. If it belongs to
the working people this is a good way of getting it back, and why not take it.”²⁶

Carnegie received even worse treatment from his former friends in the British labor movement. The British
workingmen’s organizations that had once competed for his favor, and the pleasure of listening to him lambaste
the monarchy and aristocracy, now censured him for sending in the Pinkertons. They too called into question
the moral and political advisability of accepting his bequests for libraries. On July 14, 1892, the London
Trade Council passed a resolution declaring that it was “to be hoped that in case of any further
well-advertised philanthropies on the part of Mr. Carnegie, the workers of the district will show their
disapproval in an unmistakable manner.” According to a New York World correspondent writing from London on
July 24, “The general opinion is that Mr. Carnegie will find it quite impossible hereafter to induce towns in
Great Britain to accept any of his gifts.” The Glasgow Trade Council not only passed a resolution censuring
him, but condemned the town council of Ayr, which, after receiving the gift of a public library, had seen fit
to honor him.²⁷

Instead of responding directly to the workingmen’s groups on both sides of the Atlantic, Carnegie wrote an
open letter to the Pittsburgh Art Society that was published on December 18, 1892, in the New York Times and
elsewhere: “I was naturally much grieved at the action of some of the industrial organizations…. Whatever was
of a personal character I readily understood and passed over, perhaps the more easily because I could not
quite see how I deserved it. But the opposition expressed to the library, music hall, and art gallery was a
wholly different matter…. It was indeed pitiable if the wage earners for whom these were chiefly intended
should be permanently prejudiced against them by any shortcomings of the donor, however grievous, for, sadly
as he may fail in his efforts to live worthily and do his duty—and no one, alas, knows as well as himself how
far he falls short of his own ideal—yet his gifts to Pittsburgh must ever remain stainless and work good
continually and never evil.” He desired only that “my fellow-workmen (for I have a right to use this title)
see that fair play requires them to separate the donor and his many faults from libraries and music halls and
art gallery, which have none.”

A month later, when the citizens of Mansfield and Chartiers, two small villages east of Homestead, let it be
known that they wished to name their new consolidated borough in his honor, Carnegie felt vindicated. “I
confess that the whole unexpected action of the people of the Boroughs of Mansfield and Chartiers has quite
touched my heart,” he wrote one of the men behind the idea. “Coming at this time, it is peculiarly gratifying.
Life would not be worth living to me if I felt that the people in and around Pittsburgh did not, at least, in
some degree, reciprocate the affection which I have for them; and why should I affect not to value their good
opinion, when I consider this as among the chief prizes of life to be won?…It is a bold step to christen any
place after one still living. That your people have chosen my name, must make me more careful than ever to do
nothing that can cause them to lose the confidence evinced that my future life will be such as to place no
stain upon it; and although I can never fully deserve the honor they have conferred, I shall hope never wholly
to discredit their choice.” Five years later, the new borough received its just rewards when Andrew Carnegie
donated funds for a Carnegie library in Carnegie, Pennsylvania.²⁸

 

UNABLE TO ERASE the public’s memory of Homestead, Carnegie in 1893 redoubled his efforts to dissociate himself
from the tragedy. While he could not publicly criticize Frick, he hinted in letters to his friends that he
would have handled matters differently.

“I have been in purgatory (if not worse) since July,” he wrote his old traveling companion Alice French in
February of 1893. “It is terrible. I do not believe in fighting labor, never did, new men are a delusion,
employers should shut down when things become intolerable. The whole works are not worth a human life.”²⁹

He wrote much the same letter to Whitelaw Reid the following month. “This has been the hardest trial I ever
had to endure (save when the hand of death has come)—I have been in misery since July, but am reconciled
somewhat since I have visited Homestead and gone through all the Works and shaken hands with the chief men.”
Again he asserted, without equivocation, that things would have turned out differently had he been in charge.
“Between ourselves, no manufacturer is wise who attempts to employ new men.” The guards had been hired to
protect the “old men” who he and his partners were convinced would return to work once the gates were open.
But the “workmen were terrorized and dare[d] not appear. Here was the turning point. The works should then
have been closed and the firm should have kept on negotiating but never starting until matters were right.” He
refused to put any blame for the bloodshed and the extended strike on the workingmen. Whatever may have
happened, it was not their fault. “No one knew the virtues, the noble traits of the true working man who has
not lived with them as I have and there’s one consolation in all my sorrow, not one of them but said, Ah Mr.
Carnegie if you had only been here it never would have happened.” He had much to apologize for in his letter
to Reid, who might have been vice president had things turned out differently. “To add to my cup I know the
mistake injured my friends, President Harrison and yourself, but I was powerless—after the riot and with Mr.
Frick supposed to be dying no step could be taken that would not have complicated matters still more. I was
all ready to return by the first steamer, but as my appearance on the scene would have implied Mr. Frick’s
virtual deposition and he had begged me not to do this, I remained abroad.”³⁰

Whatever he might imply about Frick’s leadership in private, Carnegie refused to second-guess or criticize him
in public. He needed him to stay right where he was: in Pittsburgh, as president and chairman of the board of
Carnegie Steel. The strike was over, but the labor problems at Homestead persisted. Frick and Schwab had ended
up at Homestead with a volatile mixture of scabs and “old men.” In May 1893, Schwab notified Frick that he had
“decided to take a strong hand [and] investigate every squabble [between former strikers and scabs] whether it
occurred in the town, or works, and deal with the guilty parties severely.” Union sympathizers who harassed
strikebreakers on the job were discharged immediately. When such harassment occurred in the town, Schwab
notified the police, who promptly arrested and fined offenders; they were then discharged from the plant. To
make sure that Homestead remained non-union, the company would later hire internal spies to report on any
organizing activity. In 1894 a new Bureau of Information was organized to coordinate the work of the spies.
Potential organizers and troublemakers were let go at once. “My own idea,” Schwab wrote Frick in January 1894,
“is that if the men hold any meetings or attempt to form any organization, we should be prepared to be fully
informed of all that goes on and unhesitatingly discharge any man connected with this movement.”³¹

Carnegie was not directly involved in any of this, though Frick and Schwab knew where he stood and acted
accordingly. He and Louise had remained overseas until January of 1893, then, after five months in the States,
returned to Europe in May and did not move back to New York until November 1893. In February 1894, they sailed
again for Europe, en route to Egypt for the winter, England for the spring, and Cluny for summer and fall.
Between April 1892 and November 1894, they would spend twenty-six of thirty-one months out of the country.

They were in Europe when, a year after the settlement of the strike, Homestead reentered the headlines once
again. In the late summer of 1893, Frick had received a note from an attorney who claimed to represent four
men who had documentary evidence of fraud in the armor department. When Frick refused to pay them for the
evidence, the four approached Secretary of the Navy Hilary A. Herbert through their attorney and offered him
the same material in return for 40 percent of the fines that Carnegie Steel would have to pay if the
allegations of fraud proved true. The newly appointed Democratic secretary of the navy, after checking with
the U.S. attorney general, offered the informers 25 percent, which they accepted.³²

The documents the four men provided demonstrated that the superintendents in the armor department had filled
in “blowholes,” tiny fissures in the steel plates, and secretly re-treated those plates designated by navy
inspectors for further testing. The charges were true, but amounted to little. Blowholes were present in all
steel plates, did not indicate any weakness in the material, and were routinely plugged to create a smooth
surface. And while the superintendents had, indeed, secretly re-treated plates marked for further testing
(because the company received a premium for superior work), every one of them was up to standard, including
those that had never been re-treated.

Despite the lack of gravity in the charges, the secretary of the navy, in secret and without informing the
company, set up a board of inquiry which found Carnegie Steel guilty of fraud. A fine of 15 percent was levied
on the total amount the company had received on all its armor contracts. Early in December, Frick was summoned
to Washington to meet with Secretary Herbert and told of the board of inquiry’s decision and the fine. He
appealed the findings directly to President Cleveland.³³

Carnegie, who was in New York at the time, was outraged by the judgment against his company. On December 17,
he took the train to Washington, where, accompanied by his attorney Philander Knox, Frick, and Millard
Hunsiker, the firm’s armor expert, he met with the secretary of the navy and the president. Later, he put his
thoughts in writing in a “confidential & strictly personal” letter to “My dear Mr. Cleveland.” On the envelope
was written: “This is a personal letter to Mr. Cleveland not to the President & I ask the Secretary to hand it
to him unopened. Andrew Carnegie.”

Though he did his best to control his anger, it seeped through nonetheless. “We have been accused, tried,
found guilty & sentenced without ever having been heard,” he wrote Cleveland.

The vilest criminal has always the right to be heard in his defense…. After we had been sentenced we were
asked to state our side of the case, not till then—But this is not the worst of it—The so-called Board who
should have been our Judges were not allowed to judge. They were instructed practically [by Secretary
Herbert], what to find…. This is a serious business for us not as to mere money though that is important these
times…. For three years I have devoted myself to meet the wants of the Country…. Spent millions, subordinated
every other branch of our business to the Government’s needs, succeeded—& then upon the testimony of spies we
are charged with irregularities and our men with fraud—I cannot stand this—even at the risk of offending the
Secretary, good honest man, but overzealous in this affair, Carnegie Steel must ask to be tried by a Court who
will at least visit our Works, listen to explanations upon the ground, & see for themselves before they
judge.³⁴

Cleveland, unwilling to publicly side with an unpopular Republican contributor and overrule his secretary of
the navy, decided nonetheless to reduce the fine to the manageable sum of $140,000. Carnegie accepted the
president’s compromise, with rather good grace.

“So be it—President compromised—divided amount claimed,” Carnegie wrote Frick from the SS Columbia, on his way
back to Europe. “If this be the last of it the loss is not great.” Carnegie worried that this was only the
beginning of a string of accusations against the company. “I fear other conspiracies. Carnegie Steel Co. has
become the Malakoff [a great stone fortress near Sevastopol that was under constant bombardment during the
Crimean War] of the Industrial situation and must bear the first attacks—our competitors escape and yet
profit. Its intolerable.” The company had no choice but to redouble its efforts to portray itself as a
progressive, forward-looking, labor-loving concern. “Our policy should be to strengthen our general position
before the Country—Can’t hide in a corner and attend quietly to business, as smaller concerns do therefore we
should be in advance providing Extra things for our workmen, libraries, etc., etc.—Also pay liberally in case
[of] accidents…. We cannot fight Trade Unions successfully without repeated losses, except by convincing our
men that their best Union is union with their employer…. Think over this—prayerfully.”³⁵

The armor scandal did not go away soon. The House empowered a subcommittee to investigate further, which it
did, calling a series of witnesses for hearings that began in the spring and went on for several weeks.
Carnegie tried to make light of the new scandal, but that was easier for him, vacationing at the time in
Cairo, than for Frick, Schwab, et al., in Pittsburgh. “It had to come out, our enemies—Amalgamated
Association—bound to use it,” he wrote Frick on March 6, 1894. “The ghost of Homestead is not yet laid.” He
suggested that Frick should defend himself and the company by blaming the “fraud” on a few “miserable
wretches…these spies—They could not and did not do the work to our standard and shirked some parts as was
discovered.” Three weeks later, he wrote again, “Surely this Armor fuss will be the last thing dragging
Homestead before the public. I hope so.”³⁶

 

CARNEGIE would spend the rest of his life trying to remove the stain of Homestead from his reputation and
demonstrate that he had always been a friend of the workingman. In 1912, as he sat down to write his
Autobiography, he asked his old partner Alexander Peacock to seek out as many former Amalgamated officials and
advisory committee members as he could locate and ask if they remembered cabling him for advice in 1892. For
years now he had insisted that the majority of Homestead workingmen remained loyal to him and had cabled him
at Rannoch in July 1892, “Kind master, tell us what you wish us to do and we shall do it for you.” When
Peacock wrote back that no one in Pittsburgh had knowledge of such a cable, Carnegie directed him to try
again. “It seems to me that rightly managed, those who had part in signing that cablegram would be glad to
pass into history as having shown friendly relations between the chief owner and themselves. It might be
presented to them in this light, I am sure. Explain fully that what I wish is to leave a record of the past
and is not to be published at present. If you were in position to write me a note stating that you had seen
certain people who were aware of the message and had told you about it, it would be valuable, next to having
their direct evidence; but you would be considered a reliable witness, I am sure, in after years. I should be
satisfied with your statement. Shall rest satisfied that you will do the best you can that the truth of
history may be vindicated.”³⁷

Peacock tried and failed again. No cable from the workers to Carnegie was ever found, nor was any Homestead
veteran located who would corroborate that one had been sent. None of this prevented Carnegie from quoting in
his Autobiography from the cable that did not exist.

 

WHATEVER THE COSTS of the Homestead strike, they proved more than worth it for Carnegie Steel. It is difficult
to overstate the long-term effects of management’s victory—and the Amalgamated’s defeat. In the wake of
Homestead, the Amalgamated was virtually driven out of the steel industry. Wage rates were reduced, the
twelve-hour shift was instituted in most of the departments that had previously run eight hours, and union
rules that had once prescribed occasional breaks were eliminated. Homestead’s steelworkers, skilled and
unskilled, lost their grievance rights and could, from this point on, be reassigned or discharged at
management’s will.³⁸

The result of breaking the union was, as Carnegie had expected, an unprecedented boom in productivity and
profits. While the nationwide depression that began in 1893 would not lift until at least 1897, Carnegie Steel
would successfully ride it out, in large part because of Homestead. Between 1893 and 1897, rail production
remained stagnant, while the market for steel plates, sheets, and structural shapes, all manufactured at
Homestead, grew by 80 percent. By 1897, Carnegie Steel was producing 49 percent of the nation’s structural
steel. Annual profits, which had fallen to a five-year low of $3 million in 1893, rebounded to $4 million in
1894,$5 in 1895,$6 million in 1896, and $7 million in 1897.³⁹

Despite Carnegie’s earlier protestations that he regarded his employees as his partners, there was no increase
in wages for the workers at Homestead or elsewhere. On the contrary, for the steel industry as a whole, wage
rates declined dramatically for skilled workers throughout the 1890s, while holding stable for the
unskilled.⁴⁰

 

THEODORE DREISER visited Homestead in the spring of 1894, soon after his arrival in Pittsburgh. “The battle
was already fifteen months past, but the feeling was by no means so,” he wrote in Newspaper Days. “I did not
know then what it was about this town that was so depressing, but I learned afterward, in the six months in
which I staid here, that it was a compound of a sense of defeat and sullen despair which was over all. The men
had not forgotten.” In the hills above the plant were “a few moderately attractive dwellings.” There were some
“uniform frame houses” on the side streets. But below, in the flats behind the mill where the bulk of the
workforce lived, “were cluttered alleys so unsightly and unsanitary as to shock me into the belief that I was
once more witnessing the lowest phases of Chicago slum life—the worst I had ever seen.” The entire town—the
mill, the flats, the side streets, the river below, and the homes on the slopes above—was shrouded in gray
smoke, so thick it blotted out the sun.

Two days later, Dreiser took the streetcar to the “east end of Pittsburgh, which was, as I could easily see,
the exclusive residence section of the city.” As astonished as he had been by the destitution at Homestead—and
by the degraded circumstances in which Pittsburgh iron and steelworkers lived in isolated enclaves elsewhere
in the city—he was even more dazzled by the wealth on display in and around Oakland. “Here…were homes of…the
most imposing character—huge, verandahed, tree-shaded affairs, with immense lawns, great stone or iron or
hedge fences and formal gardens and walks of a most ornate character…. The houses here were so very, very
noble—vast, roomy, restful, graceful affairs with shaded walks and portly entresols.” He passed by the new
Phipps Arboretum and Carnegie’s “huge and graceful library of white limestone,” still under construction.
“Truly, never in my life, I think, neither before nor since, either in New York, Chicago or elsewhere, was the
vast gap which divides the rich from the poor in America so vividly and forcefully and impressively brought
home to me…. The poor were so very poor, the rich so rich, and their self-importance was beyond measure.”⁴¹

Carnegie had fled Pittsburgh in the mid-1870s and seldom returned. His absence made it easier for him to
ignore the changes that had taken place in the industrial city over the past two decades, as the
English-speaking skilled workers who had once manned his iron and steel mills and worked on the railroad were
replaced by unskilled day laborers from Southern and Eastern Europe.

The steel magnates had always divided their workforce so as to more easily conquer it. As early as 1875,
Captain Jones, in a letter to David McCandless, at the time chairman of the Edgar Thomson steel firm,
explained that his “experience has shown that Germans and Irish, Swedes and what I denominate
‘Buckwheats’—young American country boys, judiciously mixed, make the most effective and tractable force you
can find.” In the years that followed, Frick brought in Italian and African-American workers as
strikebreakers—and allowed them, in many cases, to keep their jobs after the strikes were settled. After the
Homestead strike, there would be a greater and greater reliance on Eastern Europeans, whose primary concern
was finding steady work, no matter what it paid. “The one essential,” as David Brody has written, “was not
wages, working conditions, or living standards, but employment itself.”⁴²

Carnegie never acknowledged the presence—in larger and larger numbers—of the Eastern Europeans. He also paid
no attention, in his speeches or his writings, to the steady increase in the proportion of unskilled common
laborers in the steel mills. He preferred to imagine life and work at his plants much as it had been twenty
years earlier at the Union Iron Mills and Keystone Bridge, where most of his employees were skilled artisans
or on their way to becoming such.

In his mind, there was still abundant opportunity for upward mobility: from manual wage work to foreman to
department head to supervisor. He understood—how could he not?—that his laborers were underpaid. But he
believed that those who were worthy would quickly transcend that status. They would study and learn—in his own
libraries, no doubt—and rise steadily in his employ, much as Charlie Schwab had. He did not ask, as his
critics did, how it was possible for a man to improve himself if he was forced to work twelve hours a day,
seven days a week, or if his first language was not English, or if he had no connections of kinship, religion,
or ethnicity to the bosses above him.

Living in New York, visiting Pittsburgh only occasionally, and then only to stay at the exclusive Duquesne
Club or one of the hotels downtown or with Frick at Clayton, Carnegie preferred to make-believe that the world
of the Pittsburgh worker was still very much what it had been when he began his climb upward. It was a
comforting illusion, one that would sustain him for the rest of his life.

[1]: footnote23.html

## TWENTY-SIX

## “Be of Good Cheer—We Will Be Over It Soon,” 1893–1895

LESS THAN six months after the surrender of the Amalgamated at Homestead, almost as if it were divine
retribution for the sins of the nation’s leading steelmaker, the stock market crashed, bringing down with it
the broader economy.

There were multiple causes for the crash. As Carnegie had predicted in his 1891 article, “The ABC of Money,”
the Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890 had frightened European investors. The act, which required the U.S.
Treasury to purchase and coin millions of ounces of silver bullion, was perceived by bankers as the first step
toward a silver standard. Fearful that their American bonds and securities might in future be redeemed in
silver instead of gold, European investors began cashing them in. As more gold flowed out of the country and
more silver was coined, European concerns were exacerbated and overseas banks accelerated their sell-off of
American securities and bonds.

Carnegie, whose bond-trading career had made him acutely sensitive to European fears, wrote the newly elected
Democratic president, Grover Cleveland, suggesting that he calm the financial markets by declaring himself in
favor of strict adherence to the gold standard. “Until all doubt is put to rest, there is still great danger
of the country being drained of its gold…. All excitement can be allayed and the crisis safely passed by a
simple declaration from you. If I might suggest, somewhat like the following, ‘As long as I am President of
the United States, the workingman is going to be paid in as good a dollar as the foreign banker is’ [i.e., in
dollars backed by gold, not silver], I think this would also be good politics…. I have spoken to many
republicans, and without exception they agree that in standing for sound money…you will receive almost the
unanimous support of the Republican party.” Though Cleveland, having worked for one of the law firms which
represented the Morgan interests, understood international finance and the importance of the gold standard, he
could not get his party to abandon silver. Through the spring and summer 1893, American gold reserves
continued to decline and with them the value of the dollar.¹

The heart of the American economy—and certainly of the increasingly vital steel and iron sector—remained the
railroads. Unable in the spiraling crisis to borrow new money to service their old debts, the weakest among
them struggled to stay afloat. “More roads defaulted during the 1890s than at any time in American history,”
Jean Strouse has written. “A year after the panic, 192 lines operating 40,000 miles of road and capitalized at
$2.5 billion had fallen into the hands of receivers.” With the failure of the railroads to pay their
employees, their creditors, and their suppliers, the economy went into a tailspin. Some 16,000 firms and
hundreds of banks closed their doors. “More seriously,” as Steve Fraser has written in Every Man A Speculator,
“thousands were left homeless, tramping the roads searching for work while 20 percent of the labor force could
fine none.”²

The effects of the panic and the depression that followed were felt immediately in the iron and steel
industry. The statistics only begin to tell the full story. Pig iron production fell by more than 20 percent
from 10.2 million tons in 1892 to under 8 million in 1893; Bessemer steel declined from 4.7 to 3.6 tons; rails
almost 27 percent, from 1.74 million tons in 1892 to 1.27 in 1893 and 1.14 million in 1894.³

Carnegie was not worried. “Be of good cheer—we will be over it soon,” he wrote Frick in late May. The most
recent monthly profit statement “took my breath away—Isn’t it incredible almost—Am glad you are well & in
command—I know you will choke every mill with orders at any price necessary & keep all the Cash you can.”⁴

The only immediate casualty, it appeared, would be his Music Hall on Fifty-seventh Street in New York, which
had been a losing proposition from the moment it opened. To stay out of bankruptcy, more money would be
needed—which Carnegie hoped, but failed, to get in loans from New York banks. In early June 1893, Carnegie
asked Frick to try to raise money in Pittsburgh for the Music Hall Company. He promised to endorse the loans
himself (i.e., guarantee payment should the Music Hall default) and to make the Music Hall self-supporting by
expanding it to include rent-paying “offices and practice studios.”⁵

 

CARNEGIE miscalculated the breadth and depth of the developing depression. Try as Frick might to hold on to
cash, there was simply not enough of it around to keep the Carnegie works running at full blast, especially
after the railroads, their biggest customers, struggling to stay out of bankruptcy, stopped paying their
bills. As most American banks had ceased giving new loans, Carnegie offered to borrow money from the Bank of
Scotland. “We could easily get a million sterling here 5 million dollars if we issued 6% first mtge Gold
Bonds…. I know how to write the Prospectus and the money would be available at once…I shall be anxious to hear
just what your plans are and how you feel as to our ability to go on nicely. After a little we shall have
money forced upon us of course—but if Congress does not act [on repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act] we
shall probably have to wait for money some time. Am glad we have you at the helm for you are the best
financier I ever knew. If you get stuck Lord help the rest…. I shall be glad to go to you any time [i.e.,
return from Britain to Pittsburgh] if you feel my presence would be only ‘comforting’ and no more. There’s
profitable days before us. If others stop we should take every order at prices which deter their starting.”⁶

As the stock market continued to fall, bringing more banks and business down with it, Carnegie, with the bulk
of his fortune tied up in his Pittsburgh plants, began to worry a bit. On August 7, Frick wrote to suggest
that salaries be cut at once for all Carnegie Steel employees. “No sensible person would expect anything else
than that a reduction when made should include everybody.” None of his managers, Frick complained, was doing
enough to keep costs down. The main culprit was Carnegie’s favorite, Charlie Schwab, whom Frick criticized
whenever the opportunity arose. “There is no question but what he has great ability, but it is too largely
used to make himself popular. He is recklessly extravagant in everything he does for himself or any one else,
and I regret to say in many respects unreliable; tells you only that which he thinks will please, without
regard to its correctness, and in that way has even misled you. I feel that he has outraged the confidence I
have reposed in him in many ways…. The management at Homestead [now Schwab’s fiefdom] is the embodiment of all
that is reckless and extravagant.”⁷

“These are anxious days,” Carnegie wrote Frick the following day, as if Frick needed any reminders. “I had
thought the panic would hold off at least until December meeting of Congress when we should have been prepared
for it with $2½ millions more profits, but no amount of capital will enable us to run [un]less paid for our
product.” Carnegie advised Frick to pay his employees, but no one else. The railroads might threaten to stop
carrying Carnegie Steel freight, but they would never follow through as it was their “not paying [for their
steel and iron] which render us unable to pay.” He had, he told Frick, been to the Bank of Scotland and
“showed the Chairman confidentially the two months earnings statement [for the period before the panic broke],
which almost knocked him from his chair. I took them away and he promised not one of his Directors would be
told.” Carnegie and Frick agreed not to provide potential lenders with full financial statements, “as they
always ask for earnings and we must not surprise people so. Half million a month is out of all reason.” If the
size of their profits became public knowledge, it would become impossible to maintain even minimal protective
tariffs on their products. Although the financial news from the States was not good, Carnegie remained upbeat.
“When [the Bank of Scotland officers] get to know us there will be a splendid pot of money at our disposal all
the time, probably will pay us keep door open here as stringency doesn’t develop ‘contemporaneously’ on both
sides Atlantic. Congress met yesterday. It ought to clear the skies at once. Stop silver purchases—that’s all
we need to rebound back to prosperity. Don’t fret or take matters too hard—We can’t be hurt—It’s all coming
right.”⁸

Congress did repeal the Silver Purchase Act at the end of August, as Carnegie had hoped, but it came too late
to halt the damage already done. As the depression deepened, with no sign of a quick recovery, Carnegie was
besieged with requests for loans: from Walter Damrosch, who asked for $5,000; from Caroline Vandervort, his
friend’s wife, who asked for $2,500; from his uncle Lauder, who asked for £100; and from Charles Scribner, who
begged him to reimburse the man who had drawn the maps for the latest edition of Triumphant Democracy.⁹

Carnegie’s business strategy was the one he had followed twenty years earlier: keep production steady by
accepting orders at any price. In early October, he notified Frick that the time had come to leave the rail
pool. “I confess I can see nothing so good for us as a ‘free hand’” in setting prices. He was willing to lower
his prices and profit margin on rails if that was the only way to get the orders he needed to keep his works
running. “By this policy we shall keep our men at work.” Carnegie had never been entirely happy as a member of
the rail pool, especially after Illinois Steel was allocated a greater share than Carnegie Steel. “For my
part,” he now declared, “I do not wish to play second fiddle in the rail business any longer. I get no sweet
dividend out of second fiddle business, and I do know that the way to make more money dividends is to lead…. I
am sure that The Carnegie Steel Co. can make more dollars, even next year, and certainly in future years, by
managing its own business in its own way, free from all understandings with competitors, than by continuing in
any combination that possibly can be formed. Now having made my speech, which I trust you will read to all my
partners, I take my seat and imagine the loud applause with which my sentiments are greeted.”¹⁰

Carnegie Steel would, in the end, survive the extended depression of the 1890s because, unlike its
competitors, it was built to survive market downturns. Since the partners had reinvested so great a portion of
their dividends in new machinery, the company could produce rails, beams, plates, and other steel products at
costs below its competitors. As important, because capital for internal improvements was generated internally,
the firm was not weighed down with debt. In the first six months of the depression, while Illinois Steel,
Carnegie’s largest rival, posted a huge deficit and thirty-two different steel companies, including
Pennsylvania Steel, closed their doors, Carnegie Steel turned a profit of $3 million and increased its share
of the market. In 1892, Carnegie Steel had produced 17.8 percent of the nation’s steel; by 1893, it had
increased its share to 21.5 percent; by 1894, to 25.3 percent.¹¹

Though Carnegie had the utmost faith in the long-term trends—for the economy and his company—he worried about
the short-term suffering the depression had brought in its wake. “Never such stagnation in business here, as
now,” he wrote John Morley in mid-December of 1893. “We have resolved that none of our workmen shall suffer—or
his family, for food shelter and fuel…. I am happy in this—and also in having started a Committee Pittsburgh
to adopt same rule as to every Pittsburgh decent workman—Not one shall want except for clothes. I draw the
line there. Our own business is so infinitely better than that of others we are thankful, all right with us
comparatively.”¹²

The committee Carnegie referred to was the Citizens’ Relief Committee. He had not organized it himself, as he
claimed, but, when solicited by his friend Robert Pitcairn, agreed to contribute “a sum equal to what the
citizens of Pittsburgh contribute, dollar for dollar,” up to a total of $250,000. The day after Christmas, he
wrote to tell Frick of his offer to Pitcairn. With very little free cash of his own to spend, Carnegie had
begun relying on Carnegie Steel as a bank from which he drew money as needed, to be repaid out of future
dividends. “I couldn’t satisfy myself short of the letter written RP today in reply to his. I have no use for
money—don’t want to die rich—It will never go to a better use than to give work to worthy men in this crisis.
I feel better now—hope you approve. Wish Pittsburgh would show itself superbly grand in taking care of its
workmen.”¹³

Carnegie needed Frick’s approval, as only Frick knew whether there was sufficient cash at Carnegie Steel to
fund the contribution. Before Frick, however, had had an opportunity to check on this and get back to
Carnegie, the letter to Pitcairn appeared in the press. Carnegie feigned surprise at the public disclosure,
though he may well have been the one who told the press about his contribution. He instructed Frick to
“arrange payments as you think best…. Am too sorry this miserable breach of faith has occurred. It teaches us
a lesson.”¹⁴

The following day, Carnegie apologized again and thanked Frick for restructuring the gift. “Glad to get your
suggestions have wired RP to do as you & he decide—I noted on outside of envelop to him (‘consult Frick’). I
think it best $1000 per day—my conscience says I must give to Pittsburgh in this crisis. I love the old Smoky
City and her people and all my boyhood days return to me and I feel I would give every dollar if necessary for
Pittsburgh and her industrious working men.” He reassured Frick that there would be no further calls “upon my
balance beyond this—Music Hall will take a little cash each month.”¹⁵

Frick, who knew precisely how much Carnegie could afford to spend, seized on the opportunity to ask for
something for himself. On December 28, two days after Carnegie offered the Citizens’ Relief Committee
$250,000, Frick asked that his salary be doubled. He hated being in debt—especially in the midst of a
depression when money was tight. He had borrowed from Carnegie to purchase his 11 percent share of Carnegie
Steel Co. and owed him $1,696,894.55. Because the value of the coke company shares that secured the loan had
increased significantly, there was no longer any chance of default. The loan being almost without risk, he
asked Carnegie to lower the interest rate. “I would much prefer to sell my interest at 90 cents on the dollar,
and retire from the firm than accept the slightest change unless it came from you freely and cheerfully. I ask
only what I would do if our positions were reversed.”¹⁶

Frick had phrased his request in such a way that Carnegie was almost obligated to say yes. But he didn’t. He
agreed that now that Frick had “mastered the Steel business and made a success,” he was worth twice the salary
for managing Carnegie Steel that he had earned for managing Carnegie Brothers, which was half its size. He was
not, however, going to renegotiate the terms of Frick’s personal loan. “Now about interest on loan I cannot at
all agree with you—cannot quite understand how you can ask reduction upon a bargain which has made you one
million of dollars [Frick’s 11 percent interest in Carnegie Steel, for which he had paid not a penny down, had
paid him average dividends of $500,000 a year] seems odd—Really I do feel when you look at it in this way you
will wish you had never suggested it.”¹⁷

Carnegie read as a veiled threat Frick’s rather gratuitous claim that he would rather sell his stock at a loss
and retire from the firm than force Carnegie to make a deal he was not comfortable with. But instead of
confronting Frick directly, which he dared not do as there was no knowing how the impetuous Mr. Frick might
respond, he digressed into a longwinded panegyric on the virtues of putting all one’s eggs into one basket and
the benefits of a partnership as compared to a corporation. He was, with masterful indirection, reminding
Frick that he expected him to concentrate on the steel, not the coke business, and to consult with his
partners, as he had neglected to do eighteen months earlier during the Homestead crisis. “I don’t believe a
man ever lived clever enough to attend to more than one Manfg. Enterprise—Not one—He neglects it to some
extent if he has other interests to employ his thoughts. He makes mistakes of omission or commission which he
would have avoided had his brains not been scattered.” It would, Carnegie conceded, have been preferable to
consolidate the Frick Coke Company and the Carnegie Steel Company so that Frick would not have to choose
between them, but that was not practicable at this moment. Neither company had the excess capital to purchase
the other and Carnegie was not willing to merge them into a publicly owned joint stock corporation. “Don’t
want anything to do with a corporation as long as I am in business—Partnership is the only thing—no one man
can manage well—every one needs the companionships of equals in business to contradict and differ from him—one
advises the other…I who write you thus have grown gray in the service and speak the words of soberness and
wisdom.”¹⁸

There was no response from Frick. Carnegie wrote him a second letter, this one nastier and more peremptory
than the first. Carnegie had learned that Harry Phipps, now retired and frightened by the effects of the
depression, was considering selling his Carnegie Steel shares at a discount, and that Frick had expressed
interest in buying them. Carnegie was furious at the thought that Frick had even considered making such a
deal. Carnegie Steel stock was not to be traded for; the partners had signed the ironclad agreement precisely
to prevent such deals. When a partner was ready to leave the company, he had no choice but to sell his stock
back to the company—at book value. “Don’t try to negotiate with H.P. for his interest because he won’t
negotiate…. Bargains from poor men carry noblessing—‘The Books’ has been our rule why should it be changed?
The firm can buy any of his shares with my approval at the Books.” Not yet finished berating his junior
partner, Carnegie went on to criticize him for not adjusting the book value of the Keystone Bridge properties,
as Phipps, fearing his shares were undervalued, had begged him to do. “You promised him to fix it…. You do
yourself wrong as I see it, to wish to treat your own partners worse than an outsider—I cannot understand this
attitude, so foreign to my feelings and I think should be to you. This is good gospel for you my friend—You
need a mixture of ‘sentiment’ to make you the supreme manager nature intended you. Feeling—Imaginations—and
Sentiment—these attract the best natures to you and none others are worth attracting.”¹⁹

Carnegie, of course, had no business lecturing Frick. Though his junior partner, Frick was neither a child nor
a business neophyte. He was a man of substance, in his mid-forties, a millionaire, and president and chairman
of the board of the nation’s most profitable steel company. It is true that he had tried to skirt the rules
Carnegie had set up, but he did so from the inside.

Frick had to have found it difficult to be on the receiving end of Carnegie’s deflating remarks; but rather
than say anything in his own defense, he remained silent, biding his time until Carnegie retired.

 

ANDREW CARNEGIE was as astute a politician as he was a capitalist and political economist. Political change
was in the air and it was important to pay attention to it. The election of 1892 had not only resulted in a
Democratic conquest of the White House and both houses of Congress, but in the appearance of a new—and, for
the eastern manufacturers, even more frightening force in American politics—the People’s Party or Populists
who, in their first national election, had polled over 1 million votes, or 8.5 percent of the total for their
presidential candidate. The Populists had also elected three governors, thirteen congressmen, and two
senators.²⁰

An optimist at heart, and one who believed fervently that the American capitalist system was just and
reasonable, Carnegie expected that those who stood outside the two-party mainstream would eventually troop
back in. But to hasten that process, it was necessary to tinker at the edges of the political economy and
remove the most obvious traces of corruption, inequity, and injustice.

The Democrats, following the lead of Grover Cleveland in 1888, had identified the protective tariff as the
root of all social, political, and economic evils. The growing power of trusts, combinations, and monopolies;
the exploitation of the many for the enrichment of the few; the corruption of the governing classes; the
prostitution of law and the courts; urban disorder and decay: all was charged, directly or indirectly, to the
operation of the protective tariff. Carnegie hoped that if the tariff issue could be taken off the political
table, it would become more difficult for politicians to rally support for legislation curbing or regulating
the economic power of industrial capitalists.

He was, for this reason, not terribly upset when Cleveland was elected president. While other Republican
manufacturers bemoaned the loss of the White House, Andrew Carnegie almost applauded it—and looked forward to
the Democratic conquest of the Senate as well—as he believed only the Democrats could reform the tariff and,
thereby, remove it from the political agenda. “Shall be sorry if Democrats don’t get full control Senate,” he
had written Frick from Italy in mid-December of 1892. “We can only be rated as honest and not ‘Robber Barons’
after the Democracy passes the bill [reforming the tariff] that takes the ‘Robbery’ feature out of the
question. They can’t attack their own bill by alleging Robbery still exists. No, their action must put down
Robbery—one cent per pound for steel doesn’t seem to leave much margin, but the public in part believe we have
been favored by law. Let the Democrats change these laws.”²¹

In December 1893, Carnegie traveled to Washington to lobby for tariff reform. He met with Senator Arthur
Gorman of Maryland, the chair of the Democratic caucus, and with his old comrade, Pittsburgh Republican
congressman John Dalzell. “Am an authority with both sides on Tariff,” he wrote Morley on December 17, “please
neither, but still I am pressed to say privately, ‘What shall we do?’” He positioned himself as a moderate who
believed that the protective tariff on iron and steel had to be lowered, but not precipitously; a Republican
who was more than willing to compromise with the new majority party; and a pragmatist who opposed his fellow
manufacturers’ unyielding opposition to any change in the tariff schedule.²²

On December 19, the House Ways and Means Committee, chaired by William Wilson of West Virginia, reported out
its tariff reform bill. Though the Wilson bill reduced tariffs more than Carnegie thought wise, it was, in his
estimation, a reasonable bill, which, with a bit of tinkering, could be made palatable to the nation’s
manufacturers. On Senator Gorman’s suggestion, Carnegie identified what he believed were the lowest possible
duties the iron and steel manufacturers would accept on beams, boiler plates, pig iron, hoop iron, rails, tin
plate, iron and steel sheets, and wire rods. His greatest fear, at this point, was not that Congress would
pass a bill reducing tariff rates on iron and steel products—he could live with this—but that the politicians
of both parties in both houses, having taken hold of the tariff issue, would sink their teeth in and never let
go.

“The inevitable discussion of the Wilson Bill, if it should continue for six months, is bound to keep the
country in turmoil,” he wrote Senator Gorman on January 2, 1894. He urged the Republicans to make only the
most necessary changes in the schedules and then do all they could to make the Democratic bill a law. “I think
manufacturers and Republicans in Congress should see that a reasonable bill passed by the Democratic party
would take the tariff out of politics for many years…. To secure this desirable result I think manufacturers
should be willing to take duties which seem to be lower than necessary. Much better low duties with stability
and general approval than high duties subject to attack and deemed unfair by any part of the people.” He
added, as a postscript, “I wish to see the ‘Robber Baron’ completely exterminated.”²³

The following day, as he prepared to sail to Europe en route to Alexandria, Carnegie wrote a confidential
letter to Whitelaw Reid and enclosed with it a letter to the editor to be published in the next day’s New York
Tribune. “Believe me the manufacturing interests need peace—Wilson Bill is nearly safe and can be made so.
There are 8 to 10 Democrats in Senate ready to agree to make necessary modifications provided our people stand
by them…. Don’t fear that passage of satisfactory tariff will enable Democrats to win next election. This is
impossible. Trade cannot revive before November or indeed later.”²⁴

His letter to the editor, which was addressed to his fellow Republicans, repeated these ideas in more decorous
language. “What seems most desirable in the interests of manufacturers of the United States is, that a tariff
bill should be passed by the Democratic party, and thereby, that the suspicion that even one ‘Robber Baron’
exits in the broad domain of the Republic, cannot remain in the mind of the most ignorant citizen.”²⁵

Carnegie had played politics in his own idiosyncratic style: by swooping into the middle of an issue,
positioning himself as a moderate power broker, having his say, and then departing in the expectation that his
reasoned analysis would carry the day. It didn’t. The Wilson bill became the plaything of the politicians,
each of whom had his own constituencies to protect. For six months, senators attached amendments to it, in the
end transforming it from a template for moderate reform to more of the same. Finally, as Richard Bensel has
written, “the House capitulated, adopting the Senate bill without change, 600 amendments and all. Cleveland
allowed the bill to become law without his signature.” Carnegie was not around for the sorry denouement. He
would not, in fact, return to the country until November 1894.²⁶

Though he would take credit for the tariff legislation that was finally passed, Carnegie’s attempt at
bipartisan compromise had failed. Neither the Republicans in Congress nor the manufacturers they represented
signed on. Rather than being saluted as a peacemaker and diplomat, he was criticized as a renegade and traitor
to his party and his class for supporting tariff reform.

 

CARNEGIE had at age fifty-eight decided to spend the winter of 1894 touring Egypt, which was all the rage for
wealthy Americans and Europeans at the end of the nineteenth century. Before leaving New York, he had, as
always, provided Frick with an itinerary, complete with mail and cable addresses. Arriving at Alexandria in
early February, he was delighted to find a first “cheering cable” awaiting him. Frick was, as requested,
busily scooping the market by accepting orders at prices his competitors could not meet. Carnegie warned him
about offering rails on credit to Collis Huntington of the Central Pacific, whom he did not consider “a first
class risk. Hope collections from him will be watched. So much for business.” He then proceeded to describe
his trip in delightful detail and asked Frick to pass on his letter to Dod “and the boys so I needn’t write
any others.” He and Louise were traveling up the Nile and had found “two splendid fellows” from New York.
“Rubber whist every night and lots fun—given two dinner parties…. Expect reach Cairo about 25th—spend a few
days there and about March 18th go to Naples for Amalfi, Sorrento, etc. and be in England about middle
April…where we shall be glad to receive the Frick household…really you ought to take a run over this year—you
missed it last summer—maybe Cluny do you more good—come to one or the other—nothing like a trip abroad—‘All
work and no play’ etc.” Though Carnegie complained about the grippe—he had become something of a
hypochondriac—he and Louise were enjoying their role as pampered tourists.

We are tanned like Indians by the hot son. Nights and mornings and in the shade always cool and truly the Nile
trip is a treat in store for you, only you of all men will be bored by it at first—such beggars, such dust and
squalor as I never saw—but the temples are great and the blue sky, green crops always—the banks and the
sunsets are all unequaled elsewhere. We take no interest in anything not at least 3000 years B. C. Think of
seeing the body of Rameses II—the greatest Conqueror Egypt ever had—buried over 3000 years ago and here he
lies in his mummy case in perfect preservation as far as form and features of the face are concerned…. Tired
but it is the exercise I need. Mrs. Carnegie is doing it all in her usual thorough manner—deeply impressed
with the work done by these people much farther before Christ than we are behind him—can’t quite understand
it.²⁷

For the next nine months, Frick would receive similar letters, filled with good tidings from abroad, a
suggestion or two about business, a plea for the Fricks to visit, and a bulletin about his health—“Am really
well—slight trace of nasal catarrah remain and I sneeze now and then.”²⁸

By April, Carnegie was safely settled in at Buckhurst, in Sussex, where he had leased an estate with its own
2,000-acre English park and chapel, equipped with servants, the latest in appliances, and thirty to forty
cases of the finest wines, bought from Hedges & Butler on Regent Street. While he still lived rather modestly
in New York, at least in comparison with his fellow millionaires, he felt no obligation to do so in England.
“Buckhurst appears to be spoiling all of us,” he wrote Hew Morrison, his chief lieutenant in Britain. “It is
now thought we should have at Cluny a galvanized iron house into which the laundry could be put, so that it
might be separated from the house as it is here. As you are a kind of ‘Consulting & Supervising Commissioner’
for Cluny, would you kindly look into this matter and see what we can get, and the price.”²⁹

He had asked Morrison to stock some fishing streams at Buckhurst with live trout and was disappointed to find
out that it could not be done this late in the season. “Trout cannot be sent by rail in warm weather,”
Morrison had written on May 31. “They could be sent to Buckhurst in February. The colder the weather the
better, the less the deaths by traveling and the more readily do the fish take to new ground.” Morrison
suggested that instead of shipping dead fish to Britain, Carnegie stock the “Cluny burns and loch,” where the
fish might survive the colder water. “My idea is that you should put in 500 at once of two-year old trout; so
that you may not have to wait long for sport there. You should strictly preserve the streams and loch for your
own personal use for two or three years. You could have fishing upon them next season.”³⁰

From England, Carnegie continued his assault on Frick. “Come over and get a rest to your brain—and if possible
come soon so you can all be with us. We shall have no other visitors…truly it is worth your while—and you can
come later to us in Scotland.” Carnegie was in fine shape now, having recovered from a bad cold that had
lingered for months. “I am gaining strength and yesterday fished and in afternoon walked and was not fatigued.
My only trouble has been ‘getting tired.’…Haven’t worked at anything since I left you. Can’t and don’t want
to. Mean to be idle all this year.”³¹

A week later, having heard nothing from Frick about a vacation, Carnegie tried again. “Whatever happens, you
take your holiday. No man can stand very long the strains to which you have been unfortunately subjected,
unless he takes intervals of rest under changed conditions.” In a handwritten postscript, he added: “You don’t
know the pleasure it will give us to take good care of you all.”³²

Frick, after several more letters, finally consented to bring his family to Cluny—though for a much shorter
stay than Carnegie had hoped for. As had become his custom, Carnegie had photographs taken of his guests posed
informally on the Cluny front steps. In the center of the frame, Andrew, in his hiking/picnicking outfit with
his checkered coat and hat and knee-high boots, sits upright, smiling. At the top of the photo, in the
doorway, Frick stands uncomfortably, almost slouching, with a rather grim expression on his face, looking as
if he would rather be in Pittsburgh.³³

 

CARNEGIE remained in Britain for several months after the Fricks departed, strangely reluctant, it appeared,
to step back into the whirlwind. The Pullman workers, many of whom belonged to the American Railway Union
(ARU) led by Eugene Debs, had gone out on strike against George Pullman’s Chicago works in the spring. After a
month off the job—and with no hint of compromise from Pullman—they were joined in a sympathy strike by the ARU
men, who refused to handle any trains with Pullman sleeping cars attached. Within days, some 50,000 railroad
workers had walked away from the trains, curtailing traffic into and out of Chicago. The strikes were broken
only when President Cleveland dispatched troops to get the trains moving again.

From Cluny, Carnegie kept track of events in Chicago, but refused to be disheartened by them. “It is too bad
that the country is just out of one great strike [Homestead] to be plunged into another,” he wrote Frick in
July. “But this will surely be short-lived. The present excited period through which the industrial world is
now passing will give place to years of very calm operations. To this you may look forward with confidence. I
hope you will not allow any but the most serious occasion to prevent or delay your getting a holiday.”³⁴

 

CARNEGIE STEEL continued to be pilloried in the press. Congress held its own investigation and issued a
damning report on the armor scandal, which was picked up by the press. Republican Whitelaw Reid led the charge
against Frick and Carnegie in an editorial in the New York Tribune on August 31, 1894. “In palming off those
defective and inadequate armor plates upon the government they were imperiling the lives of thousands of our
seamen and jeopardizing the nation’s honor and welfare, but they were making money. It is an appalling
conclusion. One shrinks from believing a thing so monstrous. And yet there is the record in all its hideous
simplicity and clearness.”³⁵

In previous years, Carnegie would have taken upon himself the role of public defender of Carnegie Steel. But
since Homestead, the little man who had once taken such delights in broadcasting his views had become
press-shy. He urged Frick to take his place as the company’s spokesman. “I note you are averse to newspaper
interviews,” Carnegie wrote from England in October 1894. “Well, they are easily abused, and in the hands of
any but the Master [was he referring, tongue-in-cheek, to himself?], are usually bad, but there are critical
exceptions.” If Frick was unwilling to represent Carnegie Steel to the press, then Carnegie suggested he hire
“a newspaper man.” Defending a large corporation was “a great art,” one that, he added parenthetically,
Francis Lovejoy, the company secretary who had been sending out the press releases, lacked. “If we were a
small concern you could easily play ostrich policy, put your nose in the sand and think your body hid, but we
are really a national institution.” Unfortunately, Carnegie Steel’s “overshadowing size” made it a target for
public criticism. “This is bad, very, but it is so and should be recognized…. In this age every public concern
(and we alas are such much to your regret and mine) must carry public sentiment with its action, and to do
this it is necessary to acquaint the public with this action as it is, i.e. from our standpoint. Think
carefully over this; to be unpopular with the masses (even other than our own employees) is to expose
ourselves to injury undeserved. It is not good business policy. If I were Chairman I should myself write an
account of all actions,” and make sure it was widely distributed.³⁶

Frick’s failures as a spokesman were more than compensated for by his brilliance as a financier and executive.
He was certainly the most talented businessman Carnegie had ever worked with. Carnegie remained
extraordinarily pleased with Frick’s shepherding of Carnegie Steel, and told him so. Their only area of
disagreement concerned Frick’s still divided loyalties. Carnegie had, on several occasions, recommended that
Frick give all his attention to Carnegie Steel and withdraw from management of H. C. Frick Coke. Frick refused
to even consider the possibility.

By January 1895, the two little titans of industry had been entangled with one another and in one another’s
businesses for a very long time. Unfortunately for Frick, Carnegie held all the cards. He was the chief
stockholder not only of Carnegie Steel but of Frick’s coke company as well.

The management of H. C. Frick Coke had been a sore point between the two men for more than a decade now.
Frick, as founder and president, desired only to be left alone. Carnegie, as chief stockholder, felt obligated
to intervene to protect his investment and Carnegie Steel’s supply of fuel. In July 1894, just before Frick
was to visit Cluny, he received an angry letter from Carnegie. Frick was considering entering into a temporary
pool agreement with his competitor in coke, William Rainey, much like the ones Carnegie Steel maintained with
its competitors in rails and beams. Carnegie was outraged. “You know that this proposed agreement is illegal,”
he wrote, knowing that if it was illegal, so too were his own pooling agreements. Carnegie demanded that Frick
merge his company with Rainey’s, as that was the only way to control Rainey, who had for years refused to
cooperate on prices or wages. “For my part, I should much rather sacrifice my interest in the concern [H. C.
Frick Coke] than be made a plaything for unfair competitors to sport with. As far as my stock is concerned,
and also my influence, I give you due notice I will never cease to protest and work against anything but
practical consolidation.”³⁷

The disagreement on how to deal with the renegade coke operator was put on hold when Frick agreed not to do
anything until the new year. He had that spring suffered through another disastrously violent coke strike in
the Connellsville region and was busy putting back the pieces. Rainey—he and Carnegie agreed during Frick’s
visit to Cluny—could wait.

In October, just before returning from Scotland, Carnegie brought up the Rainey matter again in a letter to
Frick. To facilitate the merger of H. C. Frick Coke with the Rainey firm, Carnegie suggested that it might be
necessary to flatter Rainey by suggesting that “one of his sons might make a good Vice President.” Frick
should consider whether he wanted to act as president of the merged firm or “whether it would not relieve you
considerably to let Rainey, or one of his sons Chairman. Anything of that kind should be offered in order to
get a start.”³⁸

 

ANDREW AND LOUISE returned to the United States in early November, 1894, after ten months abroad. Greeted by
reporters as he walked down the gangplank, Carnegie explained that “he had gone abroad to regain his health,”
the New York Times reported on November 4. “I have not felt so well for years.” He answered questions about
politics, Tammany Hall, the death of the czar, business conditions in England, and the recently passed tariff
bills, before the reporters moved on to interview the actress Lillie Langtry, who had also arrived on the
Paris.

Accompanying Andrew and Louise were several barrels of Scotch, 1888 vintage, for distribution to Carnegie
Steel’s most special friends. Frick cautioned Carnegie that he did not think it “proper at this time to send
Secretary [of the Navy] Herbert any,” as Carnegie Steel was in the process of submitting bids for new armor
contracts. There was no such obvious conflict of interest with Senator Matthew Quay, Republican senator from
Pennsylvania and state party boss, who received his own barrel, which Frick assured him would only improve
with age if left in the wood. In the meantime, Quay should drink from the gallon drawn from the barrel and
bottled separately.³⁹

Carnegie wasted no time in making his presence known, which did not greatly please Frick, who had done quite
well managing Carnegie Steel in his absence. The first meeting he attended on his return was in New York City
with Frick and Bethlehem Steel executives. The Navy had invited bids for millions of dollars of new contracts
for steel plate armor and guns for its battleships. Carnegie suggested to the Bethlehem executives that the
two companies either divide gun forgings and armor, 50 percent for each, or that Carnegie Steel take over the
armor business, leaving armaments contracts to Bethlehem. The companies eventually agreed on the second
division.

There was no such agreement on foreign contracts. Carnegie had earlier dispatched his cousin Dod to St.
Petersburg, followed by Millard Hunsiker, his armor expert, to negotiate a secret preemptive agreement for an
armor contract with the Russian government. He then sabotaged the effort by leaking the news of the potential
contract to the press, thereby alerting Bethlehem to the need to lower its bid.

Frick, who seldom, if ever, criticized Carnegie in public or in private, could not restrain himself in this
case. “I was astounded this morning,” he wrote Lieutenant C. A. Stone, a Navy officer with whom Carnegie Steel
worked closely, “to find that the newspapers had obtained knowledge of Mr. Hunsiker’s visit abroad. To my
mind, this could only have reached the public through one source (through our leading stockholder), who, it
seems, is not able to contain himself at any time or under any conditions. I will have this traced, and
ascertain. If it were an employe of this Company, we would have no further use for his services.” We don’t
know if he said anything to Carnegie about his indiscretion, but it is likely he did. And just as likely that
Carnegie denied that he had done the company any harm.⁴⁰

Following his New York meetings with Frick and the Bethlehem Steel officers, Andrew and Louise took the train
to Pittsburgh, where they stayed with the Fricks at Clayton for ten days.

A Carnegie trip to Pittsburgh resembled nothing so much as a royal visitation. On November 19, the Carnegies,
with a party of seventy or eighty, visited the Homestead works. “It might be well,” Frick had written Schwab
in advance, “if you can spare the time, to come in this afternoon and write out a little programme of what
they will see, so it can be distributed among them.” From Homestead, the Carnegie party took the train to
Braddock, where they were met at the station by General Superintendent James Gayley and taken on a tour of the
Carnegie Library. Frick accompanied them wherever they went. “Your letters would have had prompt attention,”
he apologized to a sales representative in New York, “but for the fact that Mr. Carnegie has been with us for
several days past and we have been very busy.”⁴¹

On his return to New York in late November, Carnegie dispatched a warm thank-you note to Frick. A few days
later, he was back on a train again, this time to Washington, D.C., to meet with coke company president
William Rainey to discuss a merger of his company with H. C. Frick Coke. Frick was neither invited to the
meeting nor notified that it was going to take place.⁴²

Frick was furious with Carnegie for going behind his back and meeting with Rainey. Rather than confronting
Carnegie in person during his visit to New York and dinner with Andrew and Louise in mid-December, Frick
waited until he had returned to Pittsburgh and then, in a brief, handwritten letter displaying neither anger
nor regret announced his intention to resign from Carnegie Steel.

“Having decided to sever my connection with this association January 1st next, it is but proper you should be
at once advised that you may arrange for my successor and the purchase of my interest. The affairs of this
association are in splendid shape as you know from examinations made during your recent visit here, in every
way better than at any time in the past and the outlook for the future very bright, otherwise I should not
think of retiring now.” Frick made no mention of the Rainey meeting, but cited personal reasons for his
decision. “The past six years have been trying ones to me, and my mind from necessity has been so absorbed in
looking after the interests of this great concern, I have had no time for anything else and feel now that I
need such a rest as only obtained by almost entire freedom from business cares.”⁴³

The simple truth was that Frick could no longer tolerate Carnegie’s meddling. For ten months now, he had run
Carnegie Steel and H. C. Frick Coke while the senior partner and chief stockholder in both companies
vacationed abroad. Had Carnegie remained in Britain, all might have been good. But Carnegie, having returned
to New York, had signaled that he had no intention of severing his ties to his companies or leaving Frick
alone to run his coke company.

Carnegie’s response was immediate—and condescending, the exact wrong tone for this situation. “I cannot
consider your note for one moment because you will decide upon reflection that it would not be worthy of you
to retire without proper notice to your partners and friends. To lay down such a business upon a few days
notice would not be fair and therefore I knew you too well to believe you will do it…. I have told you of my
desire to sell to you and my partners and that I only waited until our affairs were in order when such a
proposition could be made without adding to your cares. It is I who should be relieved My Dear Friend not
you…. You are yet young and should be my successor as chief owner a post I have told you I aimed at your being
and left it to you to say when you felt the Company was ready to take my interest.” He added, as a postscript:
“You are not well my Friend you are not well. You would never have done me this cruel injustice were you
well.”⁴⁴

A master of epistolary combat, Carnegie took the initiative in what was now a war of words. Having finished
his first letter, he sat down that same day to write another. “I wrote you the minute I had grasped the main
point in your letter. I have read it more carefully since and I must say it seems a nicer letter and more
worthy of you than at first glance appeared…. My Friend, let me now say that what strain you have borne
surprises me; that I have insisted on holidays for you perhaps to the point of pressure because I knew
(although you didn’t apparently) that no brain, no not even yours, and your temperament (the latter as rare as
the former) could stand it. Trips to Europe, recreation—hasn’t that been my text—not purely because we should
thereby have the services of your rare ability, but I can say because I liked you and yours as friends.”
Carnegie suggested that, instead of resigning, Frick “take a long holiday and go to Egypt.” He ended his
letter with another melodramatic twist: “As I write your face appears to me as it was the other night when you
came to us to dinner. It was worn, you were tired, overstrained, long meetings, vital questions, discussions,
had worn you out. I am not alone in seeing recently that just as I was this time last year so now you require
just what I did; and if you can only be restored as I have been, to pristine health you will return and smile
at matters which now (in your tired state) seem gigantic and annoying. All your partners ask (at least I ask)
is that you will be patient and try the cure—not one of them would endanger your health.”⁴⁵

Frick’s response was as brusque and cold as Carnegie’s had been gracious and affectionate. In a second
handwritten note, intended only for Carnegie, and therefore not given to the typist, Frick replied that he had
“carefully read your note of the 18th. I think I understand what is due between partners and friends and that
to a large extent has influenced my action. The decision to retire from the firm was made after the most
serious consideration, and I see no reason to recall it.”⁴⁶

On December 21, Frick and Carnegie met with the secretary of the navy at the Shoreham Hotel in Washington to
discuss future armor contracts. After the meeting, they talked for the first time about Frick’s resignation.
Carnegie tried to placate Frick by offering to withdraw as chief stockholder and sell his shares in Carnegie
Steel to his partners. “I thought he was delighted” with the proposition, Carnegie would later write Harry
Phipps.

Back in New York, Carnegie put his plans into writing, the two men’s favored form of communication with one
another. “My wish is to close my business career fittingly—a splendid close. The opening of the Library [the
dedication of the Pittsburgh library was scheduled for October 1895], or rather handing it over to good old
Pittsburgh would furnish this.” Carnegie proposed to sell his stock in Carnegie Steel to “my dear friends and
trusted partners” and receive, in return, twenty-or thirty-year, 6 percent bonds, which he would disperse as
gifts “to the various Institutions I have established subject to the revenue coming to me during life…. The
main point with Mrs. Carnegie and me is the fitting close to my business life. Both set much store upon this
ending Oct…. I have always intended to hand over my interests to my young partners, and, as you know, I have
since my return explained this to you. Assist me then to realize my aim. All of you take the wealth and give
me dignified retirement. You will have my blessing, and if I can ever be of service, and am asked advice or my
assistance, it will be given—perhaps if I saw something awfully wrong, I might give advice unasked—very
likely—the C.S. Co. must always be near to me.”⁴⁷

Carnegie’s proposal was unacceptable, as he must have known. While it would have guaranteed him a lifetime
income—and an immediate infusion of new assets to donate to his various causes—his partners would be left with
the burden of paying him 6 percent annual interest on $14 million of first-mortgage bonds, a debt no firm
could afford to carry. Frick refused to even discuss the proposal. Having made up his mind to leave the steel
company, he was not going to change it. He was exhausted by the strain of running two companies at once,
worried that he was not paying enough attention to his own coke company, anxious about the health and mental
well-being of his wife and children, concerned about the million dollars or more he owed Carnegie for his
Carnegie Steel stock, and furious at Carnegie’s pigheaded certitude that he knew better than Frick how to
manage the H. C. Frick Coke Company.

Carnegie, for his part, continued to add fuel to the fire. Rather than admit that he had done anything wrong
in meeting secretly with Frick’s rival, William Rainey, he claimed now that he had done Frick a favor by
excluding him from the early negotiations that might not have led anywhere. On December 23, he had written to
tell Frick that he was going to meet with Rainey again, accompanied this time by John Walker, a Frick Coke Co.
stockholder, but not a director. “The F.C. Co. should be entirely free from any participation in the
negotiation,” Carnegie wrote. “Now don’t object to let Walker and me go ahead and see what can be done. Of
course we have no power to conclude anything…. Trust your pards and don’t know anything just yet. You remember
eating of the tree of knowledge was once disastrous. There is nothing to know anyhow—but F.C. Co. should keep
aloof—that much is clear to you.”⁴⁸

Frick forwarded Carnegie’s proposal to Walker and informed hm that he had washed his hands of anything to do
with Rainey, Carnegie, or H. C. Frick Coke. “Under no circumstances would I interfere now, or do anything that
would look like interfering with what a large stockholder thinks is going to greatly benefit this Company. Let
him now work it out his own way…. He did not keep his agreement with me, but, leaving my feelings out of the
question, he has already done the Frick Coke Company great harm, in my opinion. You will observe he does not
send the letter, or a copy of it, received from Rainey. He does not know the man he is dealing with, nor
enough about the business, or the affairs of this Company, to negotiate with him if he did.”⁴⁹

Two days later, Frick repeated his message—this time in a letter to Carnegie—that any attempt to negotiate
with Rainey was bound to fail. “Rest assured, however, I shall do nothing to interfere in the slightest with
your program in this matter, much as I deplore the way in which you started about it. Whether you fail or not,
I cannot help but think you have placed the Frick Coke Company in a very awkward position indeed. One thing
sure, you have added greatly to the merriment of friend Rainey this Holiday season.”⁵⁰

When Carnegie at last invited Frick to join him in the merger discussions with Rainey, Frick angrily declined.
“You must really get along without me in this negotiation. I thought you had learned there was nothing like
starting right, but while the start in this has not been in accordance with my ideas, as you know, yet, let me
repeat, I will not in any way hinder nor interfere with your negotiations, and have so written Mr. Walker, and
you cannot now afford to lay down and hereafter say it was because I took exception to your way of going about
it. That is all I have done, or will do, so you have a clear field. I have had the ‘pith’ taken out of me
times without number, but have seen the thing through without flinching and without sympathy. You now have my
sympathy in this, and shall have my support if you evolve something with Rainey that is really to the benefit
of the stockholders of Frick Coke Company.”⁵¹

Carnegie, recognizing belatedly that Frick was dead serious about resigning, wrote Phipps a rambling,
repetitive letter, imploring him to come to New York as soon as possible.

None of the firm know the trouble and none shall know it but you and you not till you come and unless it be
necessary to tell you…. It’s not surprising. Frick is not well. He is breaking down and is not of former
power…. Now this isn’t my sole opinion either—but rest may cure him—I hope so—I shall say no more…. I am so
sorry for Frick. No man could have stood the strain. He ought to have rest. He is not well.
Unhappy—overstrained—irritable—all nonsense to talk of his action being caused by our relations for these have
never been so thoroughly pleasant. He wishes to sell out, etc., but I shall try to dissuade him and certainly
will do nothing till you come and we decide together. He resigned with you once please remember [in 1887, when
he was ordered to end the strike at Connellsville] and I had to support you—but this time you will find more
serious reasons for him doing so I fear, his health—but now please don’t go and talk to anyone about this till
you come and see and even not then. I have not told a soul of what happened here—not one and won’t not even
you till you come down and it is necessary…. What rest will do we know not but I hope he will return to us
again as he did from your resigning crisis.⁵²

What happened next defies explanation. Carnegie forwarded the letter intended for Phipps to Frick in
Pittsburgh. It could only have been an accident. He had written Phipps at the same time that he was writing
Frick and must have put the wrong letters in the wrong envelopes.

Frick responded on New Year’s Day 1895.

“It is high time you should stop this nonsensical talk about me being unwell, overstrained etc.,” he wrote
Carnegie, “and treat this matter between us in a rational business like way. If you don’t I will take such
measures as will convince you that I am fully competent to take care of myself in every way. If ever a man
penned a sillier lot of nonsense than you did when you wrote that letter to Mr. Phipps—copy of which you sent
me, I should as a curiosity like to see it. It is from start to finish untrue and you know it.” Frick then
quoted back much of what Carnegie had written to Phipps. “Why do you write such stuff?…I desired to quietly
withdraw, doing as little harm as possible to the interests of others, because I had become tired of your
business methods, your absurd newspaper interviews and personal remarks and unwarranted interference in
matters you knew nothing about. It has been your custom for years when any of your partners disagreed with you
to say they were unwell needed a change, etc. I warn you to carry this no further with me but come forward
like a man and purchase my interest, and let us part before it becomes impossible to continue to be
friends.”⁵³

Instead of apologizing or explaining away what he had said—how could he?—Carnegie continued on the offensive.
“Of course some mistake has happened about letter to Mr. Phipps,” he wrote at once. “Perhaps what I scribbled
was not sent to him at all—I probably wrote him a cooler statement—I believe I did. I cannot understand it….
What I scribbled I don’t know, but still, my friend, I do know you will recognize in it one who likes you and
values you.” As he proceeded, Carnegie became angrier and angrier at the man he had tried so hard to befriend.

In the most sacred manner I asked if I might speak as a friend which I said was to be held sacred—you agreed—I
did,—and judge my surprise—You disregarded your obligation and told it as a charge I had made about you—I
spoke as your best friend and you knew it. Wrong I may be, there may be nothing in it. You may have been
yourself during your visit here—so be it—think so if you can but at the same time believe there may be
something in it—I am not alone wrong, if wrong—Now I wish to be friends as much as you do…. It is simply
ridiculous, my dear Mr. Frick, that any full grown man is not to make the acquaintance of Mr. Rainey, or
anybody else, without your august permission—really laughable—but I did not do it till you had given approval.
No use corresponding any more. You are determined to resign. All right. I am forced to agree that the work of
the Carnegie Steel Company and the Frick Coke Company is too much for any man…. No one values you more highly
as a partner, but as for being Czar and expecting a man shall not differ with you and criticize you, No. Find
a slave elsewhere, I can only be a man and a friend.

He signed himself, “Your friend still, Andrew Carnegie.”⁵⁴

Five days later, in Pittsburgh, at a special meeting of the board of managers with Carnegie and Lauder in
attendance, Frick formally tendered his resignation as chief executive officer of Carnegie Steel. The
resignation was accepted at a second meeting a few days later. Carnegie took back 5 percent of Frick’s stock,
relieving him of the debt he had carried to pay for it, then turned 3 percent over to John Leishman, who
succeeded Frick as president. Frick remained in place as chairman of the board.

 

IN THE END, what is most remarkable is that after all this turmoil and mutual recrimination, the situation at
Carnegie Steel remained much the same. Frick resigned from his position as president of Carnegie Steel in
1895, but he did not leave the firm entirely. On the contrary, he retained his position as chairman of the
board of managers and continued to exercise a considerable degree of power. “As you know,” Frick wrote Jay
Morse at Illinois Steel, on January 11, the day the new arrangements were formally approved, “I have for a
long time been anxious to be relieved of a great deal of detail work in connection with the Steel Company, and
have at last been able to bring it around pleasantly. I enclose (for your eyes only), and which return after
you have read, the changes we have adopted…. I shall take the same interest in the concern as I have
heretofore done. Mr. Leishman will fill the position of President.”⁵⁵

Neither Frick nor Carnegie was willing, in the final resort, to sever their ties with one another. Carnegie
could ill afford to lose the talents of so remarkable a businessman as Henry Clay Frick. Frick, for his part,
had no choice but to remain an officer of Carnegie Steel, if only to protect his 6 percent share of the
company—and his coke company which remained, in all but name, a subsidiary of Carnegie Steel.

## TWENTY-SEVEN

## Sixty Years Old, 1895–1896

APPROACHING his sixtieth birthday, Andrew Carnegie looked very much as he had at fifty and would at seventy.
His hair and beard were entirely white and closely trimmed; his eyes piercing and alert; his physique that of
a man in excellent health.

He had not changed his daily routines in twenty years. He began every morning at his writing desk, with a
secretary at his side to take dictation and type up his letters. He regularly shared his unsolicited views on
matters of domestic and international affairs with John Morley, William Gladstone, Lord Salisbury, Lord
Rosebery, Joseph Chamberlain, Arthur Balfour, and James Bryce in Britain, and with whoever happened to be in
the White House or heading up the State Department in Washington. His dear friend James G. Blaine was no
longer on the scene as Republican power broker in chief and secretary of state, but Carnegie enjoyed almost
equally strong ties with the Republican secretaries of state who succeeded him, including John Foster, John
Sherman, John Hay, Elihu Root, and Philander Knox, his former attorney in Pittsburgh.

Beginning in the winter of 1895, much of his letter writing had to do with the boundary dispute between
Britain and Venezuela. For more than fifty years, Venezuela had protested what it considered to be Britain’s
inclusion of Venezuelan territory in British Guiana; for the past twenty, it had petitioned the United States
for assistance in settling the border dispute. Finally, in 1895, Congress, claiming that the Monroe Doctrine
authorized it to intervene in the matter, passed a resolution calling on the British government to submit the
dispute to impartial international arbitration. President Cleveland directed his secretary of state, Richard
Olney, to draft a diplomatic note to the British foreign secretary, reinforcing Congress’s call for
arbitration. Lord Salisbury, who happened to be both British prime minister and foreign secretary, had ten
years earlier declined a similar request for arbitration. This time around, Salisbury again refused
arbitration, asserting that Britain did not recognize the applicability of the Monroe Doctrine that Olney had
asserted bound the United States to protect Venezuela. President Cleveland’s response was to increase the
tension by asking for congressional authority to appoint an American commission to determine the rightful
boundary between Venezuela and British Guiana, the implication being that when the boundary line was fixed,
the American government would recognize it.

Though war with Britain over Venezuela was a preposterous idea at a time when the United States had three
warships to Britain’s fifty, that did not stop Henry Cabot Lodge and Theodore Roosevelt from arguing that the
Monroe Doctrine must be defended at all costs. “‘Personally I rather hope the fight will come soon,’ Roosevelt
wrote Lodge…. ‘The clamor of the peace faction has convinced me that the country needs a war. Let the fight
come if it must; I don’t care whether our sea coast cities are bombarded or not; we would take Canada.’”¹

As rhetoric on both sides escalated, William James at Harvard attempted to insert some reason into the
discussion. In letters to the Crimson, influential friends, and his congressman, James criticized both
President Cleveland’s “fearful blunder” and the almost unanimous support his bellicose message had received
from press and politicians. Reasoned analysis and discourse, James charged, had given way to frenzied,
impulsive, and dangerous threats to international peace—and over a simple border dispute.²

Carnegie joined James and others in the “peace faction” that Roosevelt so detested. The border crisis in
Venezuela was tailor-made for his intervention, or so he believed. He had influential friends on both sides of
the Atlantic, access to major organs of opinion, and an intuitive understanding of public opinion in Britain
and the United States. In separate letters to the editors of the New York Sun and the The Times of London, he
pleaded with both sides to listen to reason. He exhorted the British people to pressure their government to
accept the American offer of arbitration, while cautioning Americans that the Europeans were in the final
stages of their exit from the western hemisphere and, if left alone, would leave peaceably. “Let us recognize
the position of these old lands, which so recently possessed the American Continent, and treat them with all
the patience and courtesy possible, making their exit as little distressful to them as we can.”³

When the British government continued to reject calls for arbitration, Carnegie changed his tune and singled
out the British for their intransigence. In a lengthy article entitled “The Venezuelan Question,” published in
February 1896 in the North American Review, he accomplished the near-impossible feat of defending British
imperialism in theory while criticizing it in practice. He began by acknowledging that “the English-speaking
race is the ‘boss’ race of the world. It can acquire, can colonize, can rule…. The action of the race in the
old home and in the new in regard to territorial acquisition has…been precisely the same. The mother has
dominated or acquired almost everything with which she has come in contact and which she coveted, and the son
[the United States] has been no discredit to his mother in the same line. It is a root passion, some of us
think a prerogative, of our race to acquire territory.”⁴

The means by which this territory had been acquired—by both Americans and British—was not always legal or
strictly moral, but this was not to be regretted. “The management of the land acquired by our race has been
best for the higher interests of humanity. It is an evolution, the fittest driving out the least fit; the best
supplanting the inferior; and the interests of civilization rendered the acquisition of the land necessary. It
was right and proper that the nomadic Indian should give place to the settled husbandman in the prairies of
the East; it is also well that the Maori should fade away, and give place to the intelligent, industrious
citizen, a member of our race.” Carnegie had no intention of holding Great Britain up “to peculiar opprobrium
for playing the wolf to the Venezuelan lamb.”⁵

What he objected to was that the British had rejected out of hand McKinley’s request that the boundary dispute
be submitted to arbitration. For Carnegie, the principle of peaceable arbitration was—and he fully understood
the irony here—a cause worth going to war over. He had, he declared in his article, recently resigned as vice
president of the Peace Society because he could not its accept its “peace at any price” principles. “Peaceful
arbitration is one of the few causes for which it is not only justifiable, but a duty to fight…. If ever the
industrial, peace-loving Republic has to draw the sword, may it be in vindication of peaceful arbitration, in
international disputes, the Christian substitute for barbarous war.”⁶

No swords would be drawn. With more serious issues to contend with in Europe, Lord Salisbury backed away from
his refusal to arbitrate, and Cleveland and Olney tempered their rhetoric. The crisis environment dissipated
almost as rapidly as it had taken shape.

While the subject of arbitration was removed from the public agenda, however, it continued to preoccupy
Carnegie, whose goal now was to get the United States and Britain to sign a formal treaty, pledging each
nation to submit all future disputes to impartial arbitration. When William Dodge, the president of a new
society “formed in the United States to labor for the completion of a general treaty of arbitration between
the two branches of our race,” asked for his support, Carnegie enthusiastically sent off letters to the
influential British politicians he was in contact with, including Balfour, Chamberlain, Gladstone, Rosebery,
and Morley, formally introducing them to Mr. Dodge.⁷

From Italy where he, Louise, and Stella vacationed in May and June 1896, and Cluny, where they spent the
summer and fall, Carnegie waged his campaign, entreating his friends in high places to exert pressure on
Salisbury to publicly declare himself—and the British government—in favor of an arbitration treaty. “Truly
this Arbitration [as a substitute] for War,” he wrote Gladstone, “seems to me the noblest question of our time
& I do wish that you could have put your stamp upon it now.” When John Morley published an article in favor of
arbitration, Carnegie praised him to the skies. “Never have I a read a stronger article…. It is so calm, yet
so clear and decided, that it must strongly affect Lord Salisbury…. I wish Mr. Gladstone could be induced to
support your view…. I feel that it is the most important step forward that our race can take in our day.”⁸

 

IN THE AFTERMATH of the Homestead strike, Carnegie had lowered his public profile. In November 1895, within
days of celebrating his sixtieth birthday and exactly three years after the Amalgamated had called off its
strike, he marked his return to public life by taking the train to Pittsburgh to preside over the opening of
his monumental new library.⁹

The dedication was held in the Music Hall portion of the building on November 5. The festivities began just
after 8:30 P.M. with the solemn entrance onto the stage of the platform party, each man—and they were all
men—bowing to the audience as he entered and took his seat. After a brief invocation by the Episcopal bishop,
Carnegie was formally introduced and gave the speech he had that afternoon distributed to the newspapers in
time to make the next day’s front pages. He began, somewhat defensively, by announcing that he was speaking at
the request of the trustees, who desired that he “state the reasons” and the “objects which I had in view” in
donating money for the Pittsburgh library. He recapitulated in brilliantly concise and incisive prose the
principles he had earlier laid out in his “Gospel of Wealth” articles, defending himself from his critics as
he did so.

It was inevitable, he argued, that “surplus wealth must sometimes flow into the hands of the few…. To one to
whom surplus comes, there come also the questions: What is my duty? What is the best use that can be made of
it?” Carnegie had determined early in life that he had no call on this surplus as an individual, but that it
had been given him as “a sacred trust, to be administered during life…for the best good of my fellowmen.” He
asked now to be judged by the uses to which he put his money: “the enlightenment and the joys of the mind…the
things of the spirit…all that tends to bring into the lives of the toilers of Pittsburgh sweetness and light.”
He had built a library to foster a taste for reading, learning, and self-improvement; a museum with plaster
casts of the “world’s masterpieces of sculpture,” so that those who could not travel abroad could enjoy and
learn from these rarest, “most interesting and instructive objects”; an art gallery because there was “no
surer means of improving the tastes of men…than through color and the sense of beauty”; and a Music Hall to
spread among the masses of the people “the appreciation and the love of music” which the more prosperous
already enjoyed. His objective was to provide the “masses” with cultural benefits that, until then, had been
reserved for the wealthy. “If Library, Hall, Gallery or Museum be not popular and attract the manual toilers,
and benefit them, it will have failed in its mission; for it was chiefly for the wage-earners that it was
built by one who was himself a wage-earner, and who has the good of that class greatly at heart.”

After “great and prolonged applause,” Carnegie was followed to the podium by William N. Frew, the president of
the library board of trustees, who announced that Carnegie had established a $1 million endowment for the
galleries and museum, thus bringing “the total of Mr. Carnegie’s gifts…in round numbers, to five million
dollars.” Then it was the turn of the governor, the mayor, and the local congressman to shower the donor with
praise. The governor and mayor were mercifully concise; Congressman Dalzell, the last speaker, went on
forever, recalling in florid language the glories of Pittsburgh, republican institutions, and Andrew Carnegie.
“There are unnumbered hearts here and elsewhere, in this, the land of his adoption, and across seas in the
land of his birth, that beat to the measure of ‘God bless Andrew Carnegie,’ and hearts shall continue thus to
beat through generations yet unborn and by us unnumbered.”

For the moment at least, the ghosts of Edgar Thomson and Homestead, of the vanquished Knights and the
Amalgamated, were put to rest. After three years of virtual silence, much of it spent overseas, Carnegie had
come home a hero and would venture forth in triumph. He had, as it were, bought himself absolution—or at least
forgetfulness, which amounted to the same.

Pittsburgh was already established as the nation’s premier industrial city and Carnegie’s name indelibly
associated with it. Just as he was not content to be regarded only as a businessman, so too did he not want
his American hometown to be known only for its smokestacks. His goal, as he would write William Frew in 1897,
was that “not only our own country, but the civilized world will take note of the fact that our Dear Old Smoky
Pittsburgh, no longer content to be celebrated only as one of the chief manufacturing centres, has entered
upon the path to higher things, and is before long, as we thoroughly believe, also to be noted for her
preeminence in the Arts and Sciences.”¹⁰

He would continue to contribute his money—and his ideas—toward this goal for the rest of his life. In 1896, he
appointed John Beatty, the secretary of the Art Society of Pittsburgh and the director of the Pittsburgh
School of Design, to head up the institute’s fine arts department. Beatty’s first task—and, from this point on
perhaps his most important, certainly his most public—was to organize the Pittsburgh art show, the precursor
of what would become known as the Carnegie International.

Unlike his colleague Henry Frick and the majority of his wealthy contemporaries, Carnegie had no reverence for
the old masters or contemporary European artists. He intended, instead, to make his Pittsburgh art gallery the
first museum of modern American art. In his “deed of trust,” he provided for the establishment of a
“Chronological Collection, intended to represent the progress of painting in America, beginning with the year
1896.” Prizes would be offered for the two oil paintings by American artists judged “of the highest artistic
merit, and worthy to represent the best American art of the year.” These works would be purchased for the
gallery’s permanent collection; runners-up would be exhibited annually in what was, at the time, “the single
largest art event in the United States.” The first prizewinner—and the first oil painting purchased for the
permanent collection—was Winslow Homer’s The Wreck.¹¹

One hundred and fifty-four artists were represented in the 1896 exhibition, but only sixty of them were
American, and only thirty from Pennsylvania. This was not what Carnegie had intended, as he made clear to
William Frew, the day after the opening. “I cannot but think that [Mr. Beatty] devoted too much attention to
the foreign pictures, while the primary object of the Exhibition is to encourage American Art…. The absence of
the most noted American artists is very marked.” Carnegie was also disappointed by the lack of attention his
Pittsburgh exhibition had received in the national press. There had not been “the slightest mention in any of
the papers here [in New York] this morning…. The public sentiment is all right in Pittsburgh, but it now
remains to bring the Exhibition before the country.”[*][1]¹²

 

THE SECOND, but not less important, component of the Carnegie library complex was the Museum of Natural
History. In 1898, Carnegie appointed William J. Holland, a former minister, zoologist, and the chancellor of
Western University of Pennsylvania, as director. His initial charge was to “develop collections representative
of the Appalachian region,” but Holland quickly broadened his mission, with Carnegie’s approval. He purchased
the collection of the Academy of Science and Art of Pittsburgh and supplemented it with gifts from Carnegie,
including two mummies he had brought back from Egypt and a collection of anatomical models from Paris.

If the Museum of Natural History was going to be, as Carnegie intended, a world-class institution, it needed
more than mummies, anatomical models, and Appalachian minerals. It had to have a dinosaur or two. The dinosaur
was more than simply a crowd-pleaser. For Carnegie and other devotees of evolutionary science, it was an apt
symbol of the unpredictability of a universe in which species and races fell into extinction when they failed
to adapt to new environments. For men of slight stature, such as Carnegie, there must have been something
quite enthralling about this most vivid demonstration that size and power did not guarantee survival.

In December 1898, William Randolph Hearst’s New York Journal ran a full-page story on the discovery of the
bones of the “Most Colossal Animal Ever on Earth” in Wyoming. Carnegie determined at once to bring them to
Pittsburgh. “My Lord—can’t you buy this for Pittsburgh—try,” he wrote Holland, enclosing the clipping.
“Wyoming State University isn’t rich—get an offer—hurry.”¹³

Holland contacted William Reed, the Wyoming man who claimed to have found the dinosaur bones. He assured
Carnegie that he could get the dinosaur for Pittsburgh, but it was going to “cost some time, labor, and
money.” Excavating the dinosaur would be only the beginning. Carnegie would have to come up with the funds to
build a great hall “for the display of such a monster.” “See what you can do,” Carnegie wrote back. “I should
like to do the Colossal [build a new hall] for the Colossal by the Colossal Lord Chancellor [Carnegie had
begun to refer jokingly to Chancellor Holland as Lord Chancellor].”¹⁴

In March 1899, Holland took the train to Wyoming to meet with Reed. He discovered that the land on which the
bones had been found was claimed by the University of Wyoming. When he tried to arrange a sale of the claim,
the Wyoming officials turned him down flat. So he did what experienced miners—for minerals or dinosaurs—do in
such cases; he filed a competing land claim.

With the tenacity of a bulldog and Carnegie’s money behind him, William Holland eventually secured the rights
to the claim, stole the American Museum of Natural History’s top paleontologist, and dispatched a full crew of
scientists, assistants, and cowboy-laborers to excavate the Wyoming bone fields. The bones were cleaned,
labeled, and photographed; saturated in gum Arabic; wrapped in tissue paper, then wrapped again in
plaster-soaked burlap; packed into wooden crates that had been lined with hay; hoisted onto a horse-drawn
wagon; and driven to the Union Pacific siding, where they were loaded onto freight cars for shipment to
Pittsburgh.¹⁵

In mid-October 1899, the first freight car arrived in Pittsburgh. By mid-May of 1900, enough bones had been
pried lose of their bandages, cleaned, studied, and assembled to allow the museum’s new chief paleontologist
to draw a full skeleton, though with the wrong cervical vertebrae attached. The drawing of what was now known
as Diplodocus carnegii was framed and sent to Scotland for Carnegie to display.

It had become clear to everyone involved that the dinosaur model, when finally assembled, was going to be too
large to fit in the space assigned to the natural history museum. The only solution was to enlarge the
building, which was fine with Carnegie. Frew, the president of what was now known as the Carnegie Institute,
was delegated to oversee the design and construction of the new building. It was no easy assignment. Carnegie,
who on these matters professed—rightly—to know more about real estate and construction than Frew did,
ridiculed almost every recommendation Frew offered to him. Why, he wanted to know, was Frew even considering
building in a new location, instead of adding an extension at the old one? And didn’t Frew know that it was
impossible to build a hall that was suitable for both orchestral music and grand opera? In the end, the Music
Hall would be the only component of the institute that was not enlarged.¹⁶

Frew persevered and the plans for the new building were, after much give-and-take, approved by Carnegie, who,
on selling Carnegie Steel in 1901, donated an additional $5 million for construction. When the building was
completed in 1907, Carnegie doubled the endowment of what was now known as the Carnegie Institute from $4 to
$8 million.¹⁷

 

IF SOMEONE had told Carnegie ten or twenty years earlier that, at age sixty, he would still be tied to his
Pittsburgh businesses, he would have scoffed aloud. But Frick’s change of title and responsibilities had left
a hole in the management of Carnegie Steel. Carnegie had trusted Frick more than he could imagine trusting any
successor. Now that Frick had given up the day-to-day management of the firm, Carnegie felt obligated to pay
more careful attention.

The business had been designed to run much like the railroad, with department heads reporting to vice
presidents who reported to a president who reported to a board. Unlike the railroads, however, Carnegie Steel
was a partnership, not a corporation and, because it raised its investment capital internally, beholden not to
outside financial interests and directors, but to the senior partner and majority stockholder. The Carnegie
board was not, in name or function, a board of directors, but a “board of managers” comprised of the nine men
who occupied the most critical management positions in the firm. Every member of the board was a partner, but
together they controlled a small minority of the stock. The two largest stockholders, Carnegie and Harry
Phipps, were not board members and did not attend board meetings.

The month after Frick stepped down, Carnegie instructed Francis Lovejoy, the board secretary, to rewrite the
company’s by-laws, in consultation with Philander Knox, the firm’s chief counsel. He wanted everything done
precisely by the books, so whatever happened next, there would be no legal trouble. The new by-laws should, he
instructed Lovejoy, provide Carnegie, as majority stockholder, with veto power over board decisions and full,
precise minutes of the proceedings of board meetings. “Some suggestions I made to Mr. Frick are, I think,
important: that the votes of each member, pro and con, in the Board shall be recorded; that no new
undertakings be gone into except by a two-third majority of the total number of the Board, nor new methods
adopted.”¹⁸

Later that year, Carnegie reminded Lovejoy that the minutes should not only record every member’s vote on
every issue, but “in addition to this…any reason or explanation which a member desires to give for his vote.
If this were properly done, then any of us looking over the Minutes would be able to judge of the judgment
displayed by the voter, which of course, would affect his standing with his colleagues. It would bring
responsibility home to him direct, and I do not see any other way that will enable us to judge whether any of
our partners has good judgment or not…. The minutes cannot err in being too full, the fuller the better. They
can err in being too much curtailed.”¹⁹

Carnegie gave the board the right to make decisions, but insisted that it understand he had veto power over
those decisions, should he care to exercise it. The minutes, with verbatim reports on what each board member
said, were the vehicles through which he kept track of the decision-making process. He went through the
minutes of each meeting with pencil in hand, providing “thoughts on the minutes” in the margins and in long
memos that he forwarded to Pittsburgh to be distributed to board members.

He kept abreast of recent developments in Pittsburgh through letters from Frick, who, having resigned as
president, oversaw long-range projects as chairman of the board of managers. He received as well annual and
biannual financial reports from Carnegie Steel and H. C. Frick Coke and monthly statements on profits and
loss, disposition of profits, stock of materials on hand, frieght tonnage into and out of the plants, and pig
iron production and coke consumption for each furnace.

Carnegie welcomed the give-and-take of long-distance debate and had no problem with partners who disagreed
with him, as long as they provided facts, figures, and analyses to back up their conclusions. When, in January
1896, he discovered that the company had bought “two bankrupt furnaces” without his explicit approval, he was
outraged. “I leave you to imagine how unsatisfactory it is to have such surprises sprung upon one.” In a
sharply worded letter to John Leishman, Carnegie protested against what he took to be “an unwarranted stretch
of authority upon the part of yourself and the other members of the Board and certainly a violation of every
sound principle governing business affairs. I am sorry to have to write this, but I cannot live and have the
C.S. Co. degraded to the level of speculators and Jim Cracks, men who pass as manufacturers, but who look to
the market and not to manufacturing, and who buy up bankrupt concerns, only to show their incapacity.”²⁰

Within a year, Leishman had been relieved of his duties. He was replaced by Charlie Schwab, Carnegie’s
fair-haired boy, who, still only thirty-five years of age, could be molded into the type of executive Carnegie
needed to run his companies. The way to Carnegie’s heart, Charlie Schwab discovered, was to give him
information. On taking office, Schwab arranged to meet weekly with the mill superintendents, detailed minutes
of which were dispatched to Carnegie. These meetings, Carnegie wrote Schwab with evident delight, were “one of
the best ideas that has ever entered your fertile brain.”²¹

It was not easy working for Carnegie. In August 1897, Schwab recommended and the board unanimously approved
spending $1 million for improvements at Homestead and Duquesne, the broad outlines of which Carnegie had
already agreed to. When Carnegie received the minutes with the decision, he assailed all the board members,
but particularly Schwab, for having approved the request without sufficient debate. “A very large question is
presented to us which should receive months of study…I am not to be considered as deciding that the proposed
changes are not desirable; I have had no opportunity to form a judgment upon the subject, but this I do
venture to submit to the Board…that no such important steps should be taken in haste. There does not seem to
be much use in sending copies of Minutes to absent partners, if great questions are to be summarily disposed
of.” The board members were astounded at Carnegie’s overreaction. They had approved the resolution without
debate because there was nothing controversial in it—and nothing that had not been gone over in advance and
met with Carnegie’s approval. Frick spoke for them all when he declared, knowing that his words would be
forwarded with the next set of minutes to Scotland, that he feared Mr. Carnegie “did not read very carefully
the Resolution covering this matter.”²²

Carnegie would not let go. He conceded that Schwab’s proposal was a sound one—and should have been passed by
the board—but objected to the way Schwab had presented it. “Even if the President is right, his mode of action
was wrong. Any plan involving a serious change in the Works, product, or methods, should be submitted to the
Board not for action, but first for study and discussion, and no action taken until all the parties have
expressed their views after time taken for study…. Would the Secretary kindly refer to the By-laws of the
Company, and read to the Board and have entered in the Minutes, that portion regarding important changes in
machinery or methods. I think these require a two-thirds vote of the stockholders. This important step was
decided with seventy five percent of the shareholders [Carnegie and Phipps] having no chance to express an
opinion…. These are a few of the points that occur to me as valuable for my partners to consider, and hence
they are submitted with all due deference. Hearty congratulations upon August net. Great.”²³

In a private communication to Schwab, Carnegie continued his barrage: “My dear young friend, you say you will
answer any list of questions I may ask, but why should a report of a President, recommending an investment,
render questions necessary? The report should be full, accurate; fact, not opinions, or impressions: really
you do not do yourself justice in the apparent ‘slapdash’ manner in which you recommend this to the Board.”²⁴

Schwab, who had been president of Carnegie Steel for less than six months, responded with a thirteen-page
letter and report which gave the senior partner the information he needed. Carnegie thanked him, congratulated
him on being such a “hustler,” and approved the proposal. He did not apologize for the tongue-lashing.²⁵

Schwab had erred in presuming that he could judge what Carnegie wanted. He would not make that mistake again.

[1]: footnote24.html

## TWENTY-EIGHT

## “An Impregnable Position,” 1896–1898

BUSINESS does not look well, but what can we expect? Nothing till the Presidential election is over, and the
Silver Agitation with it—I hope.” So Carnegie wrote Frick on June 27, 1896.¹

It had become apparent to him that William Jennings Bryan was going to win the Democratic nomination for
president on the promise that, if elected, he would move the country off the gold standard. Carnegie was
aghast at the prospect. Investors needed both stability and liquidity: gold provided them with both. As long
as the United States remained on the gold standard, American manufacturing would remain a safe harbor for
domestic and foreign investment. If the nation replaced gold with silver as the basis for its currency, the
result would be nothing less than catastrophic. Or so Carnegie believed and had been writing since 1891.

As business slumped in the spring and summer of 1896, Carnegie attributed it to fears that Bryan might be
elected on a silver platform. “You see what the Silver Craze is bringing,” he wrote Frick from Cluny in late
July. “I have, as you know, been anxious about it for years. My belief is, that the canvass [campaign] will
weaken Bryan. But it is not enough to beat him to satisfy capital; I am afraid it will be timid for a long
time, and therefore, that business will be very dull.”²

In June and October, Carnegie attacked Bryan, the Democrats, and the “silver craze” in articles in the North
American Review. He also contributed generously to the McKinley campaign war chest. Carnegie and Frick had
done business with Marcus Hanna, the Cleveland iron and coal merchant, who had become McKinley’s chief adviser
and fund-raiser. Hanna and McKinley were their kind of Republicans: stolidly conservative and committed to
protective tariffs and gold. When J. P. Morgan resisted contributing because he feared McKinley was not enough
of a “gold bug,” Carnegie offered to talk to him. Hanna was delighted. “I am only too glad to avail myself of
your kind offer to put in a good word for us—You will know how to do it so that it will not appear that I am
soliciting influence.”³

William Jennings Bryan was young, attractive, and dynamic, in sharp contrast to the dour McKinley. Still,
Carnegie was convinced that his popularity would tumble over the next three months, as the Republicans,
utilizing their enormous advantage in funds and their control of most of the nation’s newspapers, hammered
away at his youth, his radicalism, his inexperience, and his agrarianism. “The political situation in the
United States is sadly mixed,” Carnegie confided to Morley on August 1, “still, I do not believe that the
Silver Craze can stand the three months pounding that it is to receive previous to the vote. I am busy
preparing ammunition for the campaign; short paragraphs for the wage-earners, whose votes are to decide the
issue.”⁴

On July 22, he published in the New York Times and New York Tribune a letter to the editor attacking Bryan on
the currency question. Three weeks later, he expanded on it in the draft of a campaign pamphlet he forwarded
to Hanna. “All that is needed to bring the wage-earners, that is, the masses of the voters, into line against
silver, is to have leaflets printed by the hundred-thousand, and a copy given to each workingman in every
mill, factory and farm in the doubtful states. I have tried my hand at a leaflet, and if your literary bureau
publishes it…I will pay the cost…. Do not be discouraged, the Bryan Boom is bound to burst. It is not founded
either upon fact or reason.” Hanna accepted Carnegie’s offer. In mid-October, he reported back that the
Republican National Committee had printed and circulated five million copies of Carnegie’s leaflet.⁵

Carnegie was convinced that Bryan would be defeated, but he worried nonetheless about the long-term effects of
the politicization of the currency issue. European capitalists could not help but be frightened by the
possibility that, if not in 1896, then perhaps in 1900 or 1904, a Democrat would be elected on a silver
platform and take the nation off the gold standard. On August 6, he expressed his fears in a letter to the
members of the Carnegie Steel board of managers, who, he feared, were not paying sufficient attention to the
looming crisis. Anticipating a fall panic, precipitated by a flight of capital and followed by plummeting
prices, he urged the board to sell off whatever product the company had on hand and hoard its dollars for the
coming crisis. “There is no telling but that our resources may be strained to the utmost, and every dollar
will count.”⁶

Two weeks later, Carnegie cautioned his Pittsburgh executives again against taking Bryan’s defeat for granted.
He urged them not to renew the “bonus” that had been given the steelworkers the year before. “The political
situation seems to have taken a decided turn for the better; but until McKinley is elected, there is danger of
excitement and panic at any time.”⁷

By late September, he was sure that Bryan would be defeated. “The majority of the popular vote will be
enormous for McKinley, the largest ever obtained by any candidate,” he “prophesied” for Henry Yates Thompson,
the owner of the Pall Mall Gazette; “perhaps, he will have the largest majority in the Electoral College. The
Bryan Campaign promises to collapse. Once more virtue triumphs in the Republic.”⁸

His predictions were born out on November 3, when William McKinley was elected with 272 electoral college
votes to 176 for Bryan. McKinley’s margin in the popular vote was 610,000, but Bryan had polled almost 6.5
million votes, more than any other Democratic in history.

The silver menace has been defeated in battle, but the war was still to be definitively won. In a final,
post-election attempt to bludgeon Bryan and his pro-silver forces into permanent silence, Carnegie published
“Mr. Bryan the Conjurer” in the January 1897 North American Review. After twelve pages of accusing Bryan of
the usually incompatible crimes of chicanery and stupidity, Carnegie saluted him (and his loyal wife) for
being “models of purity in their simple lives”—and then wished them a well-deserved and, he hoped, permanent
retirement to their “Sweet, humble, loving home.”⁹

 

THERE WERE many reasons why Carnegie continued to put off retirement: primary among them his love of
competition and his commitment to making more money so that he would have more to give away. His Pittsburgh
plants were now the marvel of the industry, their productivity higher, their costs much lower than their
competitors’. The coke problem had been solved long ago with the purchase of a majority share in H. C. Frick
Coke. The major challenge now facing the company was ensuring itself an adequate supply of high-quality,
low-cost iron ore.

Carnegie and his partners had declined to join in the “iron rush” that had taken off in the late 1880s with
the discovery of soft sand like iron ore in the Mesabi Range in northeastern Minnesota, about 100 miles from
Duluth. Carnegie had no intention of investing in iron-mining ventures hundreds of miles away. All the money
earned in Pittsburgh was plowed back into the mills. In 1892, Harry Oliver, who had years before worked with
Carnegie at O’Rielly Telegraph, offered him a share in a Mesabi iron mine he had invested in. Carnegie turned
him down. He had no use for men like Oliver who, having made and lost fortunes in iron and railroads, were now
speculating in mining properties. “Oliver’s ore bargain is just like him—nothing in it,” he wrote Frick on
August 29, 1892. “If there is any department of business which offers no inducement, it is ore. It never has
been very profitable, and the Massaba is not the last great deposit that Lake Superior is to reveal.”¹⁰

Like other start-up businesses born in debt and requiring steady infusions of capital to survive, the mining
companies and railroads that had been organized during the 1880s Mesabi iron rush were nearly destroyed in the
Panic of 1893. John D. Rockefeller, who, according to Ron Chernow, “stumbled, almost by accident, into owning
most of the iron ore on the Mesabi Range,” stepped into the breach and bailed out the failing companies by
loaning them money in return for stock. By the mid-1890s, he controlled “several million tons of iron ore and
a railroad to cart it off” to Duluth. To transport the ore the next step of their journey, across the Great
Lakes to the nation’s steel mills, Rockefeller and his chief financial adviser, Frederick Gates, assembled a
fleet of fifty-six oversized lake steamers.¹¹

Harry Oliver, who had been steadily expanding his own holdings of mining properties, contacted Frick and
Carnegie in the spring of 1894, fearful—and rightly—that Rockefeller would keep on buying Mesabi mines and
railroads until he owned them all. Oliver offered Carnegie Steel a 50 percent interest in his Mesabi
properties in return for a half-million-dollar loan. From Sorrento, in Italy, where he was vacationing that
spring, Carnegie instructed Frick to open negotiations with Oliver “in view of threatened combination….
Remember Reckafellow[*][1] & Porter [a Rockefeller associate] will own the R.R. [that links the mines with the
Duluth ports] and that’s like owning the pipe lines—Producers will not have much of a show. We are big enough,
however to take care of ourselves and if forced could make another outlet somehow [to transport the ore to
Pittsburgh]…. It’s a pity we have to go in at all, still I cannot but recognize we are right in flanking the
combination as far as possible…. I don’t think Standard people will succeed in making ore a monopoly like oil,
they have failed in every new venture and Rockefeller’s reputation now is one of the poorest investors in the
world. His railroads are almost worthless.”¹²

Within weeks of acquiring his half share in the Oliver Mining Company, Carnegie forced Oliver to give him
another third. He did not trust Oliver as a manager and wanted majority ownership of the new mining property.
Although now committed to the venture, he still had major misgivings about investing large sums of money in
it. “If Massawba ore requires special form of furnaces, it will add force to my instinctive aversion to making
investments hundreds of miles away. These, in my opinion, are all wrong. The ore mining business is a business
by itself, and ten dollars can be made at home to any one that you can ever make in these outside ventures.”¹³

Carnegie, despite his instincts, was being forced into the iron ore business as a defensive measure. He could
not allow Rockefeller to continue to buy Mesabi mines, railroads, and lake steamers.

There were two explanations for Rockefeller’s oversized investments in Mesabi iron ore. Either he had decided
to go into the steel business for himself or he was intent on acquiring a monopoly position in iron ore and
then forcing the steel manufacturers to share their profits with him. Either scenario would bring him into
conflict with Carnegie.

Though Rockefeller had made his fortune and his reputation earlier than Carnegie, he was in fact four years
younger. He looked much older. Tall, gaunt, hairless, and unsmiling, he resembled nothing less than a skeletal
ghoul. Carnegie, on the contrary, was beginning to look more like a well-groomed Father Christmas, with a
smile to match. By the mid-1890s, both were semiretired. Whereas Rockefeller had virtually retreated from
active business affairs, however, leaving more responsibility to Gates, Carnegie still paid close attention to
his business empire.

The oil baron and the steelmaker harbored no great affection for one another, but each respected the other’s
business organizations and commitments to philanthropy. They exchanged Christmas greetings and Carnegie made
sure to send Rockefeller copies of his speeches and pamphlets. “I am pleased with the sentiments you give
expression to,” Rockefeller wrote Carnegie on receiving the address he delivered at the dedication of his
Pittsburgh library. “I would that more men of wealth were doing as you are doing with your money; but, be
assured, your example will bear fruits, and the time will come when men of wealth will more generally be
willing to use it for the good of others. I had intended to call upon you to express my appreciation, or I
would have written before.”¹⁴

Rockefeller and Carnegie had achieved dominance in their respective industries by running roughshod over the
competition. But they were smart enough to know that they were too evenly matched—in intellectual and
financial resources—to enter into combat. It made more sense to combine than compete. Carnegie, having
submitted Mesabi ore from Rockefeller’s mine for testing in his Homestead open-hearth furnaces, and
discovering that it burned cleanly, directed James Gayley, a former furnace superintendent and now a member of
his board of managers, to “go and sleep in New York, and do not come home until you bring us a lease of the
whole Rockefeller ore.” It would be a lengthy negotiation, as neither John Leishman, who represented Carnegie,
nor Frederick Gates, who negotiated for Rockefeller, wanted it said that their counterparts had gotten the
better of them.¹⁵

On October 27, Carnegie recommended to Frick, who remained a master dealmaker, that the “Rockafellow
negotiation should be hastened and proposition got for our consideration.” Three days later, unwilling to let
the negotiations drag on any longer, he wrote Rockefeller directly, suggesting that the two men close the deal
by themselves. “Our people have been conferring with your Mr. Gates upon an alliance which would give us all
the ores we can use from your properties. The differences between the two seems to have been so great as to
cause a failure of the negotiations. They came to see me today and explained these differences, which do not
seem to me too irreconcilable, if both parties realized as I do, the mutual advantage of such an alliance, and
were prepared to meet each other halfway. When Mr. Gates submits the matter to you, as I suppose he will, and
you concur in this, I believe you and I could fix it in a few minutes, and I shall be very glad to go and see
you if you think it worth while to take the matter up. It is a big operation, and needs to be looked at in a
broader light than either Mr. Gates or Mr. Leishman, perhaps, are justified in taking.”¹⁶

By mid-November, Carnegie confided to Cousin Dod that the decision had been made to “align ourselves with
Rockafellow—Oliver showed me yesterday a sketch of alliance which is good. Will get Messabi.” The final
agreement was signed in December 1896. Oliver Mining and Carnegie Steel, its parent company, took a fifty-year
lease on the full output of all the Rockefeller mines for a royalty of twenty-five cents per ton, far below
the market price. Carnegie Steel guaranteed, in turn, that it would ship all ore from the Lake Superior
region, whether it came from the Rockefeller mines or elsewhere, on Rockefeller railroads and steamers. The
two titans agreed not to compete with one another in the future: the Carnegie interests promised that they
would neither lease nor purchase any new Mesabi mines for the length of the agreement, leaving the field open
to Rockefeller to expand his holdings; Rockefeller, for his part, pledged that he would stay out of the steel
business.¹⁷

“I am happy knowing that we are now secure in our ore supply,” Carnegie wrote Frick nine months after the deal
with Rockefeller. “This was the only element needed to give us an impregnable position. We can now figure cost
within a trifle and take contracts ahead without danger.” Though he had been hesitant, initially, to divert
capital from steelmaking, he was now quite ready to acknowledge the benefits of vertical integration. “It is
clear to me,” he wrote his cousin Dod on New Year’s Day 1898, “that profit is to be made in steel
manufacturing only by the concerns which do every step in the process themselves.”¹⁸

Though the deal benefited both men, Carnegie, testifying in 1912 before the congressional committee
investigating U.S. Steel, could not help but gloat over the price he had negotiated for the iron ore. “Don’t
you know, it does my heart good to think I got ahead of John D. Rockefeller on a bargain…. This is the only
time I really did get ahead of my fellow millionaire.” He had, he told the committee, cheerfully digressing
from the business at hand, recently visited with Rockefeller, who had given him and Mrs. Carnegie “large
photographs” of himself. “Positively, it is a delight to meet the old gentleman. But I did not refer to the
ore purchases that I made from him.” Carnegie’s jest about getting the best of Rockefeller was front-page news
across the country the next day, with the cartoonists having a field day picturing the two tycoons locked in
combat.¹⁹

The two men had, in fact, become more friendly with the passage of time, as each moved further away from
business and into philanthropy and golf. Carnegie kept sending Rockefeller his publications and books he
thought “the old man” would find informative; they also exchanged holiday gifts. In February 1903,
Rockefeller, on blue stationery, in tight, almost perfect handwriting with only a hint of a flourish, thanked
Carnegie for his latest gift of “the oatmeal of your own manufacture…. It is very good and I hope you enjoy
the eating of it as much as I do. Be sure to eat it very slowly, and masticate well, (Mrs. Carnegie will
explain). You grind oatmeal; I grind apples, and have ordered a bottle of my sweet cider sent you from
Pocantico. Keep right on with your grand work of giving away money, regardless of the criticisms of cranks and
fools. You have already given away more money than any man living. The good Lord bless you and give you wisdom
for your great responsibilities.”²⁰

“The precious cider has arrived,” Carnegie replied,

been drunk and “your good health and all your families” proposed and enthusiastically hailed—verdict rendered
by Mrs. Carnegie (whose favorite tipple is cider) best ever tasted. Many thanks. I note what you say about
giving as none knows more about that than yourself. “The way of the giver is hard” like that of the
transgressor but you and I don’t give for applause, nor to please any body of men, or any man but ourselves,
what we see to be for good of others, therefore criticism and mean flings don’t pierce the skin and we go
on—our own reproach alone we fear—that’s my talisman. If I please myself I’ll have to do much better than
ever. Nobody abuses me as keenly as I do myself. I know more faults in myself than all the outsiders do. I
played 18 holes St. Andrews [his club in Hastings-on-Hudson] yesterday, Saturday not Sunday. When you return
I’ll be glad to go and have a round on your links. I wish we could get to see more of each other and our
respective wives also become friends not mere acquaintances. Do come and spend two weeks at Skibo, then we
should be friends ever after. Your kind [do] not like fashion and smartness, neither do we—Here’s my hand, let
us be friends…. P. S. That’s a boy you’ve got. Took to him first interview. Kind greetings to Mrs.
Rockefeller.²¹

CARNEGIE’S second major project in the mid-1890s, which he pursued simultaneously with his negotiations with
Rockefeller, was the construction of a new railroad that would link his Pittsburgh mills with the Conneaut
Harbor on Lake Erie, the final destination for the Great Lakes steamers with their shipments of Mesabi iron
ore.

After twenty years of battling with the Pennsylvania Railroad for lower freight rates for iron ore running
south and coke running north, he was ready to invest whatever money it took to provide his own transportation
networks. “Railroad Companies simply charge ‘what the traffic will bear,’” he wrote Frick in February of 1896.
“I do not blame [them] for combining and getting the best rates they can from us…. I am sure that you feel
with me that if we were in [PR president] Mr. Roberts’ place, it is very probable we should do exactly as he
does…. I would not reduce rates until I thought it was necessary.” The only long-term solution was to find an
alternate way to move materials into and out of Pittsburgh. Carnegie toyed with the idea of getting the
federal government to finance a canal between Lake Erie and Pittsburgh. “If we elect a Republican President,
as I think we shall by an immense majority, it is probable that we shall get our bill through for a canal from
Pittsburgh to Lake Erie.”²²

The canal idea was, Carnegie knew, rather far-fetched. It would in the long run be simpler, if more costly, to
build a railroad linking the Union Railroad, the privately held road that connected the Carnegie Steel plants
in Pittsburgh, to Conneaut on Lake Erie, the port of delivery for iron ore shipments, and Connellsville and
its coke ovens to the southeast. All that was required was a great deal of capital. Carnegie, having long ago
decided that it was best to put all his eggs into one basket, was reluctant to go into the railroad business,
but recognized that he might have no choice if he were to gain the leverage he needed to force the
Pennsylvania to lower its rates.

In January 1896, he signed a tentative agreement with the president of the small railroad company that owned
the ramshackle road from Lake Erie to Butler, Pennsylvania, about thirty miles north of Braddock. The two
agreed to enlarge and extend the railroad between Pittsburgh and Conneaut. He simultaneously launched
discussions on building a thirty-mile spur to link Connellsville with the Carnegie plants in Pittsburgh.

In February, James McCrea, the Pennsylvania Railroad vice president in charge of roads west of Pittsburgh,
wrote to ask Frick to intervene and ask Carnegie to halt construction of the northern link and planning for
the southern. “I suggested,” Frick wrote Carnegie, that “if he would address a letter to me, stating his
position, and what the roads under their control proposed to do [in lowering freight rates], I would see what
could be done to prevent its construction. Said he would be glad of an opportunity of doing so.”²³

Carnegie’s bluff had paid off. Pennsylvania Railroad officials volunteered to negotiate lower freight rates if
Carnegie Steel would pledge to abandon any plans to build new railroads. Frick, as chairman, presented the
deal to the Carnegie Steel board of managers and telegraphed Carnegie to suggest that it be approved. When
Carnegie refused to approve the deal Frick had negotiated, President Roberts and Vice President Frank Thomson
of the Pennsylvania requested an interview with him. Carnegie had by this time obtained information on the
rates the Pennsylvania Railroad charged competitors to ship their freight. Armed with these figures—and with
plans for his new railroad—Carnegie, as he tells the story in an article he wrote later, strode confidently
into the railroad offices in Philadelphia and demanded that Roberts and Thomson lower the rates charged
Carnegie Steel to the level his competitors were paying. The railroad officials agreed, but asked, in return,
that he drop plans to build competing railroads in the state. Carnegie refused to halt construction of the
road north to Lake Erie, but agreed to abandon plans to extend it south to the coke region, in return for
reduced freight rates.²⁴

It would, in the end, cost Carnegie $2 million—$1 million of it borrowed from the United States Trust
Company—to build his Lake Erie railroad. It was worth every penny. The road, renamed the Pittsburgh, Bessemer,
& Lake Erie, then the Bessemer & Lake Erie, reduced the costs of shipping iron ore to Carnegie Steel’s mills
and furnaces. With long-term agreements on cheap iron ore and coke—and transportation costs brought down to
what even he now considered a reasonable level—Carnegie saw no limit to the company’s future market share and
profitability. There was no need, at least for the foreseeable future, for the company to enter into or remain
in “pools” that limited its share of the market. “Since we have the ore mines on our shoulders, and coke, and
the railroad,” Carnegie wrote Frick in October 1897, “we cannot afford to do anything that will restrict us
from taking the business of the country and running full.”²⁵

Carnegie Steel was now ready to take on the world. Carnegie dared his competitors to try to take any of his
business, while he prepared to advance into their territories. When Illinois Steel, Carnegie Steel’s major
rival, put in a bid for an armor contract, Carnegie was outraged. “I never knew a dirtier action in business
than that of the Illinois in regard to Armor, it was pure spite—a foul blow, besides, under present management
that Company has declared war against us.” Instead of trying to arrange a truce, as he had in the past,
Carnegie directed Frick to take the battle to the enemy. “Now is the time when we are prosperous and others
are not to drive our stakes in everywhere and command the situation.”²⁶

Its supplies of raw materials assured the future was brighter than ever for Carnegie Steel. “Our organization
never was so perfect,” Carnegie bragged to Frick in the spring of 1898, “we seem to have reached the secret of
moneymaking in iron and steel manufacture.” Net profits were not only climbing, they were climbing
exponentially, from $3 million in 1893, the first year of the depression, to $7 million in 1897, to $16
million in 1898.²⁷

 

WHILE WE CANNOT discount the effect of the iron mine acquisitions and railroad building ventures on Carnegie
Steel’s newfound profitability, the foundation for the company’s extraordinary growth had been laid a decade
earlier with the expulsion of the Knights from E.T., the Amalgamated from Homestead, and potential union
organizers from Duquesne. With organized labor banished, Frick and Schwab had been able to cut wages and
increase hours with brutal efficiency. In January of 1895, when the 1892 Homestead contract expired, Schwab
reduced wages by a further 15 percent. In the spring of that same year, in the midst of a boom in production,
Schwab recommended that the pay scale—which he had cut in January—be raised to keep workers from moving to
other plants. Carnegie suggested instead that the furnace men and unskilled workers be paid a “bonus,” which
could be rescinded whenever the company decided it necessary to do so. The bonus was set at 10 percent, well
below the 15 percent cut in wages that had preceded it. A little more than a year later, in the midst of a
mild downturn in orders, Carnegie proposed that the bonuses be rescinded. “There is a very easy way to stop
bonus. When mills stop for a time, as they must [for maintenance], before starting them, let the men be told
quietly that the firm regrets it cannot go on paying bonus under present conditions. The men will agree to
start without the bonus; if not you can wait. No public notice need be given.”²⁸

Much of the money that was poured into Homestead—and the other Carnegie plants—was spent on labor-saving
equipment. The gangs of men who had lifted, hauled, and shoveled were replaced by huge scooping machinery,
automated car dumpers, larger barrows, electric trolleys, traveling cranes, and a variety of other mechanical
devices. Between 1892 and 1897, the Homestead workforce decreased by some 25 percent.

Contrary to Carnegie’s promises in the 1880s, his workingmen did not share in the firm’s remarkable
prosperity. On the contrary, there was, through the 1890s, an inverse relationship between the firm’s revenues
and profits and the amount of money distributed to the workforce as wages. According to figures compiled by
the geographer and historian Kenneth Warren, while the value of the goods shipped from the Carnegie mills
increased by some 226 percent in the seven years following the strike of 1892, the percentage of revenues paid
out in wages decreased by 67 percent. The sliding scale, which Carnegie had claimed would serve as the
foundation of the employer-employee partnership, was based not on profits, which continued to rise, but on the
price of steel, which continued to fall.²⁹

 

CARNEGIE never evinced any guilt at the conditions under which his employees labored, many of them for twelve
hours a day, seven days a week, for less than a dollar and a half a day. He was on the contrary proud of his
record as an employer. In response to critics of his “Gospel of Wealth” essays, he had declared that “those
who insure steady employment to thousands, at wages not lower than others pay, need not be ashamed of their
record; for steady employment is, after all, the one indispensable requisite for the welfare and the progress
of the people.”³⁰

Andrew Carnegie was not a cruel or uncaring man. In paying his common laborers $1.35 or $1.50, he was obeying
the laws of the marketplace, which established this value for a day’s labor. To have paid them or his skilled
workers extra would have endangered the viability and profitability of his steelworks. It would also have
violated the principles of the Gospel of Wealth which he was determined to live by. Having declared that his
role in the larger evolutionary schema was to make as much money as possible so that he would have the maximum
amount to give away, he was obligated to squeeze profits out of his enterprises. And that required him to pay
his workers as little as possible.

A weaker man, Carnegie implied in his speech at the dedication of his Pittsburgh library in November 1895,
might have given in to the entreaties of his workers to raise their wages. But Carnegie would not. Even if it
had been possible to share his surplus with his workers without damaging the viability of the enterprise, to
do so was neither “justifiable or wise, because there are higher uses for surplus wealth than adding petty
sums to the earnings of the masses. Trifling sums given to each every week or month—and the sums would be
trifling indeed—would be frittered away, nine times out of ten, in things which pertain to the body and not to
the spirit; upon richer food and drink, better clothing, more extravagant living, which are beneficial neither
to rich nor poor. These are things external and of the flesh; they do not minister to the higher, the divine,
part of man.” It was far better, Carnegie insisted, to hold on to the surplus and concentrate it “in one great
educative institution, lasting for all time [which] ministers to the divine in man, his reason and his
conscience, and thus lifts him higher and higher in the scale of being.”³¹

[1]: footnote25.html

## TWENTY-NINE

## “We Now Want to Take Root,” 1897–1898

ADECADE AFTER their marriage, any doubts Andrew and Louise may have harbored about their future happiness had
evaporated without a trace. Andrew remained as restless as ever; Louise as stable and calm. The combination
worked well. As the years passed, the marriage grew stronger. They remained an odd-looking couple—the age and
height discrepancy exaggerated as he shrank over time—but they also found more and more to bind them together.
Andrew learned to appreciate classical music; Louise, Scottish folk songs and the bagpipes. Louise grew
accustomed, though never completely, to having a houseful of guests, her husband always the center of
attention; she even came to appreciate the joys of travel. Andrew, for his part, slowly but gradually
understood what it meant to have a home to return to when his travels were done.

For the first three years of marriage, Andrew had shared Louise with Mrs. Whitfield; having dedicated years of
his own life to caring for his mother, he could not begrudge Louise doing the same. When, in early 1890, Mrs.
Whitfield died, Carnegie regained his wife—and her sister Stella, who became a permanent member of the
household. “Louise heartily with me since her Mother left us,” he wrote Frick, with a mixture of pride and
relief in January 1890.¹

With his father, mother, and brother gone, Carnegie relied on Louise for emotional ballast. There was no one
else to whom he unburdened himself, if indeed he did so with Louise. A little man and a majority stockholder
in a huge enterprise, he had no choice but to stand tall at all times. His letters were, with rare exceptions,
brimming with good cheer. He remained close with several of his boyhood friends, Bobby Pitcairn, Harry Phipps,
Vandy, and Dod among them, and gathered new friends as he grew older; with the exception of John Morley, most
of them were also business partners, which added layers of complication to the relationships. Aside from aging
relatives in Dunfermline and Cousin Dod, who divided his time between Pittsburgh and Europe, Louise was his
family. In a curious passage from his Autobiography, he refers to Louise’s “guardianship.” Like his mother,
she worried about his health, tried to slow him down, and made sure he was well fed and clothed.²

 

IN THE WINTER of 1891, after four and half years of marriage, the world Carnegie had built with Louise was put
at risk when she took ill with a severe case of typhoid. Louise’s illness and the long convalescence that
followed were profoundly disturbing. Having married a woman twenty years younger, Carnegie had never
anticipated that it was he who might be left alone. Dr. Dennis, who had cared for Carnegie and his mother in
Cresson in 1887, was called in at once. For several months Louise was bedridden, in and out of the hospital,
with periods of recovery and relapse following unexpectedly one upon another. Carnegie remained at her
bedside, moved into the hospital with her, and put off his annual spring trip to Pittsburgh until he was
assured that she was out of danger.³

In the winter of 1895–96, almost five years to the day she had taken ill, Louise was stricken again. Fearful
that the New York winter was delaying her recuperation, Andrew took her south to Palm Beach, and then to his
sister-in-law’s estate on Cumberland Island. The convalescence took much longer than expected. When Louise’s
health returned to normal, he brought her north to New York, then traveled with her and Stella to Italy,
instead of to England and Scotland, in the hope that warm weather might speed her full recovery.

Louise and Andrew had been married for nine years now. His sixtieth birthday and her thirty-ninth had come and
gone and still there was no sign of a child. Louise’s authorized biographers, who had access to her diaries
and personal correspondence, tell us that “Mr. and Mrs. Carnegie had longed for a child,” and that Louise,
“with her maternal spirit and her fine gifts for motherhood, was starved for one.” Neither they nor Carnegie’s
biographers provide any explanation as to why that longing had not been satisfied.⁴

The explanation that makes the most sense is the one handed down orally from Louise to the daughter she
finally had, Margaret, and from Margaret to her children and grandchildren. According to Linda Hills, one of
her great-granddaughters, Louise had always wanted to have children “and certainly more than one. However,
because Andrew had a friend who lost his wife in childbirth…he was very fearful of losing Louise in the same
way and did not want to risk it. She, on the other hand, more than anything, wanted children. In her late
thirties she became very ill and was delirious [the time frame corresponds with the 1895–96 illness]…. During
her delirium, she cradled a pillow and tended to it as if it were a baby. The doctor at the time told Andrew
that she was pining away for a child and that if she survived the illness, he must let her have one.”⁵

We have no way of verifying the family story, other than to note that it is consistent with the chronology of
events. Louise got pregnant in the spring or summer of 1896, probably in Italy; she was very much with child
when she returned to the United States in the late fall of 1896. In November, Carnegie wrote his cousin Dod to
tell him that Louise had “rented a fine country House 30 miles out [from New York], back of Greenwich
Conn.—2¹/2 miles. We are to run out there now and then. Louise gets tired so easily since grippe and I think
the experiment well worth trying. She does far too much to please people here, many of them old far away
connections who are of all people most exacting, and take offense at refusals to dine & visit etc. Now ‘we can
be out of town.’ Cowardly retreat—but a retreat from them.” There was no mention of the pregnancy, though this
must have been the reason for their taking the “country House.”⁶

All was well in the Carnegie household. Louise was healthy, her sister Stella delighted to be living in the
“country,” Carnegie as content as he had ever been. The lengthy depression of the mid-1890s was finally
lifting; the Republicans were back in the White House, his Pittsburgh library, music hall, art gallery, and
natural history museum were a grand success, and his career as a writer had taken off, with regular essays in
the Nineteenth Century and the North American Review.

When in New York, he spent every morning in his library, the grandest room in the Carnegies’ home. In the
center was a mammoth table, covered with pens, paper, newspapers, and open books. “There are books and books
everywhere,” wrote one visitor. “They reach from the floor to the ceiling and cover three sides of the room,
as well as encroach upon the fourth side, which is the bright spot in the library, with its fireplace.” On
either side of the mantelpiece, stacked on shelves, were “precious mementos and pleasing reminders of
interesting occasions,” photos, plaques, and trowels, given as gifts at library groundbreaking ceremonies.
There was a large easy chair for reading and a “comfortable lounge” for napping “with the rollicking motto
above, ‘There’s a good time coming, boys.’” Scattered elsewhere in the room were Carnegie’s collection of
musical instruments, a xylophone-shaped instrument from the Orient, and a set of Japanese bells.⁷

Carnegie entered his library at ten each morning and generally stayed until one in the afternoon. After
luncheon, he was likely to take a walk or carriage ride in Central Park. On occasion he would return to his
library in the afternoon to read a bit more or give dictation to his secretary. He remained a prodigious
correspondent, not only with his partners and managers in Pittsburgh, but with a large and growing assortment
of friends, including some of the English-speaking world’s most renowned and powerful men.

In one of his letters to Gladstone, he boasted like a small boy of having received in that day’s post “three
letters, One from you…one from Herbert Spencer, One from John Morley. I am quite set up as no other can say
this.”⁸

He had continued to maintain a steady correspondence with Herbert Spencer, who had, as he aged, become even
more sour and ill-tempered. Now seventy-seven, he had written Carnegie at great length explaining why he
refused to sit for a portrait to be paid for by donations from his British admirers. Spencer told Carnegie he
had no wish to give anything back to the British, who had, by earlier neglecting to subscribe to his works,
delayed their publication for several years. The Americans had always been generous and he would sit for a
portrait for them, but to his latecomer British admirers, he owed nothing.⁹

Carnegie wrote back at once. Great men, he reminded his old hero, were never appreciated by their
contemporaries.

When have the prophets not been stoned, from Christ down to Wagner?…Why, my dear friend, what do you mean by
complaining of neglect, abuse, scorn; these are the precious rewards of the teachers of mankind…. Let me urge
you to go carefully over every word you have written which shows other than a spirit of deep gratification at
the neglect, scorn, and abuse which you have had to suffer. Your attitude towards ordinary beings should be
that of lofty pity and anxiety for their reaching the light by-and-by, which you have discovered and in which
you rest…. My belief is, that one word showing disappointment, or, may I say resentment, of the treatment you
have received from your countrymen, will detract very much from the loftiness of our Guide, Philosopher, and
Friend. Do think this over.

If earlier he had worshipped Spencer from a distance, he now acknowledged that he had something in common with
his hero—both men were underappreciated for their accomplishments. “I remember you once said to me, that you
did not understand how I could [go] forward building Libraries, halls and Museums for the working masses of
Pittsburgh, when these had publicly requested City Councils to reject the gifts. If I had entered upon the
work with the desire to win popular applause, I should have richly merited the punishment that their action
would have inflicted upon my vain nature, but I was sustained by the knowledge that they knew not what they
did, and so rendered only more steadfast, if possible, in my determination to give them the precious gifts.
The result has been extraordinary. Never, to my knowledge, have Halls, Libraries, Museums, Art Galleries
roused the masses of a city to such enthusiasm.” Carnegie suggested that Spencer take a lesson from his
disciple.¹⁰

 

WHILE LOUISE AND STELLA remained in Greenwich through the winter of 1897, Carnegie commuted back and forth to
New York. In March, he took the train to Harrisburg for a brief business meeting and, as he wrote Frick,
“caught slight cold.” The cold developed into pleurisy, a dangerous condition for a man in his sixty-second
year. The newspapers having picked up the story, his private secretary was obliged to acknowledge that
Carnegie had indeed been struck by “an acute attack of pleurisy,” but that there were no complications and
reports in the press were “making out his case much worse than it is.”¹¹

Carnegie insisted, in letters to Frick and Frew, with whom he now consulted regularly on his Pittsburgh
library, that he was on the mend, but Louise remained concerned. Handed a note to mail to Frew in Pittsburgh,
she added on the bottom that while “Mr. Carnegie is really better as you may see by the above…he is very weak
and the doctors say he must be exceedingly careful about exposure for some time. That dinner with the
subsequent visit to Harrisburg were too much for him. He came home completely fagged, caught a chill and this
is the result.”¹²

The episode brought dramatically home to Louise the harsh reality that she had married a much older man who
was almost certain to die before her. On March 20, from New York, where she was awaiting her confinement, she
wrote to John Ross, Carnegie’s solicitor in Dunfermline, to inform him that she had now completed paying—out
of her own funds—for the property where Andrew had been born, and wished to begin work on erecting “a fitting
memorial to Andrew’s mother and to himself—of course this cannot be done during either his or my lifetime, but
I should like it started.” She and Carnegie had “talked a great deal about it this winter and we both cling to
the idea of a winter garden or palm house…. This palm house should be filled with the choices of palms and
exotic plants…placed under the care of an educated man who could instruct the people and make their visits
interesting. The actual house in which Andrew was born I should like to keep intact—it could be used as a tool
house perhaps the superintendent could live on the lower floor, or have his office there…. In the center of
the Palm House I should like to place a beautiful fountain of the finest marble—really a work of art…and if
possible to bring the stream where Andrew used to draw water—to flow through the fountain so that it would be
a perpetual stream of pure water.”¹³

Ten days later, on March 30, 1897, three weeks after her fortieth birthday, Louise Whitfield Carnegie gave
birth to a daughter. Carnegie, who had remained behind in Greenwich to convalesce from his pleurisy, returned
to New York to visit his wife and daughter. The birth had gone well; the baby was healthy. “As I first gazed
upon her,” Carnegie recalled in his Autobiography, “Mrs. Carnegie said, ‘Her name is Margaret after your
mother. Now one request I have to make…. We must get a summer home since this little one has been given us. We
cannot rent one and be obliged to go in and go out at a certain date. It should be our home…. I make only one
condition…. It must be in the Highlands of Scotland.’” Louise had long before fallen in love with Cluny, which
had been their summer home for almost a decade. It was here that she wanted to put down roots.¹⁴

There were, regrettably, more pressing matters at hand than their future Highland home. Carnegie’s
convalescence was not proceeding smoothly. Having exhausted himself during his trip to New York to meet his
daughter, he was driven back to Greenwich to recover his strength. “Every day I find myself better,” he wrote
his wife on his return. “The trip to New York and excitement of meeting rather upset me and I appeared worse
than the normal condition. Wait till you see me here and you will be happy. Now since I have seen you and the
Little Saint I seem always with you. Before this all was glamour—like a dream. Now as real as ever Margaret a
little ‘uncanny’ yet—fresh from heaven and not yet just earthly like ourselves…. Guess I’ll not risk another
visit. I do so much wish to be well to welcome you. Only six days more after this. Hurrah! A kiss for Margaret
and twenty for her mother. Ever darling, your own Andrew.” One tiny cloud lay on the horizon. Carnegie had
received “a note from Mr. Macpherson of Cluny” who was engaged to be married and intended, on taking a wife,
to take up residence on his estate, instead of leasing or selling it to the Carnegies. “We must remain in that
district,” Carnegie reassured Louise, “but hopes of our getting Cluny seem faint now, although there’s many a
slip, etc.”¹⁵

Louise, knowing full well that her husband was overly optimistic, dismissed his cheery reports about his
recovery. Worried that he would cut short his convalescence to take the train to Washington on armor business,
she asked Stella, who had remained in Greenwich, to “please tell Andrew, the most patriotic duty we can
perform to our country—better than the making of armor plate—is the taking care of our wee Margaret so that
she in turn may grow up a strong healthy woman and become the mother of men. This duty I cannot perform by
myself, nor can he do it alone. We must do it together; therefore please urge him to take good care of his
health, not only for our sakes, but for our country.”¹⁶

Carnegie stayed in Greenwich for another two months and received there the congratulations of family and
friends on becoming a father. Frick, a devoted father to his own daughter Helen, was among the most
enthusiastic well-wishers. On April 30, he wrote Carnegie that he “should like exceedingly to see Mrs.
Carnegie, and be introduced to the little daughter, and hope for that pleasure before you go abroad.” Carnegie
wrote back, as he always did, that he was “gaining daily…. Up for breakfast regularly now.” He intended to
leave for Europe as scheduled on June 2 and invited Frick to bring the whole family to visit at Cluny.¹⁷

On May 31, just before their departure, he wrote Dod of their plans. “We intend to be quiet for a time at
Cluny till all settle down—[the laird of] Cluny’s marriage may cause us to lose Cluny and therefore I intend
to coach about and see various places. We have decided to own our Highland Home, no more leased houses.” He
suggested—as he would continue to do for the next ten years—that Dod buy an estate in the Highlands. “Don’t
you want to invest—buy the adjoining Estate and settle down for summers. I think a nice yacht up there would
be worth having. Am improving but not yet fit for the moors. The sea will do it however.”¹⁸

Undeterred by the difficulties of taking a newborn baby on an ocean cruise, Carnegie, Louise, Stella, and
Margaret sailed on June 2 with their small army of maids, male servants, and private secretaries, supplemented
now by nannies and nurses. “We came via Southampton,” Carnegie wrote Gladstone, “only because in the American
ship is to be had a complete suite of rooms, including bathetic—our infant traveler only two months old needed
all conveniences.”¹⁹

Their first weeks in Britain were not easy ones. “Margaret stood the voyage well,” Carnegie wrote Frick from
Cluny on June 14,

but a boil or swelling on her neck gave trouble and it had to be lanced in London—poor little tot—she is
flourishing here and begins to get her former rosy cheeks. We have had news of the death of Mrs. Carnegie’s
grandmother, who was more of a mother to Stella and Louise—this coming just after aunt’s death has made this
for the first time a sad house—Stella has not been out of bed since we received the cable…. Louise has
Margaret fortunately but the Doctor insists she should have no other cares, for a time. So we are to live
quietly and those friends who were coming to see us and Margaret we have had to prevent. Mrs. C. insists upon
nursing Margaret entirely. One Doctor suggested a little mixture of our own Cons. [condensed] milk which is
fine but no—no use. So as the time approaches for you to sail I feel I must write to say that I have not the
heart to suggest to her that we could have the Fricks with us…. There are very few lady friends Mrs. C. would
welcome so cordially as your wife…. But you and Mrs. Frick will understand how we are situated—It would be no
pleasure for you anyhow to be in the house with us and so we must just go on ourselves until matters
frightened. I am gaining strength daily which is all I lack—can walk around “the Burns” without fatigue which
is something. Of course you could run up or down…. See me for a day or two and talk over any business
matters…. Men need no attention and Mrs. C would not be interfered with in any way.²⁰

Frick wrote back at once to say that he not surprised by Carnegie’s request. “On my return from New York, Mrs.
Frick at once said she did not think Mrs. Carnegie would want even her most intimate friends to visit her this
year.” He fully understood that the Carnegies were not up for a family visit, but hoped to be able to “run up
a day or two to see you. If not on my arrival, will do so before returning home.”²¹

Carnegie was exaggerating his daughter’s and his wife’s condition. They were well enough to take the train
from Southampton to London for Queen Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee. “Baby Margaret’s first trip, nine weeks old.
Baby an excellent traveler,” Louise wrote in her travel diary. They stayed at the Metropole, from where they
watched the Queen’s procession from their window.²²

From London, they traveled directly to Cluny. On arrival, Carnegie set off on a coaching tour of the
Highlands, with the faithful Hew Morrison, Edinburgh librarian and general aide de camp, at his side. Their
holy grail was a Highland estate for the Carnegie clan, now expanded to include little Margaret.

Louise remained behind at Cluny to care for her daughter and try to talk Macpherson into changing his mind and
selling his family’s estate to the Carnegies. While she had willingly sent Carnegie off on his journey, Louise
worried that he might be enjoying the coaching so much he had taken his eye off the prize. She begged him to
focus his considerable talents on this one task. “Am very anxious too for your report by word of mouth…. We
now want to take root. We haven’t time to make mistakes; as many playthings and play places as you like and
yachts galore, but a home first please, where we can have the greatest measure of health…. But enough—we can
talk this over better when we get together, and understand, darling, I want your good first and I’ll try to be
happy wherever you settle. We shall gang far ere we find anything muckle better than Cluny for baby. Her
cheeks are as brown and as fat as possible. She almost talked to me as I was undressing her this evening.”²³

Carnegie, meanwhile, was having a fine time touring. The only property that came close to meeting his
requirements was Skibo in the northern Highlands near the ancient town of Dornoch. The estate encompassed tens
of thousands of acres of meadows, moors, gently rolling hills, lochs, and streams; a long stately entranceway
lined with beech trees and yews planted seven centuries earlier; and a view of the North Sea. An added
attraction was its accessibility to several large lochs, the Dornoch Firth, and the North Sea, on which
Carnegie could go yachting, his newest passion.²⁴

There were unfortunately serious problems with the property. Unlike Cluny, where the main house and out
buildings were in fine repair, served by well-maintained roads, and surrounded by finely manicured lawns and
gardens, Skibo needed a great deal of work before the Carnegies could consider it their home. The last owner
had ripped down what remained of the ancient castle and substituted a faux-Gothic mansion in its place. The
house looked grand enough from the outside, but was far too small for the full Carnegie entourage of extended
family, servants, and visitors. Worse yet, the grounds, roads, fences, stone walls, and fields were in severe
disrepair; the outbuildings, barns, dairies, stables, and the cottages in which the tenants, servants, and day
laborers lived were literally coming apart at the seams. The previous owner had gone bankrupt and abandoned
the property. The estate had fallen into the hands of court trustees who were willing to sell it relatively
cheaply. The real costs would come later: it was going to require vast amounts of time, energy, capital, and
on-site supervision to bring Skibo back to its glory.

And then there were the dependents who came with the estate. As the laird of Skibo, Carnegie would become a
post-feudal landlord with responsibilities for the hundreds who lived and worked on his land, but had no legal
rights to it. Earlier in the century, Scottish landlords had had almost absolute rights to their land; the
tenant farmers who lived and worked it almost none. But after a series of revolts in the Highlands and the
passage of the Crofters Act of 1886, the laws governing land tenure had been changed to provide tenants with
some protection. This almost guaranteed that Skibo, like other Highland estates, was destined to continue
leaking money, until and unless Carnegie spent large sums to improve the land, attract new crofters, cottars,
and day laborers, and make it possible for the protected tenants to pay their rents.

No one, it appeared, but a rich American would have dared take on such a project. Even Carnegie was daunted.
Instead of buying the property outright, he asked permission of the court trustees to lease Skibo for a
season. With no other potential bidders in sight, the trustees readily agreed to his terms.

 

IN THE FALL of 1897, Carnegie, who had that spring suffered through a potentially life-endangering illness and
become a father, initiated discussions with his partners about purchasing his and Harry Phipps’s stock in
Carnegie Steel. His fondest wish was that the company remain a closed partnership, with the surviving partners
absorbing his and Phipps’s shares. To make this possible, he proposed that the payout schedule be extended to
give the surviving partners a full fifty years to buy back his stock and sixteen years to pay for Phipps’s.²⁵

Carnegie’s proposal to revise the terms of the “ironclad” agreement had to be approved by all the partners.
Phipps, who had balked at the last revision in 1892 but eventually been persuaded to sign, refused to do so
this time. Anxious to retire as soon as he could, he did not want to have to wait sixteen years for his
payout.²⁶

Carnegie was incredulous. “My Dear Pard,” he wrote Phipps rather condescendingly, “Surely you are a little
‘off.’ I know of no reasons why the Iron Clad is not pleasing to you…. Is it [the] sixteen years you wish
shortened? No doubt every partner will try to meet your wishes in this respect. I know when you consider fully
you will never say you will leave your partners in the dark about what they are to meet when you go. If you go
before me—and I am well—I think I could meet the occasion [i.e., come up with the money needed to buy Phipps’s
shares], but it…might give serious trouble. Think over this. You have a fine kind nature which will lead you
to humane decision. Our partners are next to our family in my opinion.”²⁷

On October 9, Carnegie wrote Frick to warn him about Phipps, who was also concerned that the company was still
offering new partners stock and allowing them to pay for it out of future dividends.

You may find him all awry in regard to Iron Clad Agreement, but if you will have Lovejoy [the Carnegie Steel
board secretary] get all the signatures to it promptly, the Squire will be all right. He seems unduly alarmed
about matters. Thinks we give new men interests unnecessarily large, favors getting in capital; in other words
he would make the firm like [a corporation]…. The secret of our success has been that we have done just the
opposite and I have written him that next to taking care of our own families, I think our young partners have
the greatest claim upon us old fellows, for whom they are working, making fortunes. I also suggested that if
he wanted enough of cash out of the business to secure his family, if they were not secure, I believed you
would buy a part of his interest and could give him satisfactory security and rather prompt payments. He has
not been up here; if I had a personal interview with him I could no doubt arrange something satisfactory to
him but he sails on the 16th and I shall not see him. You can, no doubt, smooth him down; calm his fears and
get his signature to the Iron Clad, which I think it is important to close.²⁸

Phipps, having met with Frick, agreed to rethink his position on the ironclad, before declining once again to
sign it. Frick, as chairman of the board of managers, declared in October 1897 that with the new ironclad
agreement in hiatus—perhaps permanently—because Phipps refused to sign it, the 1892 one would remain “legally
operative.” The following June, Frick changed his mind. As he wrote Carnegie, he now believed the 1892
agreement was “not binding” on any of the partners, “nor on anybody, and never has been.” The agreement to
take effect had to have been signed by every partner, but for some reason Vandy, now dead, had never signed
it. This meant that the procedures set up in that supposedly “Iron Clad” agreement, including the mandatory
purchase of deceased partners’ shares at book value, were unenforceable. Where this left the company, Frick
did not care to speculate. Nor did he let the rest of the partners know that the ironclad had been pierced.
The bottom line was that, if Phipps or Carnegie should die or demand to be bought out, there were no legal
procedures in place to determine the price of the shares or the method by which they would be purchased.²⁹

 

THE CARNEGIES decided not to return to the United States in the fall of 1897, as had been their custom.
Carnegie, warier than ever of his health—and that of his wife and baby—had decided that they would winter at
the Villa Allerton in Cannes, where the climate was gentle, the accommodations luxurious, and the company,
including William Gladstone, most hospitable. When the weather turned warm, they would return to Scotland and
take up residence at Skibo.

“Off to Cannes Saturday, beautiful Villa Allerton for the season,” Carnegie wrote Walter Damrosch in early
November, “and I have chartered a yacht—expect to take almost daily excursions with Margaret—Her mother also
and Stella no doubt on fine days. All well—I am very well, Louise also except a slight cold last three days,
better today…I am all right sure, never felt better and the temptation to risk New York this winter was
strong. Little Margaret and the Atlantic turned the scale.”³⁰

The villa turned out to be everything Carnegie had hoped for. It was a relatively new house, built about 1882,
with a large garden, a pond, a shooting range, and a caretaker’s cottage for the servants. “I’m sitting in my
spacious library in shirt sleeves—windows all open,” he wrote Hew Morrison in mid-November, soon after
arriving. “The blue sea in the distance—all I need now is the coming yacht,” which had been chartered from a
Glasgow firm and was due to arrive in January.³¹

Margaret was doing brilliantly. She had graduated to porridge, Carnegie proudly reported. Louise was also
delighted with the Cannes villa, though she had not gotten over her disappointment that, on leaving Cannes in
the spring, they would not be returning to Cluny. “The giving up of Cluny, with all its tender associations,”
she wrote her friend and former pastor, Charles Eaton, “has affected my sister and me deeply, and we cannot
look forward to Skibo with the delight that Mr. Carnegie does, but when we have seen it and have lived there
no doubt we shall grow to like it, particularly if it suits Mr. Carnegie and Margaret. We find our home here
all we anticipated and more, and we are most delightfully situated. The restful out-of-door life has brought
new vigor to Mr. Carnegie and really there is not a trace of his recent illness left. He climbs the hills with
the greatest ease and is in the best of spirits.”³²

The Villa Allerton, rented for the winter season, provided everything the Carnegies required except a private
secretary. Carnegie had decided to begin work on his memoirs and asked Hew Morrison to find him a discreet,
well-organized young man who could take dictation and use the typewriter. “He must be an all round intelligent
pleasing young man with brains—one anxious to do everything he can to make himself indispensable to us.
Educated of course—typewriter and stenographer—if with some literary ability so much the better. Should like
to try him on a special piece of work I have on hand…would not engage him beyond three months. If he is just
the man I want would engage him permanently £250 per year or even more…. It is the exceptionally bright good
natured young man I am after but must have good judgment. He may have to see people about Skibo and attend to
many little arrangements for me. Don’t recommend any ordinary person, give me a young man who can make a
future for himself.”³³

Morrison suggested James Bertram, a twenty-five-year old Scotsman who had just returned from South Africa,
where he had worked for the railroads. Carnegie was delighted. “You have rendered me a great service anent the
secretaryship. Of course you know Mr. Bertram comes of ‘good kith and kin’ and has a record—We shall expect
him as stated. A real treasure of a Secretary is the most important member of the Family, beyond its own
members. He ought to become a lifelong friend and companion.”³⁴

Bertram turned out to be the perfect secretary. The two men would spend their mornings together for the next
eighteen years, until Carnegie was too sick to write any more. Bertram found Carnegie to be “the most charming
and companionable person” he had ever met. Carnegie’s conversation, Bertram would report later to Burton
Hendrick, “was brilliant, sizzling with anecdote and epigram, and reaching all fields.”³⁵

Soon after coming to work for Carnegie, Bertram would take on the task of organizing Carnegie’s ever-growing
“begging” correspondence, signing his own name to letters he preferred not to bother Mr. Carnegie with,
transcribing handwritten scribbles into formally typed letters on the appropriate letterheads, and setting up
the application procedure for groups applying for church organs and libraries.

Carnegie, with Bertram at his side, kept very busy at Cannes. He turned over a full complement of business
reports from Pittsburgh, started work on his memoirs, and spent increasing time on his philanthropies. As the
profits at Carnegie Steel increased annually, so did his disposable income, and the size and number of his
gifts. With profits at $3 million in 1893, he had spent less than $1,000 on new philanthropic projects. In
1896, with profits at $6 million, he donated more than $132,000 ($100 million today): $12,500 to the New York
Botanical Gardens; $1,000 to the New York Public Library; some $62,000 for his Pittsburgh Institute and
Library; $14,000 for a library in Wick Parish in the northern Highlands; $6,300 to Damrosch’s Oratorio and
Symphony Societies; $4,000 for schools in Homestead and Dunfermline; almost $27,000 for church organs; and
$500 to the Old Timers Telegraphers Association.³⁶

There would have been more money to spend had Carnegie acceded to the requests of his retired partners, Harry
Phipps and Dod, and paid out higher cash dividends. Phipps compared the fate of the senior Carnegie Steel
partners with the fabled Philip Nolan, the man without a country, who had wandered the globe, always drawing
near land but never landing. “We get in sight of dividends…then a new ship, a new voyage—and never land, each
time a new and deeper disappointment.” Dod was in full agreement. “I have a long communication from Harry on
the question of dividends v. improvements—His position seems to me unassailable…I cannot see why you do not
make dividends.” Phipps’s and Dod’s entreaties fell on deaf ears. With Frick’s support, Carnegie maintained
that the company had no choice but to reinvest up to 75 percent of its profits in capital improvements, if it
were to remain competitive.³⁷

For the time being, Carnegie thought it best to continue to concentrate his philanthropic spending on
Pittsburgh. He turned down a request for funds for the free library in Wolverhampton, explaining that because
he made a practice of not saving any money, he had none on hand to spend on new ventures. “I am depending upon
the future to provide the four-hundred thousand pounds which I promised to spend [in Pittsburgh], and
therefore I must resolutely confine myself to this department until I have the money. As it will come from
Pittsburgh, I think, it is only right that it should be spent there.” When Gladstone asked for money for the
Bodleian Library at Oxford, Carnegie turned him down as well. He had, he explained to Gladstone, pledged £1
million for his Carnegie Institute in Pittsburgh and “have still about 400,000 to spend there. I am in no
position to give any considerable sums for other purposes. All my surplus will be needed to pay for the
Pittsburgh additions.”³⁸

 

MUCH OF THE NEWS from America, that winter of 1897–98, was of Cuba, the atrocities committed by the Spanish
troops, the growing independence movement, and the pressure on the American government to intervene. On taking
office, President McKinley had declared himself opposed to intervention, but events were conspiring against
him. In February 1898, the Spanish minister in Washington insulted McKinley in a letter published in the
Hearst newspapers and the American battleship Maine exploded under mysterious circumstances in Havana Harbor.
In March, Senator Redfield Proctor, a respected moderate from Vermont, visited Cuba and reported to Congress
on the deplorable violations of decency and human rights practiced daily by the occupying Spaniards. “A great
pity that Cuba looms up just when the nation was getting financially in splendid shape,” Carnegie wrote Frick
from Cannes on March 29. “There will be great excitement, but I believe there will be no war. Spain blusters
but is too weak.”³⁹

While leading Republican members of the business community, including Henry Frick, implored the president they
had put into office to resist the drumbeat for war, Carnegie kept his silence, if only because he could not
believe the Spanish government would be stupid enough to go to war or strong enough, if it did, to hold back
immediate defeat. Even after war had been declared in April 1898, Carnegie remained optimistic that it would
soon be over. “I am not alarmed, much as I regret war,” he wrote Frick on April 23. “Spanish bravado is a
proverb—when put to the test the forces of Spain will melt away. My only fear is that we may be induced to
linger in Cuba, and become responsible for good government there. This would be more serious than the war. If
we restrict ourselves to clearing the Spaniards out, and then clearing out ourselves, the United States will
have scored, as showing to the world, a chivalrous act without taint of self.”⁴⁰

Twenty years earlier, he had offered up the prayer after traveling through British-held India, “May heaven
keep America from the colonizing craze! Cuba! Santo Domingo! Avaunt, and quit our sight!” He had, in the
succeeding years, witnessed nothing to convince him that America would benefit from following the British
example and becoming an overseas colonial power. Fortunately, he had seen no evidence that McKinley was
prepared to embark on such a course.⁴¹

On June 4, as U.S. troops mobilized in Tampa preparatory to invading Cuba, the New York Times published a
front-page interview with Carnegie, who was in London on his way to Skibo. He expressed his opinion that
General Nelson Miles, the commanding general, was “an ideal warrior who wins victories without fighting,” and
then went on to “protest energetically against any extension of the Republic.” Responding directly to the
chatter from home about the emerging American empire, he declared his fondest “hopes that the Americans will
justify the sentiment of Mill: ‘The Americans often talk as if about to do foolish things; but so far they
have never done one.’”[*][1]

On June 12, the New York Tribune and other newspapers reported that Carnegie had turned down a request from
the “Scottish Highlanders of Illinois” that he outfit a regiment “for service in the war with Spain.” “I do
not believe that the war will last long, or ever reach the dignity of a real war. You will see Spain go all to
pieces soon, much sooner than you could get the historical Highland garb provided for the regiment proposed.”

 

THE CARNEGIES arrived at their new Highland home at Skibo in the spring of 1898, almost simultaneously with
the American landing in Cuba. While Carnegie was as delighted with the estate as he had been on first
sighting, he was still not convinced that he should purchase it, in large part because it was so lacking in
the amenities required by a sixty-two-year-old man, his forty-one-year-old wife, and their year-old daughter.
Within weeks of settling in, he began making plans—tentative ones—to improve the estate. The overworked but
compliant Hew Morrison had already hired a staff, arranged to transport the Carnegies from London—and their
furnishings from Cluny—and, at Louise’s request, found the perfect “organist.” He had done so well at all
these tasks that Carnegie added a new one: “I understand that ‘principal Librarian’ means that one has nothing
to do but attend to ‘odds and end.’ Here is one for you. I wish very much to have a Saltwater Swimming Bath
(heated). Please ascertain who the man is in Scotland who has distinguished himself building these. I do not
wish to get into connection with anyone who has not had great experience, and knows the latest and best….
Should like some idea of cost, say 30' x 60'.”⁴²

Louise found the new estate to her liking, though it would never come close to replacing Cluny in her
affections. “We are all very pleased with our new home,” she wrote Dr. Eaton that spring. “The surroundings
are more of the English type than Scotch. The sweet pastoral scenery is perfect of its kind. A beautiful
undulating park with cattle grazing, a stately avenue of fine old beeches, glimpses of the Dornoch Firth,
about a mile away, all seen through the picturesque cluster of lime and beech trees. All make such a peaceful
picture that already a restful home feeling has come…. To show you the unique range of attractions, yesterday
Mr. Carnegie was trout fishing on a wild moorland loch surrounded by heather while I took Margaret to the sea
and she had her first experience of rolling upon the soft white sand and digging her little hands in it to her
heart’s content, while the blue waters of the ocean came rolling in at her feet and the salt sea breeze
brought the roses to her cheeks.” Louise was especially pleased that her idea to hire an organist for Skibo
had worked out so well. She had arranged to surprise Andrew (not told about her plan) by having the organist
greet the Carnegies with Beethoven’s Fifth “as we stepped on the threshold of our new home…. The organist has
now become a permanent institution. Every morning we come down to breakfast greeted by swelling tones,
beginning with a hymn or chorale, and swelling into selections from the oratorios, etc. In the evening our
musician plays for us on our fine Bechstein piano, which we now are really enjoying for the first time. We are
all delighted with our musical atmosphere.” As important as the organist would be, he would never supplant the
piper who, as chief music maker at Skibo, was given the task of waking family and guests by circling the main
house before sweeping through the downstairs hall, assuring that all were awake and primed for breakfast, and
then returning at dusk to “pipe” the guests in to dinner.⁴³

John Morley, to whom Carnegie had confided his misgivings about purchasing Skibo, urged him to think twice
before turning it down. “I never put my ballot in, after all. My feel is for it; but you must surely try a
little longer? It is of no use to take it for a term by way of experiment, and then to decide before the
experiment has been fully made. The only possible drawbacks are (1) distance, and (2) the bother of tenants.
The place itself is extremely fine; as pleasant a place as I ever saw.” With Morley’s vote in favor and
Louise’s approval, Carnegie purchased Skibo.⁴⁴

 

IN EARLY AUGUST, Carnegie was startled to receive a densely written letter at Skibo, in a tight, tiny hand,
from his former secretary and assistant, James Bridge. Their last communication had not been a pleasant one.
Carnegie had donated the copyright and royalties for the first edition of Triumphant Democracy to Bridge and
John Champlin, who had helped him with the book. Five years later in 1893, Bridge contacted him to request his
permission to bring out a second edition. Carnegie rejected the idea, but eighteen months later changed his
mind. Instead, however, of commissioning Bridge, he hired new researchers to bring the book up to date. Bridge
was understandably angry. He held the copyright and was convinced that he had every right to profit from
future editions.⁴⁵

Having heard nothing from Bridge for almost five years, Carnegie was startled to receive what he believed was
a thinly disguised blackmail request. Bridge had, he wrote Carnegie, rescued a trunkful of papers from the
rubble after his house had burned down. Inside was a bundle which he assumed had to do with Triumphant
Democracy. When he opened it, “an unaddressed scrap of paper…fell out…. This unaddressed scrap, signed E, had
evidently dropped out of letter written by a Mrs. Seymour. There were other envelopes addressed in the same
hand, besides some in the hand of Miss Whitfield—as she was then—and some in another handwriting which I had
seen before but did not recognize.” Bridge claimed that he had no idea how Carnegie’s private letters had
ended up in his trunk (a good question), but guessed that when Miss Hood, the maid, “cleaned up your private
desk on our leaving Cresson, she dumped the contents on to the pile I had taken out of my desk, which you
remember was in the same room.” His “first impulse” on finding the letters “was to burn them all; but on
reflection I thought that you ought to be told of their discovery.” He assured Carnegie he understood how
sensitive the letters were and, in order to avoid any embarrassment, had placed them “in a safe place in New
York where no one but myself can get them.” The scrap from E., the most sensitive note of all, he had locked
away in his own safe in San Francisco. He suggested Carnegie should notify him immediately upon his return to
New York so that they might arrange for the transfer of the letters—and the scrap from E. “You will understand
why I do not wish to have it in my possession any longer than is necessary. It is needless to say that you may
confidently rely on my discretion. Your instructions concerning the disposal of these papers will be carried
out to the letter, and afterwards I shall try to forget the incident. Of course I have not read anything
beyond the note which showed the character of the rest, though as you probably guessed at the time, I know who
the Seymours were.” Bridge closed his letter by asking for a loan of $10,000 so that he might purchase stock
in the Overland Monthly, which he currently edited in San Francisco. In return, he would give Carnegie a half
interest in the company. “It is a good business proposition as it stands; but I would supplement this by an
appeal to auld lang syne when there was a bond of sympathy and mutual trust between us which alone would have
justified me in making this request and you grant it.”⁴⁶

Carnegie asked Bridge to “mail anything you have of mine,” but received nothing. In 1903, when Bridge surfaced
once again, Carnegie warned his friend William Stead against him. He told Stead about the blackmail attempt
and that he had refused to pay Bridge off. There was no reason why he should have. His relations with E. or
Mrs. Seymour, whoever they were and whatever form they may have taken, occurred before he was married. Bridge
did not get his loan, but neither did he follow through on his implicit threats.⁴⁷

 

CARNEGIE followed events in Cuba as closely as he could from Skibo. Never one to put much store in protocol,
he took it on himself in mid-July 1898 to cable the ranking officer in Cuba, General Nelson Miles, with his
personal advice. (It was a miracle that he got through to Miles, at a time when even William Randolph Hearst,
covering the Cuban conflict for his New York newspaper, found it difficult to get an open cable line.) The
city of Santiago having fallen to the Americans, Carnegie urged General Miles to proceed at once “full force
[to] Porto Rico…. Capture Porto Rico; would tell heavily [in] Spain and Europe.” Through backchannels,
Carnegie had learned that the Spanish had fortified Havana and were prepared for a lengthy siege. The war, he
counseled, would be brought to a speedier conclusion should the Americans proceed directly to Puerto Rico.
Rather than dismissing this advice, General Miles laid it before McKinley and his cabinet. He was, he tells us
in his memoirs, delighted when he was ordered to proceed to Puerto Rico, as the “patriotic philanthropist” had
suggested.⁴⁸

The general and his troops landed in Puerto Rico on July 25. By the end of the month, as Carnegie had
predicted, the Spanish government, its navy destroyed in Manila Bay and its soldiers defeated in Cuba, opened
negotiations for an armistice. On August 12, hostilities were formally suspended. The Spanish agreed to grant
Cuba independence and cede Puerto Rico and Guam to the United States. The fate of the Philippines was to be
determined at a peace conference to be held in Paris in the fall.

Carnegie wasted no time making his opinions known on how the U.S. government should proceed. In “Distant
Possessions: The Parting of the Ways,” published in the August 1898 North American Review, he presented a
strong argument against the annexation of the Philippines, in the process establishing himself as a viable
leader for a burgeoning anti-imperialist movement. The American nation, Carnegie argued, had come to a
“parting of the ways.” Would it remain a republic, governed by the principles of self-determination? Would it
continue to prosper as it enjoyed the blessings of Triumphant Democracy? Or would it follow the path of the
mother country toward empire and Triumphant Despotism? “The question should be calmly weighed; it is not a
matter of party, nor of class…. Let us, therefore, reason together, and be well assured…. that we are making
no plunge into an abyss.”⁴⁹

Carnegie had no doubt but that the United States would be best served by withdrawing quickly from Cuba, Puerto
Rico, and the Philippine Islands. As a manufacturer, he proclaimed, he had learned that trade did not follow
the flag and colonies did not mean new markets. “Even loyal Canada trades more with us than with Britain. She
buys her Union Jacks in New York…. Possession of colonies or dependencies is not necessary for trade reasons.”
The annexation of the Philippines would weaken, not strengthen the economy. The nations of Europe were already
spending millions to stay abreast of one another in a feverish, escalating, and increasingly threatening race
for foreign colonies. “If we are to compete with other nations for foreign possessions, we must have a navy
like theirs.” France had fifty-one battleships, Britain eighty; the Americans had four, with five more in
construction. To secure and protect its future colonies, America would have to spend millions. Arguing
directly against his own self-interest as chief stockholder of the nation’s leading manufacturer of steel
plate and armor, Carnegie argued that monies spent on the military would come out of the funds needed for
internal improvements in the Americas: a Nicaragua Canal; a waterway from the Great Lakes to the ocean; new
and improved ports, harbors, canals, and railways. “To be more powerful at home is the surest way to be more
powerful abroad. And the way to enhanced power and prosperity at home was through investment in internal
improvements.”⁵⁰

Carnegie’s arguments against annexation were, for the most part, economic and political, but there were moral
issues at stake as well.

It if be a noble aspiration for the…citizen of the United States himself…to have a country to live and, if
necessary, to die for, why is not the revolt noble which the man of the Philippines has been making against
Spain? Is it possible that the Republic is to be placed in the position of the suppressor of the Philippine
struggle for independence…. Are we to practice independence and preach subordination, to teach rebellion in
our books, yet to stamp it out with our swords?…It has hitherto been the glorious mission of the Republic to
establish upon secure foundations Triumphant Democracy…government of the people, for the people, and by the
people. Tires the Republic so soon of its mission, that it must, perforce, discard it to undertake the
impossible task of establishing Triumphant Despotism, the rule of the foreigner over the people? And must the
millions of the Philippines who have been asserting their God-given right to govern themselves be the first
victims of Americans, whose proudest boast is that they conquered independence for themselves.⁵¹

It was a bravura, if uneven performance. In shifting the terms of his argument from the economic to the
geopolitical to the moral and then back again, Carnegie diminished the effectiveness of each strand in his
loosely woven manifesto. But by extending the range of the anti-imperialist argument, he framed the contours
of the debate that would follow. The tone of his article was confident, not defensive; he had logic and
morality on his side.

There was, in his article, what John Morley would later refer to as “a touch of exaggeration in expression,”
but Morley excused it as an inevitable component of Carnegie’s “invincible optimism…as to the whole world’s
progressive course.” Carnegie had no doubt but that warfare and imperialism belonged to prior eras of world
history. The future was to be one of peace through arbitration and the widening of the sphere of “triumphant
democracy.” He was convinced that his arguments against annexation would carry the day. His confidence in
President McKinley’s judgment was bolstered when the president recalled John Hay to Washington to serve as
secretary of state. McKinley, Hanna, and Hay were reasonable men, who could not possibly disagree with him on
the dangers of annexation to the very soul of America.⁵²

He could not have been more wrong. He had been a loyal Republican all his life and never veered far from the
party line. Even his apostasy on tariffs had been relatively mild and short-lived. It was difficult if not
impossible for him to imagine that he would ever be out of step with the leaders of his party, including his
friend John Hay. But he was very much out of step—and would remain so for the rest of his life. While the
Republicans, timidly under McKinley, more defiantly under Roosevelt, became the party of expansion and
imperialism, Carnegie would remain, as he had always been, an opponent of military adventurism and American
imperialism.

[1]: footnote26.html

## THIRTY

## The Anti-Imperialist, 1898–1899

ANDREW CARNEGIE’S VIEWS. A POLICY OF COLONIAL ACQUISITION MEANS DEATH TO BUSINESS PROSPERITY,” read the
October 21, 1898, New York Times headline. Two days earlier, the Carnegie family had returned to New York on
the Kaiser Friedrich after nearly a year and a half abroad.

Carnegie wasted no time making public his anti-imperialist sentiments. When a Times editorial on October 24
questioned his assertion that the Filipinos were capable of governing themselves, he reminded readers that the
Europeans had used similar arguments to defend their own colonial acquisitions. “It was the cry against the
Spanish Republics that they could not govern themselves; even Mexico not so long ago was thought incapable of
self-government. These are all acquiring the art of self-government through the stern but salutary school of
experience. So it will be with the Philippines. The people who have organized a large army and beaten their
oppressors may be safely trusted eventually to establish stable government.” He then proceeded to raise a new
set of objections to annexation. Young Americans who had volunteered to fight against the Spanish “oppressor”
ought not to be asked now “to shoot down the patriotic [Filipino] soldiers who were fighting against the
oppressor for their country’s independence long before Admiral Dewey appeared…. Let us watch what they say and
do, if a President of the United States ever dares so to order.”

Carnegie had never, in the past, been much of a team player, but the stakes were too high for him to fight
annexation by himself. Just three days after his return to New York, he began making contact with the nation’s
most outspoken anti-imperialists. “With every word you say as to the gravity of the present situation I am in
full accord,” he wrote Carl Schurz, the former Republican senator and now a leader of the campaign against
annexation of the Philippines. “I have been greatly troubled…and have written the President several times from
the other side…. When can we meet?…P.S. I think I have read everything you have said or written upon the
subject. If we could have a hundred bold men in public life like yourself, it would be better for the
Republic.”¹

Carnegie’s efforts were embraced at once by the anti-imperialists. E. L. Godkin, the editor of The Nation and
the New York Evening Post, welcomed him back to the country with a personal note, and congratulated him on his
recent articles and interviews. “You are doing the best work of your life. God protect you…. Keep it up; we
will copy you [in the Evening Post] every time.”²

Mr. Carnegie’s reentry into the public arena, after being out of the country for nearly eighteen months, did
not go unnoticed by Republican Party stalwarts who were pushing McKinley to annex the Philippine Islands, as
he had Hawaii. Republican Chauncey Depew, who would be elected that year to the Senate from New York, attacked
Carnegie for believing that “the only thing to do was to ‘scuttle and run.’” Depew assured his listeners that
he and Teddy Roosevelt, who was running for governor, believed “in assuming the responsibility in the spirit
of Bunker Hill” and holding on to the Philippines.³

On October 26, a week after Carnegie’s return, Secretary of State Hay, acting on President McKinley’s orders,
instructed the American commissioners to the Paris Peace Conference to demand that Spain cede Philippines to
the United States. Carnegie was incensed at the decision and prepared to do whatever he could to get it
reversed. On October 31, one day after the commissioners formally presented their demands to the Spanish, he
wrote a letter to the editor of the New York Tribune, a pro-annexationist Republican newspaper, in which he
provocatively, some might say tastelessly, called attention to the stories from the day before on the return
of the dead and wounded. “So goes on day by day the weary tale—only the first drippings, these, of the heavy
blood tax required to feed imperialism.” The following day, the Tribune published a second letter from
Carnegie, in which he updated the “record of the vampire imperialism, which feeds upon the blood of our
volunteers,” and asked pointedly “how many lives of American volunteers is occupation of the Philippines
worth, I wonder, in the estimation of imperialists? Not one drop of one, I hope, will yet be the reply of the
American people.” Two days later, he published his third letter in four days, this one longer and angrier than
the preceding two.

In what he promised Tribune readers would be his last letter to the editor, Carnegie on November 3 suggested
rather bluntly that the men who had volunteered to fight to free Cuba from the Spanish should refuse to take
up arms against the Filipinos. “Volunteers cannot be induced to do the work of imperialism…. They never
expected to be called upon to hold in subjection at Manila insurgents who had risen against the
oppressor—Spain…. Now, these men can urge with some degree of reason that they have not been fairly treated;
that the President has taken advantage of them; that the war being ended, their engagement is also ended.”
Republicanism and imperialism were essential foes. If McKinley did not retreat from the course he had set,
Carnegie was confident that the U.S. Senate would do its duty, reject the Treaty of Paris, and dedicate itself
anew “to the policy of the fathers, and keep the Republic solid, compact, impregnable—free from the vortex of
European strife.”

It is a credit to Carnegie’s stature and to President McKinley and his cabinet’s commitment to free speech
that no legal action was taken against Carnegie for suggesting that American soldiers should refuse to fight
in the Philippines.

Carnegie was fully committed now to the anti-annexation campaign, though he knew this would put him at odds
with his party, his president, and his friend John Hay. On November 19, he signed on as an honorary vice
president of the newly constituted Anti-Imperialist League and sent a check for $1,000. On Sunday, November
20, he attacked the president for vacillation—“I begin to grow doubtful about the President having convictions
upon any subject”—in the anti-imperialist, Democratic New York World. This change of venue—from the Republican
Tribune to Joseph Pulitzer’s World—was a big step away from the political orthodoxy that had marked his public
statements to this point. The World welcomed him on its front page, with a portrait, all the space he needed,
and a huge banner headline: “ANDREW CARNEGIE: ’NO IMPERIALISM.’ The Greatest Steel Manufacturer on Earth
Writes for The World His Reasons Against Annexation of the Philippines.”

On Tuesday, November 22, three days before his sixty-third birthday, Carnegie took the train to Washington to
call on the president at the White House. The meeting was a private one. Carnegie told reporters only that he
had left his card “in the White House.” He did not say he had returned later to implore the president to take
a firm, public stance against annexation. Receiving no hint of any sort that McKinley was going to do anything
of the sort, Carnegie stepped up his public attack. On Thursday, he sent Secretary of State Hay a preview of
the article he intended to publish that Sunday in the World, enclosed with a personal letter—(“strictly
confidential—I would write this to no one else but you”)—imploring him to intervene with the president.
McKinley, Carnegie feared, was being ill-advised by “nice courteous gentlemen, the very kind of people the
President don’t need about him just now.” He, Carnegie, did not relish having to contradict the president in
private and criticize him in public, but he knew of no other way to get him to reverse his policy. “Some day
if the President awakens from the abyss into which he is about to plunge, he will send for me and thank me for
being his best friend. If I arraign him it is for his good…. My friend I have never had such an unpleasant
task to perform in my life.” He intimated that McKinley was not listening to reason because he was ill. (Three
years earlier, he had suggested the same thing about Frick, the last man to disagree with him.) “I am so sorry
for the President—I do not think he is well, and yet I see that if one American Soldier’s blood is spilt
shooting down insurgents, either in Cuba or the Philippines, he shall be like another Mac[beth], ‘he shall
sleep no more’; every drop of blood is upon his hands.” Carnegie was so used to winning people over to his
point of view—through charm, logic, and sheer bullheadedness—that he took it as a personal affront when he
failed. “It is a great strain which the President is putting upon the loyalty of his friends and supporters,”
he confessed to Hay. “Many are bearing it—it has proved too great for me.” He signed his letter, “bitterly
opposed to you yet always your friend,” then added, a P.S.: “How I wish I could stop all this stirring up of
the President in the newspapers, but he gave me no hope that he realized how he was drifting to the devil.”⁴

Carnegie’s self-importance knew no bounds. What, for John Hay and the loyal Republicans who surrounded the
president, must have been most infuriating was his cocksure self-confidence combined with a total lack of
party loyalty. It was one thing to criticize the president in private, quite another to do so in the Sunday
newspapers. On Sunday, November 27, Carnegie published his second anti-imperialist article in the World, this
one also splashed across several front-page columns. The centerpiece was a monetary accounting of the pros and
cons of imperialism. Speaking from his bully pulpit as a successful manufacturer and businessman, Carnegie
reckoned the cost of annexing the Philippines to be not less than $100 million per annum; its benefits, zero.
Despite the prognostications of Secretary of the Treasury Lyman Gage, who “has never manufactured anything nor
exported anything,” and President McKinley, who had “no experience of commerce,” annexation, Carnegie
declared, would yield no tangible rewards for the nation’s businessmen, workingmen, wage earners, or farmers.
The Philippines were simply too far away to be a viable trading partner. “The claims of the imperialists that
foreign acquisitions extend our commerce with the Philippines is groundless. Let us hear no more of it. They
must confine themselves to ‘Humanity,’ with a big H, for business reasons there are none.”

Recognizing that he might have exceeded the bounds of propriety in attacking—in a Democratic newspaper—the
president’s policy, logic, and lack of convictions, Carnegie concluded his onslaught by confessing that he was
a personal friend of McKinley who had, just that week, been granted an interview in the White House. “Mutual
friends,” he claimed, had suggested that he had gone “too far” in questioning whether McKinley “had
convictions upon any subject.” He declared in his World article that he had not been “speaking of the private
character of Mr. McKinley” but of his “official acts as President…. I have known Mr. McKinley most of my
political life. I have always been his friend, but never so much his friend as I am to-day, when I tell him
the truth as I see it. Would that he had more such friends.” Shamelessly advertising his exalted place within
the Republican Party as independent adviser to presidents past and present, he declared that years before he
had counseled another friend, former President Ulysses S. Grant, against annexing San Domingo. “I have done
with President McKinley just as I did with President Grant—opposed and denounced his policy. Gen. Grant
remained my friend notwithstanding to the end, and I his friend.”

Carnegie was walking a tightrope now—and he knew it. He had criticized the president and his policy in print,
but remained, or so he professed, a Republican who had the best interests of the party and the president in
mind. On November 28, he wrote to warn McKinley that “labor” and the nation’s chambers of commerce were
opposed to his decision to pay Spain for the Philippines. “The true friend,” Carnegie assured McKinley, “not
only warns a friend of what he sees to be dangers that surround him, but he ventures to counsel him as to what
he should do in the crisis. Were I President of the United States I should announce in my message to Congress
that I demanded the Philippines from Spain that I might give to them the Independence which every people can
claim as a God-given right.” He signed this letter, “your friend personally; but the bitterest enemy you have
officially, as far as I know.”⁵

Secretary of State Hay was beginning to worry for Carnegie’s sanity. In a letter to Whitelaw Reid, Hay
criticized the “wild and frantic attack now going on in the press against the whole Philippine transaction,”
and added that he feared that their mutual friend Andrew Carnegie “really seems to be off his head. He writes
me frantic letters signing them ‘Your Bitterest Opponent.’ He threatens the President, not only with the
vengeance of the voters, but with practical punishment at the hands of the mob. He says henceforth the entire
labor vote of America will be cast against us, and that he will see that it is done. He says the
Administration will fall in irretrievable ruin the moment it shoots down one insurgent Filipino. He does not
seem to reflect that the Government is in a somewhat robust condition even after shooting down several
citizens in his interests at Homestead.”⁶

Carnegie would have been aghast to discover that Hay was ridiculing him behind his back. He had indeed thrown
caution to the winds in publicly attacking the sitting president he had helped elect. But he could do no less
to protest a policy so fraught with danger to his beloved republic. Annexation of the Philippines was wrong,
politically, economically, morally; the president had to be made aware of this.

In everything he said or did, Carnegie believed he was acting in the best interests of his nation—and of the
Republican Party. He had, it was true, allied himself with the anti-imperialists, many of whom were opponents
of core Republican positions, but he had done so as a loyalist who stood with the party 100 percent on the
issues of tariff protection and the gold standard. It was incumbent on those in the anti-imperialist camp,
whatever their views on other issues, to work together against annexation. He would do his part as a
Republican insider; he expected Godkin and other independents and Democrats to do theirs by rallying to the
cause as many voices and votes as they could. “Believe me the fight is just begun and we are going to win.
[The president] is now getting letters from most important men, both industrially and politically; they are
opening his eyes. There is nothing that benefits the cause like such letters from men to whom he is
indebted.”⁷

 

CARNEGIE spent most of his waking hours on the anti-annexation campaign. He might have done better to devote
some of that time to his steel business. Since Frick’s retirement as president almost five years earlier,
Carnegie had been trying to redefine his role in the company. He continued to read and comment on the minutes,
reports, and accounting statements sent him, and had taken a lead role in negotiating a long-term agreement
with Rockefeller for iron ore and in constructing new railroad that linked his mills to Conneaut Harbor on
Lake Erie. By the fall of 1898, his company had attained what he had earlier characterized as “an impregnable
position” in the steel industry.

This did not mean, of course, that there were not issues that required his full attention. There were.

The steel industry had entered into what Alfred Chandler has called “the nation’s first great merger
movement.” The notion of merging competing firms was not a new one, but it had been sidetracked by a lack of
interest in financing industrial consolidations. Only as it became apparent that manufacturing firms had come
out of the mid-1890s depression in better shape than the railroads and that the best protection against
antitrust legislation was to merge competing companies did capital become available for a new and robust round
of industrial mergers. In 1897, there had been six mergers in the manufacturing sector; in 1898, there were
sixteen; in 1899, sixty-three.⁸

In September 1898, the Morgan interests organized the Federal Steel Corporation with a capitalization of $200
million by consolidating the Illinois Steel works, the ore mines of the Minnesota Iron Company, the Lorain
Steel Company, and two railroads. Judge Elbert Gary, Illinois Steel’s general counsel, became Federal Steel’s
first president. Through 1898, and with accelerating ferocity in 1899 and 1900, the merger movement
transformed the steel industry. The Morgans were not the only financiers who understood the magnitude of
profits that could be generated by merging former competitors. Speculators like the Moore brothers of Chicago
and John “Bet-a-Million” Gates, acting separately and in concert, organized American Can, American Steel Hoop,
National Steel, and American Tin Plate. Judge Gary, with the Morgans’ support, merged fourteen different
companies into National Tube and another twenty-five into American Bridge.⁹

Carnegie, Frick, and Schwab had at various times during these two frantic years been asked to join the parade,
but they had never found an offer to their liking. In January 1898, Judge Gary had broached the idea of having
Carnegie Steel merged into the new American Steel & Wire Company he was helping to organize. Four months
later, John Gates had suggested that Carnegie might want to purchase Illinois Steel, then in the process of
being consolidated into Federal Steel.¹⁰

In May, with mergers in the air, Frick suggested that Carnegie consolidate Carnegie Steel and H. C. Frick Coke
Company, which were still managed as separate companies. “It seems to me time may have arrived when Carnegie
Steel Company should own all stock in H. C. Frick Coke Company…. One big perfect organization would have many
advantages.” He didn’t add—and didn’t have to—that the individual shareholders in the companies would profit
enormously from such a merger.¹¹

Though Phipps was in favor of the plan, Carnegie’s cousin Dod feared that the terms Frick laid out were far
too favorable for the coke company shareholders. “How comes it that the coke business has got so very
valuable, has increased in much larger rates than the steel works…. Let us take a breath anyway, there are a
number of different points of view to look at this from.” Carnegie agreed with Dod that the issue needed
further examination, which he put off until his return to the States in the fall of 1898.¹²

By the time Carnegie returned after eighteen months abroad, the business decisions waiting to be made had
mounted, one on top of and often dependent on the other. His partners tried their best to get Carnegie to
concentrate on these issues, but he demurred. All through the fall and winter of 1898, while Frick was
considering various plans for consolidation, the majority stockholder appeared to be fully absorbed by the
anti-imperialist campaign. Phipps, who had been trying to cash out his interest in the company for several
years, traveled to Washington to spend time with Carnegie in November and reported to Frick that Carnegie had
finally begun considering “the great question of selling out” and contemplating what he would do with the
“great sum” he would get. Much of it, he had decided, would be spent on “a fine plum” for Pittsburgh.¹³

Dod, who was in closer communication with Carnegie than anyone else, had no idea whether his cousin was
prepared as yet to sell his interest in his companies. “His mind is nothing like made up, sometimes one way
and sometimes another,” Dod wrote Phipps in late November. “A little circumstance took place during one of our
talks which it would be well you should know—Louise came in and sat down, he turned to her and told her what
we were talking about, his thoughts were running favorably to the sale at the time—she remarked that when it
was done she ‘would be the happiest woman in America’—He immediately turned on her quite savagely and went
into quite a tirade on men who retired from business dying etc. etc.—that he would be laying down a crown etc.
etc., so I judge the matter will make the most progress by being let alone as much as possible—He is in a
considerably excited state about the Philippines anyway and this coming on the back of it may have had
physical effects I fear.”¹⁴

Carnegie had been talking about selling his steelworks for years, but never very seriously. It was impossible
to sell without a buyer—and outside of Messrs. Rockefeller and Morgan, there were few men capable of coming up
with the cash or guaranteed 5 percent gold bonds that Carnegie wanted for his share. Still, he knew that he
could not hold out forever, that sooner or later he would have to cash in his majority interest in the company
that bore his name.

The question was when. In his “Gospel of Wealth” essays, he had stated that it was the duty of the man of
wealth to dispose wisely of the “surplus revenues” he had accumulated. Had his fortune been smaller, it would
have required less time to dispose of. But it was huge—and growing larger by the day. The sooner he started
giving it away, the better. On the other hand, the longer he delayed, the larger that fortune would grow—and
the more there would be to give away.

 

APPROACHING his mid-sixties, Andrew Carnegie had reinvented himself again. The “Star-spangled Scotchman,”
capitalist, and philanthropist had become the nation’s most outspoken anti-imperialist. Almost daily now, new
letters, tracts, pamphlets, and articles were sent forth from the library at 5 West Fifty-first Street. He
published letters to the editor of the New York World on November 30, December 1, December 8, and December 11,
then switched to the Republican New York Times and published three more on December 12, 17, and 24. The
onslaught continued through January 1899 with another five letters to the editor of the World.

To make sure that his message reached the widest possible audience, Carnegie hired a press agency to privately
“syndicate” his World letters to at least five hundred papers in the “agricultural press,” as well as to
thousands of weeklies and hundreds of the leading dailies in the country. His friend the industrialist Clem
Studebaker requested “copies of all the letters that you have written in reference to the Philippine question”
to distribute to his own networks. Frank Doubleday approached him with the suggestion that they publish a
short book of articles, “Imperial Policy of the United States, which will sell for 25 cents in paper, 50 cents
in cloth.”¹⁵

Carnegie also published the speeches and articles of other prominent anti-imperialists. “Print your speech in
pamphlet form and distribute it and I will be your banker,” he wrote Carl Schurz after receiving an advance
copy of a speech Schurz intended to deliver in early January in Chicago. “This is the way in which I can aid
the good work. You have brains and I have dollars. I can devote some of my dollars to spreading your brains.”
Fearing that Schurz, like Godkin, was becoming disillusioned with the mounting drumbeat of support for
annexation, Carnegie reassured him as best he could. “Do not lose faith in the Republic or in Triumphant
Democracy. It is sound to the core.”¹⁶

As the weeks passed with no sign that McKinley was backing away from his decision to annex the Philippines,
Carnegie reached out to Democrat anti-imperialists like Grover Cleveland. In mid-December, another Democrat,
William Jennings Bryan, the man whom Carnegie had so caustically referred to two years earlier as a trickster,
a charlatan, and a “conjurer,” sent him a note asking Carnegie to call at the Hotel Bartholdi in New York.
Carnegie replied by asking Bryan to visit him instead at home. “I would go to you, but am sick and unable to
leave the house. I believe you to be the only man in the country today who can save us from the twin evils of
imperialism and militarism.” The newspapers got wind of the meeting—and had a field day with rumors about the
canny old Scotsman and the Nebraskan populist plotting an alliance to overthrow McKinley.¹⁷

Carnegie asked Bryan to abandon his silver campaign and concentrate his energies on the fight against
imperialism. He may also have suggested that if Bryan ran for the presidency in 1900 on an anti-imperialist,
instead of a pro-silver platform, he might support him. Bryan, of course, had no intention of tying himself to
Carnegie politically. “Am informed that you have prepared public statement discussing our interview &
suggesting possibility of your supporting me in 1900,” Bryan cabled Carnegie on Christmas Eve. “I hope report
is untrue. I have not discussed interview publicly and prefer that you do not. I am not a candidate for any
office at this time—whether I ever shall be again depends upon circumstances. I not only ask no pledge of
support conditional and unconditional but believe a pledge or prophecy likely to injure the cause of
constitutional government against imperialism, a cause which is more dear to me than political preferment. I
am making this fight in my own way & hope to see the question disposed of before 1900 so that the fight for
silver and against trusts and bank notes may be continued. You and I agree in opposing militarism and
imperialism but when these questions are settled we may find ourselves upon opposite sides as heretofore. Let
us fight together when we can and against each other when we must exercising charity at all times.”¹⁸

The silver issue, Bryan insisted, was far from dead. Still, he agreed that it was important that he and
Carnegie join together to fight imperialism and militarism. “Keep after them,” Bryan wrote again on December
30. “You will reach republicans and I shall reach silver men…. I assure you that I wish you every success in
your effort to point out to other people the evils that attend a colonial policy.”¹⁹

Having met the enemy—in his own home—and been spotted doing so, Carnegie had some explaining to do. On
December 29, in a note wishing John Hay and his family a Happy New Year, accompanied by a “small lot of whisky
from the Queen’s vat—i.e. the vat from which she is renewed every year,” Carnegie mentioned the “silly reports
anent Bryan and your servant” and explained that Bryan had called upon him as well as “upon several Americans
(not Imperialists)—I was honored—He’s right anent Americanism—but unless he drops silver…he has no chance. But
he can beat us to death on the right platform.” Though Bryan had told him the exact opposite—in no uncertain
terms—Carnegie, pulling out all the stops, informed Hay that he now believed that the “democrats will drop
silver. Then look out.”²⁰

Carnegie had become something of a one-note Jeremiah with his dire predictions of gloom and doom should the
Republicans become the party of imperialism. Opposition to Republican expansionism, he insisted in another
letter to Hay, was mounting across the country. “A large majority of the most intelligent are opposed. As to
Labor, that is settled. As to the Farmers I believe they will be ranged alongside of Labor…. From the party
point of view I see nothing but disaster. If the country should be polled today the majority against Expansion
would be something surprising…. I believe [President McKinley] stands to-day in grave danger of wrecking the
party to which he owes his elevation to the highest political office on earth, and needs today more than ever
he did in his life, the counsel of men who will tell him the truth, because they have no favor to seek at his
hands.”²¹

If McKinley was not going to pull back from the abyss, the Senate could block annexation by refusing to ratify
the Treaty of Paris. In January 1899, a month before the Senate was scheduled to vote on the treaty, Carnegie
published the first part of “Americanism Versus Imperialism” in the North American Review. Having in previous
articles dispatched the argument that imperialism promoted commercial expansion, he took aim at the two
remaining tenets of the imperialist credo: that America’s military might and security would be strengthened by
its acquiring a far eastern empire, and that “humanitarian” interests dictated that the Americans benevolently
govern the Filipinos who, as an inferior race, were incapable of governing themselves.

Carnegie declared that the annexation of the Philippines would weaken, not strengthen, the nation militarily
by providing potential enemies with an easy point of attack. With a tiny navy and almost no regular army, the
United States had but two ways to protect its new holdings in the Far East: it could enter into a military
alliance with the British and rely on them for protection, or it could embark at once on a twenty-year project
of militarization—for it would, he argued, take at least that long to construct a viable navy. In either case,
the result would be disastrous.²²

The Senate vote on ratification of the Treaty of Paris was scheduled for February 6. Carnegie relocated to
Washington in late January to lobby against it. Because a two-thirds majority was required for ratification,
the Democrats had it in their power to reject the treaty. Bryan, however, already looking ahead to the 1900
presidential election, believed it wise politics to permit the treaty to pass so that he could oppose it and
imperialism in the upcoming campaign. He argued as well, and as speciously, that the treaty did not obligate
the president to annex the islands. Carnegie and the vast majority of the anti-imperialists did not see it
that way. A vote for the treaty was a vote to ratify the sale of the Philippines to the United States,
preliminary to formal annexation.

The treaty was ratified by a one-vote margin when Bryan refused to marshal any votes against it. In the years
to come, it would be claimed (without proof) that soon after the ratification vote, Carnegie visited with
President McKinley and offered to buy the Philippines for $20 million (the amount the Americans had given
Spain) and set the islands free. The claim is not credible. Carnegie did not have anywhere near that sum to
spend—and would not until he sold Carnegie Steel, an event that was several years in the future. He never
mentioned any such offer in his Autobiography or any of his letters, but he never denied the rumor either,
preferring perhaps to let it stand as testimony to his commitment to peace.²³

 

CARNEGIE had now lost every round of his fight against annexation and imperialism. Like a punch-drunk boxer,
he staggered forward, refusing to concede defeat. Though the Philippines were now a possession of the United
States, McKinley or his successor could, he claimed, with the stroke of a pen grant them independence.

In March 1899, Carnegie published the second part of “Americanism Versus Imperialism.” Again, he laid out all
the arguments against annexation, but this time around, the article format could no longer contain his anger.
The evils of imperialism had assumed human form as American soldiers waged war on the people they had sworn to
free from Spanish tyranny. How could this have come to pass? The Filipinos, though an inferior race, were not
savages or barbarians who required taming. Carnegie urged his readers to concentrate their attentions not on
the differences between the races, but on their similarities. “It is astonishing how much all human beings the
world round are alike in their essentials.” The Filipinos “love their homes and their country, their wives and
children, as we do, and they have their pleasures…. They have just the same feelings as we have, not excluding
love of country, for which, like ourselves, as we see, they are willing to die. Oh, the pity of it! The pity
of it! That Filipino mothers with American mothers equally mourn their lost sons—one fallen, defender of his
country; the other, the invader.”²⁴

 

SOMETIME during the fall of 1898, as Carnegie entered deeper and deeper in the battle against the annexation
of the Philippines, he made up his mind to sell his shares in Carnegie Steel if a suitable offer were made. He
did not advertise the decision or put it in writing, but let Frick and Phipps know that this was his
intention.

Frick proposed that Carnegie Steel and H. C. Frick Coke should be consolidated into one holding company and
sold to outsiders or to the remaining partners. Carnegie suggested that Frick should “work this up.” Frick
answered that there was “really nothing to do” but call a meeting of the senior partners “and reach firm
agreement.” There were, he insisted, several potential investors ready to provide the funds required to buy
the new company. “It is surprising the amount of money awaiting investment in this City [Pittsburgh]. On all
sides you find people who are looking for investments.”²⁵

Early in January 1899, Carnegie, Phipps, Frick, Dod Lauder, Charlie Schwab, and the other senior partners met
at Carnegie’s home in New York. It was agreed to try first to sell the coke and steel companies either to
Federal Steel, the new conglomerate organized by the Morgan interests, or to Rockefeller. When neither party
consented to bid, Frick, with Carnegie’s encouragement, wrote up the alternative plan to consolidate the steel
and coke companies into a new company, which the partners would then purchase. Dod, Carnegie, Phipps, and
perhaps Frick would be paid for their shares in cash and gold bonds, and retire.

Although there was much to recommend selling now, Carnegie, after initiating talks on selling, hesitated and
then declined to move. The latest profit figures for 1898, which he had just received from Frick, convinced
him that the business was doing too well to give up just now. It made better sense to wait a few years and
then sell out at an even higher price.

On January 24, he cabled Frick that he had decided not to sell his shares or to merge Frick Coke and Carnegie
Steel into a new company. He claimed his decision had been made with Frick’s best interests in mind. “To be
frank I prefer keeping with you in coke. Why should your own concern, biggest of its kind, be merged or
changed as long as you ‘are to the fore’ or willing to look after it, which I know you can’t help doing any
more than I can Carnegie Steel? These are no Helen [Frick’s daughter] or Margaret by a long sight but they are
our business creations. I can’t get over the feeling that we lose our affection for this baby if ever a change
is made. My will gives Carnegie Steel Co. control if I die, and if anything happens to you, which the Fates
forbid, of course we should have to do the best we could which I fear wouldn’t be very good. Frick Coke Co. is
good for a big year, bigger than interest on bonds. Let’s let it alone is my vote. I’m not anxious to sell,
neither is the Squire. Neither should you be. It’s good enough.”²⁶

Frick did not agree. He wanted out of the partnerships with Carnegie, out of the coke company, out of the
steel company. And he believed that that was what Carnegie would, in the end, agree to. He had received too
many confused signals from Carnegie to abandon his plans to first consolidate, then sell H. C. Frick Coke and
Carnegie Steel. He would, he was convinced, eventually come up with a plan that was too good for Carnegie to
refuse.

In March 1899, the next chapter in this extended saga opened when Frick was approached by William Moore, who,
with his brother, had made a name for himself by organizing a number of trusts and mergers, including American
Tin Plate and National Steel. Moore offered to buy (and then consolidate) Carnegie Steel for $250 million,
five times its established book value, and H. C. Frick Coke for the inflated price of $70 million. He intended
to raise much of this money by selling shares in the merged company to the public. We don’t know if it was
Moore’s idea or Frick’s to keep his name from Carnegie, but it was, in any event, a wise decision. Carnegie
had spent a lifetime distinguishing the good he did as a businessman from the evil wrought by stock
speculators. He would not have been comfortable handing over the business that bore his name to a man like
Moore with a reputation for stock manipulation.²⁷

Years later, Carnegie testified under oath that he “did not know it was Mr. Moore that we were dealing with.
Mr. Frick told me that the parties had bound him not to reveal who they were.” Carnegie claimed that because
he did not know who the principal investors were, he required, “as an earnest of good faith,” a nonrefundable
option of $2 million, of which 58.5 percent or $1.17 million, his share, was to be deposited in his private
account. A reputable businessman and investor, he reasoned, would have no trouble coming up with such an
amount. Frick agreed that this was a reasonable request. Carnegie then gave “Mr. Frick and my partner, Mr.

Phipps, my power of attorney to act for me in accepting to option, if it were taken.”²⁸

Frick presented Moore’s proposal to the Carnegie Steel board of managers and announced that as the mystery
investor was able to put up only $1 million of Carnegie’s option money, he and Phipps would contribute the
extra $170,000 from their own pockets. He asked the other partners to forego what would have been their share
of the $2 million option money—and they agreed.

On May 4, 1899, Frick and Phipps cabled Carnegie in Britain: “option money deposited today. We furnished
‘$170,000.’…Cannot say when [prospectus] will be made public. Will cable frequently.” The next day, Frick
cabled again, this time with the news that the outline of the prospectus had been “well received although full
details not made public. Subscriptions will be received here at First National Bank and like institutions in
leading cities in this country. Likely will be oversubscribed.” Before five days had passed, Carnegie received
another enthusiastic cable from Frick and Phipps. The new company, they announced, was going to be organized
in New Jersey, with the current board of managers as directors and “six additional members.” The officers
would remain the same. Sufficient money had been raised so that there would be “no necessity ask public
subscriptions.”²⁹

Two days later, Frick discovered for himself why Carnegie had wanted nothing to do with speculators like the
Moore brothers. On May 12, Roswell P. Flower, the ex-governor of New York, and one of the speculators whom the
Moores had enlisted in their syndicate, died suddenly, throwing the whole plan into limbo. Frick confronted
William Moore, who confessed that, with Flower out of the picture, he would have a difficult time coming up
with the money he had promised. He suggested instead that they raise it by selling 2.5 million shares of stock
at $100 each. Before Frick had a chance to notify either Carnegie in Scotland or the board of managers in
Pittsburgh, word was leaked in Chicago that Moore was behind the plan to sell stock to the public, infuriating
Frick, who directed his chief lieutenant in New York to “say to Mr. Moore if statements of this kind appear in
the press I will feel called upon to deny them. The understanding was there was no publicity to be given this
matter until we all agreed just how and when it should be done, and I expect that understanding to be strictly
lived up to.”³⁰

The cat was out of the bag. On May 20, Frick and Phipps wrote Carnegie about the new plan, which, they
explained, would, unlike the first one, capitalize the company at $350 million, exactly what it was worth,
with no water added. Mr. Moore, Frick now confessed, had wanted a higher capitalization, but in the new plan,
would not get it.³¹

Three days later, Frick cabled Carnegie again, in one final attempt to explain away Moore’s failure to live up
to the agreement he had made. “Mr. Moore is an honest man, but very sanguine. He led us to believe that the
First National Bank and City National Bank would join him in taking charge of this matter…. This [new]
agreement puts the matter in control of Mr. Phipps and myself, and is on a very conservative basis, in view of
what has been agreed to pay you, and on a basis where our employes and friends can safely invest. It is
astonishing the demand there is from that source. Notwithstanding the demand, however, amount of money to
raise is immense…. Believe the public will subscribe [buy common stock]largely. If I should find, however,
that it was not all going to be taken, might conclude to sail with my family on 6th of June, and have a
conference with you regarding it, in which event would have Mr. Phipps accompany me.”³²

Though he did not reveal it in his letters or cables, Frick was close to panic now. The option was due to
expire on August 4, at which point the $1,170,000 paid Carnegie would be forfeited. Frick and Phipps expected
that Carnegie would keep Moore’s portion of the option money and return the $170,000 they had contributed.

On May 29, Frick wrote to suggest that Moore accompany him and Phipps to Skibo to ask Carnegie for an
extension. “If you should decide to go, it would be well to keep it entirely quiet, and not let the newspapers
know that you are going abroad to see him. I have grave fears that Mr. Carnegie will decline to extend the
option. He will regard it as a cold business transaction, so that the result, so far as you are concerned,
would be to lose the money you have paid, and I have serious doubts about Mr. Carnegie’s willingness to ever
return it. Please think this all over, and let me hear from you.” When Moore refused to travel to Scotland,
Frick asked if he could, at the very least, organize “an Underwriting Syndicate…that would take absolutely,
say $50 [million] or $60 [million] of the stock, and pay for it…. This, I think, would greatly influence Mr.
Carnegie to extend or modify the option. Without this, I fear our effort will be fruitless.”³³

 

THE FOUR CARNEGIES—Andrew, Louise, Stella, and Margaret, who had celebrated her second birthday in
March—arrived in June to spend their second summer at Skibo, their first as owners. On June 23, they were
joined by their tenants and neighbors for the official laying of the foundation stone for the castle they
intended to build on the site of the existing house. Construction began at once; the servants were moved to a
nearby cottage, the Carnegies settled into their own wing of the old house.³⁴

There were fewer guests than usual that summer, though Carnegie did entertain the American ambassador to
Britain, Joseph Choate, Choate’s wife and daughter, the journalist William Stead, and several Americans who
were “shooting” nearby. Carnegie had quickly settled into his new life as a country squire. He was, his friend
Stead thought, “like a child with a new toy. For a man of sixty two [sixty-four really], he has succeeded
marvelously in preserving unimpaired the delight of youth in all that is new and beautiful. He is as
enthusiastic as a boy about Skibo. Heaven itself, he declared, is not nearly so beautiful as Skibo.” Carnegie
enjoyed fishing for salmon in the Dornoch Firth and trout in the mountain streams that fed it. The Seabreeze,
his yacht, lay at anchor a short distance from the house. That summer, Carnegie took several trips with his
family and one with Rudyard Kipling, who was staying nearby with his father and cousin while recuperating from
illness. Carnegie also spent a great deal of time at the golf links, about three quarters of a mile from the
main house, down a beautiful winding path. He introduced Ambassador Choate to the game that summer. With Stead
as their caddie, he and Choate played three or four holes before a thunderstorm (a frequent Skibo occurrence)
sent them scurrying back to the house.³⁵

Harry Phipps and Frick arrived at Skibo in the second week of June to petition for an extension of the Moore
option. Carnegie’s answer was blunt and to the point. “I said not one hour,” he reported to Dod, adding that
both Frick and Phipps were “delighted, both wished the matter ended.” Carnegie then proposed that the company
be sold to the partners who, he suggested, could take out a new mortgage on the properties and buy out his
share for 4 percent gold bonds. “Pleasant interview at Skibo,” Frick and Phipps cabled the board in
Pittsburgh. “Will not extend or modify present option. Have advised Chicago [i.e., Moore].”³⁶

Carnegie, as always the most gracious of hosts, took the two men on long walks and carriage drives, and
proudly showed them the improvements he had made—and planned to make—on his estate. It was, he thought, a very
pleasant visit. In July, Carnegie visited Phipps at his estate in England. The partners, who had been friends
now for almost half a century, went fishing and “Andrew was made happy by catching two fine salmon—17'' to
18'' inches long—hooked and landed them unaided,” Phipps wrote Frick, who had returned to Pittsburgh. “I
landed three the other morning.”³⁷

The Moore plan had fallen through, but the promise of a huge payout had prompted Carnegie to think again about
selling his interests in Carnegie Steel and H. C. Frick Coke. During Stead’s visit, Carnegie confided to his
old friend that he was going to retire on January 1, 1900. He was not, he insisted, retiring because of
health; he was “as active as ever,” Stead found. Nor was he retiring because of pressure from his partners
who, he told Stead, hoped he would remain active in the business. “But Mr. Carnegie was inexorable. He said it
was much better that he should leave and let them run the business themselves.” If he held on to the business,
it would increase greatly in value. Nonetheless, he had decided to “retire in order that he might spend his
life in distributing the money which he had taken so much time to earn.” Stead found the prospect of a
self-made millionaire embarking on such a venture of giving away his entire fortune “so interesting, and so
practical, and so up-to-date,” that he chose to devote his upcoming “Annual,” the 150–200 page pamphlet he
sent in December to his Review of Reviews subscribers, to the story of “Mr. Carnegie’s Conundrum: £40,000,000:
What Shall I Do With It?” On learning of Stead’s intention, Carnegie had “rather deprecated my publishing
anything about him or his millions until next year. His plans, he said, were not completed.” Still, he
supplied Stead with the autobiographical materials he needed and tacitly gave him permission to proceed.
Stead’s pamphlet was published in late November 1899.³⁸

Carnegie was busy that summer on his own writing projects. He expanded his anti-annexation articles into the
full-length book Frank Doubleday had asked for, then put the manuscript away. It would never be published.
Carnegie had reluctantly concluded that summer that there was nothing more to be said on the subject of the
Philippine annexation. The Senate had approved the Treaty of Paris, an insurgency had broken out in the
islands, American soldiers killed, and a new war declared. No president could dare grant independence to the
Filipino insurgents while they were at war with American soldiers.³⁹

Carnegie wrote no more articles or letters to the editor or private notes to Secretary of State Hay about the
Philippines. He did not give up his commitment to anti-imperialism so much as redirect it from the American
annexation of the Philippines to the British invasion of the Transvaal, the northern Boer republic. Britain’s
conduct in South Africa was, Carnegie insisted in a North American Review article written that fall and
published in December 1899, “indefensible and her policy foolish. No nation has a right to attack and endeavor
to suppress a people so capable of self-government as the Dutch [Boers].”⁴⁰

Carnegie did not feel quite so isolated as an anti-imperialist in Britain as he had in the United States. In
the United States, his allies had been apostate Republicans and a few Democrats. In Britain, he was joined in
his attack on the Boer War by his friends in the Liberal Party. When Sir William Harcourt, formerly chancellor
of the exchequer in Gladstone’s government, delivered one of several impassioned speeches against the war,
Carnegie congratulated him on his and the Liberal Party’s stance.

Although I have no right to interfere in your politics here in Britain I cannot refrain from writing you a few
words having just finished your speech. Never has the question been so clearly, so powerfully placed before
the country. It is unanswerable and such is my faith in truth so clearly put that I have new hopes and
(barring accident which is always to be feared in such positions as the present) that my nation is to be saved
from the indelible disgrace of wrongfully waging war against a weak state, whose internal independence it has
itself guaranteed. Yourself and Morley will live in history for your noble defense of the right. Our own
branch of the English speaking race is today covered with infamy suppressing allies whom it promised
independence—I have tried to imitate you even against my own party…. I am going to denounce McKinley and his
apostasy to our traditions—wish I could reach our people as I know you have done.⁴¹

Despite his promise, Carnegie did not, on returning to New York in the fall of 1899, denounce the president.
With American troops having returned to battle—this time against Filipino insurgents—he realized that there
was now no way of recalling them short of some sort of victory.

## THIRTY-ONE

## “The Richest Man in the World,” 1899–1901

THE BATTLE was joined in October 1899. This time there would be no reconciliation.

Frick had hoped and expected that Carnegie would refund the $170,000 he and Phipps had put up as option money
in the Moore deal. By the end of the summer, it had become clear that Carnegie had no intention of giving it
back. He had discovered that Frick and Phipps had, without informing him, written into the agreement with
Moore a $5 million bonus for themselves should the deal be consummated. Carnegie had given them power of
attorney to act on his behalf in the negotiations. He had never suspected that they were, in fact, copromoters
and would profit handsomely if and when Carnegie Steel was sold to Moore’ s syndicate. The least he could do
to show his displeasure was to withhold their $170,000.

Frick did not petition Carnegie for the money he and Phipps were owed. Nor did Carnegie ever raise the issue
of the $5 million bonus. Instead, Frick and Carnegie took out their anger by veiled and not so veiled
criticisms of one another. Carnegie, who held his temper better, did not mention Frick by name when he
criticized several contracts which the board, under Frick’ s leadership, had recently approved. Frick defended
himself by going on the attack. “These contracts have been made, and we must live up to them. If Mr. Carnegie
wishes to review past actions,” Frick declared at the board meeting of September 11, “we have as much right to
review other things…. I think we have blundered about in proportion to our interests in our concern.”
Carnegie, he was suggesting, as the majority stockholder had made the majority of the blunders.¹

Remarks published in the minutes were intended for Carnegie’ s consumption and Frick knew this. He had tried
to provoke Carnegie but without much success. “The Chairman says that we all have blundered,” Carnegie
responded blandly on October 16. “True, and always will blunder; no one is infallible, but suggestions of a
change do not imply personal reflections. It is simply a business question as to what is best, and experience
should teach us to change when thought best.”²

Frick was not conciliated by what he must have seen as a rather condescending riposte. For more than two
decades now, he had bristled as Carnegie exercised his prerogatives as majority stockholder. After resigning
as president of Carnegie Steel, Frick had stayed on as chairman of the board of managers and provided the glue
that kept the company together. While Carnegie was leading the high life in New York, London, and his Scottish
estates, Frick stood at his post in Pittsburgh through fair weather and foul. He had waited patiently for the
older man to resign or, failing that, to turn over control of the business to his partners. At the very least,
he expected that Carnegie might by now have recognized, as surely everyone else did, that Henry Clay Frick
knew as much as he did about the steel business and infinitely more about coke.

Twice before Frick had lost his temper—and his good sense—at Carnegie’ s hauteur, picked a fight knowing he
could not win, and been forced to resign. As long as Carnegie remained the majority stockholder in Carnegie
Steel and the controlling stockholder in H. C. Frick Coke, there was no way Frick was going to win a battle
with him.

On October 25, nine days after Carnegie’s letter acknowledging his blunders was presented at the Carnegie
Steel board meeting, the H. C. Frick Coke board met, with Frick in the chair. At the end of the meeting,
Thomas Lynch, the president of the company, reported that Carnegie Steel officials had informed him that they
had “been advised by Mr. Carnegie that he made a permanent contract with Mr. Frick at a fixed price per ton
[$1.35], commencing January 1st last,” and that they would pay only that amount, not the higher rates the coke
company had been billing them. Lynch insisted that there was “no record of any such contract” for $1.35 a ton
coke, and he had “repeatedly so informed the proper officers of the Carnegie Steel Company.” There were
arguments to be made for and against such an agreement. A year before, Frick, at Carnegie’s suggestion, had
agreed to fix the price of coke at $1.35 for the next five years, but the oral agreement reached between the
two was never finalized. Because the market price of coke was, in 1899, above $1.35 a ton, it was to Carnegie
Steel’s advantage to enforce the unsigned agreement. It was to H. C. Frick Coke’s advantage to deny its
existence. Dod Lauder, who represented his cousin and Carnegie Steel on the coke company board, suggested that
any questions about such an agreement should not be the subject of board business as they were “between Mr.
Frick and Mr. Carnegie.” Frick ignored him and asked Lynch if he wished the board to take any action. Lynch
recommended a formal resolution rejecting Carnegie Steel’s claim that H. C. Frick Coke was bound by prior
agreement to deliver coke for $1.35 a ton. Dod Lauder protested again that this was a matter for Frick and
Carnegie. Frick overruled him. He had, he insisted, no authority to make any contracts for the coke company.
That was the responsibility of the board. He put Lynch’s resolution to a vote and it was passed, with Dod the
sole dissenter.³

On Carnegie’s copy of the board minutes is scrawled, in his handwriting: “No Contract. Declaration of War.”
This had, it appears, been Frick’s intention. Rather than attempt to negotiate his differences with Carnegie,
he was ready to go to war. Lynch formally notified Schwab at Carnegie Steel that he had been authorized by the
H. C. Frick board to cease delivery of coke until the steel firm acknowledged that there was no agreement in
place setting the price at $1.35.⁴

Carnegie and Schwab did not respond to the obvious provocation, but instead behaved as if nothing had
happened. In early November, Carnegie traveled to Pittsburgh to attend a meeting of the Carnegie Steel board
of managers. There was no mention of the coke-pricing dispute at the meeting; the major item of business was a
resolution to buy from Frick a parcel of land near Homestead. It was approved unanimously.

While their two companies remained in battle mode over the critical issue of how much the steel company would
pay for its coke, Frick and Carnegie continued their long-term correspondence on merging. Carnegie had
proposed combining the two companies based on their book values. Frick recommended on November 18 that the
merged company be capitalized at $150 million, double the book value for both companies. It was not an
unreasonable proposal, as the consolidated steel and coke company would be worth at least that much on the
open market.⁵

Carnegie rejected Frick’s proposal. That same day, November 20, the board of managers of Carnegie Steel held
its regular monthly meeting.

Frick inserted into the minutes an angry, disjointed, frenetic attack on Carnegie. He called the board’s
attention to the fact that the company had, at Carnegie’s insistence, loaded up on advance orders for rails at
a full $8 less than the current market price. Then, having accused his senior partner of poor business
judgment, he violated Carnegie’s cardinal rule of business etiquette and launched an ad hominem attack. Frick
informed the board that he had learned, from whom he did not say, “that Mr. Carnegie, while here, stated that
I showed cowardice in not bringing up [the] question of price of coke between Steel and Coke companies. It was
not my business to bring that question up.” He insisted that neither he nor Carnegie had the right to
determine company policy in regard to coke pricing, then steered off in another direction and accused Carnegie
of attempting to destroy the H. C. Frick Coke Company and its directors:

“The value of our coke properties, for over a year, has been, at every opportunity, depreciated by Mr.
Carnegie and Mr. Lauder [Cousin Dod], and I submit that it is not unreasonable that I have considerable
feeling on this subject. He [Carnegie] also threatened, I am told, while here, that…if the minority
stockholders [of H. C. Frick Coke] would not give their share of the coke to the Steel Company at about cost,
he would, if possible, attempt to ruin them. He also stated, I am told, while here, that…he had doubts as to
whether I had any right, while Chairman of the Board of Managers of the Carnegie Steel Company” to privately
purchase land near Homestead for later resale to the steel company. Why, Frick asked rhetorically, had not
Carnegie been “manly enough to say to my face what he said behind my back?” Frick demanded that Carnegie
apologize for slandering him and threatened not to sell his land to Carnegie Steel without such an apology.
“Harmony is so essential for the success of any organization that I have stood a great many insults from Mr.
Carnegie in the past, but I will submit to no further insults in the future. There are many other matters I
might refer to, but I have no desire to quarrel with him, or raise trouble in the organization, but, in
justice to myself, I could not at this time, say less than I have.”⁶

Carnegie wrote Frick at once

to relieve you as promptly as possible from present troublesome thoughts. Never did I say a word other than in
praise of your conduct anent the purchase up river [i.e., the property adjoining Homestead which Carnegie
Steel had purchased while Carnegie was in Pittsburgh]…. This is just the result sure to come from tale
bearers—distortion—words innocent if one hears and knows the conditions and spirit in which they are said
become quite another thing when “the informer” injects his venom. Again—I don’t remember ever mentioning the
coke difference except to those who had said to me you had told them you would fix it with me…. If I have
“insulted” you I have known it not—on the contrary I have looked forward until your scheme miscarried to you
being in command of all and it has not been a source of anything but a satisfaction to me…. I shall receive
your unmerited invective in silence. When you get your usual calm and if you come to me I shall tell you all
the circumstances just as they occurred and you will be sorry for your hasty outburst to your partners. I am
not guilty and can satisfy you of this—also of the folly of believing tale bearers, a mean lot.⁷

Carnegie had probably gossiped too much about Frick during his most recent trip to Pittsburgh. Discretion had
never been one of his virtues. The important point, for Carnegie at least, was that he had acted without
malice. Carnegie did not hold grudges. Frick had tried to profit, at his expense, from the Moore deal, but
that was past history and Carnegie was always looking forward. The dispute between the two men on the price of
coke was about “business” and thus, Carnegie trusted, amenable to settlement.

Cousin Dod, who had never liked or trusted Frick, was not nearly as charitable. By personally attacking
Carnegie at the board meeting, Frick had thrown down the gauntlet. Carnegie, Dod insisted, could not now back
away. “To my mind the chairman [Frick] seems to have deliberately burned his boats, & the issue is now
Carnegie or Frick pure & simple. Should you make any arrangement that leaves him in power everyone will
practically look on the settlement as your virtual abdication from the control of the affairs of the firm…. I
have considered ever since this controversy about coke began that he is scarcely responsible for many of his
sayings and doings and, now that the sting of the failure last summer is added, the less said about his
condition of mind the better.”⁸

“You voice my views exactly,” Carnegie wrote back. He had, he recognized now with a bit of prodding from his
cousin, suffered too long from Frick’s tantrums. Carnegie had no stomach for personal confrontations—and never
had. He had long ago exiled himself from Pittsburgh because he had no wish to engage in boardroom battles or
intrigues with partners. Frick, on the contrary, appeared to enjoy such confrontations. For that reason alone,
he had to be sent away. “Frick goes out of chairmanship of board next election or before—that’s settled days
ago.” Carnegie insisted to his cousin that he had, in years past, put up with Frick’s outbursts because he
needed him. But the time had come to replace Frick with Charlie Schwab, who had demonstrated that he was ready
to run the company. “You may show to CMS,” he instructed Dod, “and let him lay his plans accordingly—once
again we are to be a happy and united family…. My birthday—never better nor happier especially since I decided
to tell Mr. Frick in kindest manner that I mean divorce under ‘Incompatibility of Temper.’ I shall tell him
never had anything but happy family until he came into it—and I am not going to have anything else—it is
divorce between us as far as management of our business is concerned…. I believe our best business interests
demand an end of quarreling.”⁹

Schwab, uncomfortably thrust into the middle of the dispute between his two superiors, tried to effect some
sort of reconciliation, but failing, suggested that Carnegie notify Frick himself that he was removing him
from office. “Undoubtedly, the best way is for you to come to the offices [in Pittsburgh] and arrange matters
with Mr. Frick direct…. Believe me, Dear Mr. Carnegie, I am always with you and yours to command. I want to be
straightforward toward all. I believe the great majority of important partners feel as I do.” Schwab then
wrote Frick, advising him that Carnegie was going to depose him as chairman and that there was nothing Schwab
could do to protect him.¹⁰

Carnegie arrived in Pittsburgh a few days later and informed the board members that he was going to request
Frick’s resignation. Before he had a chance to do so, Frick formally resigned in a letter to the board dated
December 5, 1899.¹¹

 

FRICK’S RESIGNATION came at a critical moment in the company’s history, as it was being challenged by newly
formed conglomerates in finished steel. On December 30, Carnegie outlined his battle plan to the board of
managers. If the newest of the giant steel-finishing trusts, in tin plate and wire, decided to produce their
own unfinished ingots instead of purchasing them from Carnegie Steel, Carnegie was prepared to fight them to
the death. “If they decline to give us what we want, then there must be no bluff. We must accept the situation
and prove that if it is fight they want, here we are ‘always ready.’ Here is a historic situation for the
Managers to study—Richelieu’s advice:—‘First, all means to conciliate; failing that, all means to crush….’ We
should look with favor upon every combination of every kind upon the part of our competitors; the bigger they
grow, the more vulnerable they become. It is with Firms as with Nations, ‘Scattered possessions’ are not in it
with a solid, compact, concentrated force.”¹²

Hoping that Frick had cooled down since submitting his letter of resignation, Carnegie wrote him from New York
in late December or early January 1900 and took up once the notion of consolidating Frick Coke and Carnegie
Steel. At the end of this handwritten letter, he segued into a discussion of the dispute about coke pricing
which had precipitated the break between the two partners. “I wish you would fix coke prices. Schwab wrote me
about them. My views are as far as I can see now that the price fixed by you $1.35 was right.” He suggested
that the two companies begin negotiations on a “fixed price for all time and relieve us of friction which has
arisen. Surely you and Lauder and Lawrence [Phipps, Harry’s son] could figure this out…. Do get at a permanent
arrangement & greatly oblige—you want to make your pard a Christmas Gift any how—I’ll not look for a $40,000
thing. Give me a settlement permanent on Coke & I’ll bless you.” Below his signature, Carnegie added: “We
never had friction before. It annoys me more than dollars even than Philippines.”¹³

There is no record of any response from Frick, perhaps because he recognized, belatedly, that he held a losing
hand.[*][1] Carnegie’s position was unassailable. As a majority stockholder in H. C. Frick Coke, he now pushed
through a reorganization which gave him five out of seven seats on an enlarged board of directors. He, not
Frick, was in complete control now, not only of Carnegie Steel, but of the Frick coke company as well.

On Sunday, January 7, 1900, Carnegie, who had been in Pittsburgh twice in two months, returned once more to
ratchet up the pressure on Frick. On Monday, he met again with the Carnegie Steel board and proposed that it
formally withdraw the 1897 ironclad agreement which, because Phipps had refused to sign it, was non-binding.
He then asked the partners who had joined the firm in the last ten years to sign the 1892 ironclad. His
reasons for adding the signatures of the new partners to the 1892 agreement were transparent. He was making
sure that this agreement was legally binding should he choose to invoke it. Like the other versions of the
ironclad, the 1892 agreement provided that three quarters of the partners with three quarters of the shares of
stock could, at any time, for any reason, expel a sitting partner and demand that he sell his shares back to
the company at book value. If Frick did not back down, Carnegie intended to exercise this clause and remove
him from the partnership.

On Tuesday, January 9, the reconstituted board of the H. C. Frick Coke Company met and, with Frick and Lynch
in a five-to-two minority, approved the $1.35 a ton price agreement. Frick stormed out of the room to confer
with his lawyers.

On Wednesday, as Frick worked in the private office at the Carnegie Building in downtown Pittsburgh, he was
told that Andrew Carnegie was in the anteroom asking to see him. According to George Harvey, Carnegie
announced that “he had dropped in to see if they could not reach a definite and final settlement of the coke
dispute between their two companies.” He insisted, once again, that Frick had the year before agreed to a
permanent price of $1.35. As Frick was uncomfortable with that agreement, Carnegie now proposed that the price
stand for two years only. Frick asked if this were a final offer; Carnegie reminded him that he had the votes
on the board to do anything he pleased. Frick then inquired if Carnegie would be willing to sell his interest
in H. C. Frick Coke “at a price to be fixed by competent and disinterested business men.” Carnegie declined to
do so. Frick asked if Carnegie would buy Frick’s interest in Carnegie Steel “at a price to be fixed in the
same way.” Again Carnegie refused. Frick wanted to know what would happen if he declined to accept Carnegie’s
offer to set the price at $1.35 for two years. Carnegie answered that if Frick persisted in causing harm to
Carnegie Steel, the partners would have no choice but to buy him out at “book value.”¹⁴

The discussion had gone as far as it could. Frick, realizing he was trapped, lashed out in anger. According to
Burton Hendrick, who based his account on a “memorandum” by Carnegie describing the episode, Frick “jumped up
and clenched his fist and said, ‘Why, I expected that, now you will see what a fighter I am. This is a fight,’
and then he began a tirade of personal abuse. I sat very soberly, because there is nothing sobers one man so
much as seeing another give way to passion…. He became wilder and I was forced to leave.”¹⁵

The next step had already been prepared. Carnegie called into session an emergency meeting of the Carnegie
Steel board of managers. A resolution was offered and passed requesting “Henry C. Frick to sell, assign and
transfer to The Carnegie Steel Company, Limited, all of his interest in The Carnegie Steel Company.” Those
signing the resolution represented more than three quarters of the partners and three quarters of the
outstanding shares of the company, as per the 1892 ironclad agreement.

On Monday, January 15, the board secretary, Francis Lovejoy, who had been one of the few partners opposed to
the resolution, presented Frick with the resolution. Two days later, Lovejoy resigned his position as
secretary of the board, in protest against its treatment of Frick.

On Tuesday, Frick delivered his reply to Lovejoy. “Yesterday you served on me a notice, dated January 15, 1900
in which you referred to ‘A certain Agreement between The Carnegie Steel Co., Limited, and the partners
composing it.’…Will you please give me an exact copy of the said alleged agreement, the existence of which I
deny?”¹⁶

On February 1, Charles Schwab, as president of Carnegie Steel, informed Frick that his 6 percent interest had
been transferred to the company and that the proceeds from the sale were being held in trust for him. Based on
the terms of the ironclad agreement, Frick was to receive $4.9 million, which represented 6 percent of $75.6
million, the “book value” assigned the company. The settlement was ridiculously unfair. Any impartial
valuation of the company would have put its worth between $250 and $500 million, 6 percent of which would have
yielded Frick some $15 to $30 million.

It was true, as Carnegie and Frick both knew, that on several occasions in the past, the interests of ejected
or retired partners or their estates had been formally bought back by the company at book value, but almost
always with additional monies added as bonuses or honoraria to bring the sum closer to the market value of the
shares. Had Carnegie found a way to do the same for Frick, he might have avoided the trouble that was to
follow. But he did not. Frick had turned aside Carnegie’s repeated offers of friendship; he had spurned his
many attempts at reconciliation; and he had, in the past year alone, betrayed him twice: first in the Moore
agreement, then by denying the existence of the $1.35 price agreement he had orally agreed to.

With Carnegie steadfast against any compromise, Frick had no recourse but to turn to the courts. On February
13, 1900, he sued Carnegie Steel in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County, asking the court, among
other things, to enjoin the company from interfering in any way with his “interest in said Carnegie Steel Co.
(Ltd), and from excluding him from participation in the care and management of the assets and business.”¹⁷

The contents of Frick’s complaint exploded across the front pages of the nation’s newspapers. It was, to that
point, the most spectacular lawsuit in American corporate history, with two flesh-and-blood protagonists, each
of whom made for great copy—and better caricature. Frick’s complaint and Carnegie’s reply were filled with
juicy tidbits that provided fodder for the many stories that followed.

Frick charged that Carnegie had been an absentee feudal landlord who, having “conceived a personal animosity
[had] without good reason, and actuated by malevolent motives,” forced his resignation and concocted a
“fraudulent scheme” to defraud him of his rightful share in the company “whilst benefiting himself.” There was
no properly signed “ironclad” agreement, and had never been one; Carnegie had no legal right to eject him from
his leadership role in the company, no right to force him to sell back his 6 percent interest, and certainly
no right to fix an arbitrary value on that 6 percent.¹⁸

Carnegie gave as good as he got. The response to Frick’s complaint, filed on behalf of Carnegie Steel and
signed by all the board members save Phipps and Lovejoy, declared that Frick was “a man of imperious temper,
impatient of opposition, and disposed to make a personal matter of any difference of opinion…. At times,
moreover, he gives away to violent outbursts of passion, which he is either unable or unwilling to control. He
demands absolute power and without it is not satisfied.” Frick had been removed from office and from his
position as a partner and share owner because he had caused dissent within the board, and had begun to
“introduce controversy of a personal character into the business of the association.” In demanding Frick’s
resignation, Andrew Carnegie had not been “actuated by malevolent motives,” but rather “by a desire for what
he believed to be, and what in fact was, for the best interests of the association.” Carnegie did not harbor
any “personal animosity toward the plaintiff.” On the contrary, he had “at all times entertained and exhibited
towards the plaintiff the most kindly sentiments [and had always] endeavored at all times to deal with him in
the most generous spirit and with the most sincere regard for his interests.” As for the ironclad agreement
which determined the value of Frick’s 6 percent interest, it had been in place for years, was absolutely
legal, and had, in fact, been enforced by Frick during his tenure as president. Frick knew from the moment he
joined the firm that he would be bound by this agreement and that “the value of his interests is by the terms
of said agreement to be ascertained by reference to the books of the company,” not by the market value of the
company’s assets.¹⁹

[image]

“TAKE THE CRUMBS, LITTLE BOY!”

The most spectacular revelations to come out of Frick’s lawsuit had to do with the outrageous profits Carnegie
Steel had been generating as a “tariff-protected” manufacturer. Until Frick’s complaint, no one had any idea
how profitable Carnegie Steel had become. Carnegie and Frick had kept these numbers secret because they knew
they would provide union leaders, Democratic politicians, and antitariff men on both sides of the aisle with
vital ammunition against protective tariffs for the steel industry. Now, in an instant, Frick ripped away the
curtain, revealing that Carnegie Steel had earned net profits of $21 million in 1899, and that he and Carnegie
expected those profits to rise above $40 million for 1900.

The cartoonists had a field day, picturing Frick demanding his share of the loot from Carnegie. The story of
the feud was too good to go away. It had everything the newspapers wanted: melodrama, revenge, deceit, and
betrayal with political overtones. Democratic politicians and editors were particularly overjoyed. Nineteen
hundred was a presidential election year in which a Republican high-tariff man, William McKinley, was running
for reelection against a Democratic free trader, William Jennings Bryan. Marcus Hanna, now a U.S. senator and
still in charge of Republican Party politicking, insisted that Frick and Carnegie agree to postpone any trial
until December, after the election.²⁰

Both men were besieged with letters and cables begging them for the good of Carnegie Steel, the steel
industry, Pittsburgh, and the Republican Party to settle their differences and avoid the disclosure of
embarrassing revelations sure to emerge from a public trial. George Westinghouse, an associate of each,
offered his services as mediator. “Will you allow me to say,” he wrote Carnegie, “at the risk of being
considered officious, that this matter is looked upon by mutual friends, as not only very harmful to your own
interests but to Pittsburgh generally.”²¹

Among the most poignant letters was one from Samuel Harden Church, the secretary of the board of Carnegie’s
Pittsburgh Institute. “The sorrow which has fallen upon you has filled my heart with profound pity. Nowhere do
I hear any comment except of deepest regret…. All look upon it as a very great misfortune for all concerned,
including this community…. It is a melancholy reflection to those who love you…that you should be called back
to hard labor, to detail, to drudgery, and, worst of all, to face the friends and partners of a lifetime in
the angry controversies of a lawsuit.”²²

Though Carnegie, with his cheery smile and outsized benevolence, was a much more sympathetic character than
the tightly laced, perpetually scowling Frick, on legal and moral grounds it was hard to argue with the junior
partner, who was being defrauded of tens of millions of dollars. Carnegie could argue that Frick had agreed to
the terms of the ironclad when he became a partner. But he could not destroy the evidence that the 1892
ironclad was not binding, as Frick had warned him, because it had not been signed by all the partners in 1892.

Carnegie’s resolve not to compromise gave way quickly. Had Harry Phipps been willing to fight on alongside
him, Carnegie might have stood his ground; but Phipps was firmly planted in the Frick camp. He believed Frick
was entitled not to a share of the book value of the company, but to its market value, which was considerably
more.

On March 17, a month after Frick filed his complaint, Carnegie and Schwab met with Phipps and Lovejoy
representing Frick at 5 West Fifty-first Street to arrange a settlement. Phipps suggested that, as a first
step forward, the proposal that Frick had floated the year before to consolidate the steel and coke companies
and increase their “capitalization” or book value be considered. Two days later, again without Frick present,
a second meeting was held, this time in Atlantic City, a neutral location a step closer to Pittsburgh and far
enough away from New York not to be noticed by the press. The Carnegie Steel board, with wives in tow to fool
the press into believing this was a pleasure trip, agreed to organize a new holding company, capitalized at
$320 million: $250 for Carnegie Steel, $70 million for H. C. Frick Coke. The existing partners, Frick
included, were to receive half their interests in the new company in common stock and half in 5 percent
first-mortgage bonds. Under this agreement, Carnegie’s share was almost $176 million; Phipps’s, $35 million;
Frick’s $31.6 million. Frick agreed to give up any management role in the new company and withdraw his suit.
The base issue of the price of coke was settled quickly and sensibly, with the companies splitting down the
middle the price H. C. Frick Coke demanded and the $1.35 Carnegie insisted had been agreed upon.²³

“Settlement made,” Frick telegrammed a friend and former colleague. “I get what is due me. All well. I, of
course have not met this man Carnegie and never expect nor want to. It is not my intention to be officially
connected with the reorganized concern.”²⁴

Frick and Carnegie would never meet again. Their final communication came in the form of a nasty telegram from
Frick to Carnegie in Skibo, in August 1900. Frick, who remained a stockholder in the new consolidated firm, in
his final attempt to convince Carnegie that he, Clay Frick, was the better businessman, caustically criticized
the high prices that the Carnegie Company, as it was now called, was paying for coal and scrap. “Ruinous….
Look into these and other matters yourself. Do not let them hide things from you. You cannot trust many by
whom you are surrounded to give you facts. You need commercial rather than professional ability to cope with
concerns managed by brainy and honest men trained to the business. You are being outgeneraled all along the
line, and your management of the Company has already become the subject of jest.”²⁵

Frick may have had the last word, but as his great-granddaughter and biographer would later write, “though
vindicated and victorious,” his had been “a hollow victory. All but two of his Carnegie Steel partners had
voted against him, reminding him that, in a sense, he had never belonged.” Frick severed his ties with the
Carnegie Library and the Carnegie Institute in Pittsburgh and withdrew his offer to lend art to the
International exhibitions. He would soon leave Pittsburgh altogether to take up residence in New York City.²⁶

 

THE CARNEGIE COMPANY, formed with the merger of Carnegie Steel and H. C. Frick Coke, was formally organized on
April 1, 1900, with Charles Schwab as president and chief executive officer. One might have thought this would
have been the perfect time for Andrew Carnegie to retire. He was sixty-five years old, and in Charlie Schwab
had found a chief executive in whom he had full trust. But reinvigorated by the battle with Frick, Carnegie
was not about to let slide one final opportunity to modernize, expand, and extend his market share. Frick had
claimed loudly and publicly that he, not Carnegie, had been the genius behind the success of Carnegie Steel.
Carnegie appeared determined to prove his former junior partner wrong. With Schwab at his side, he would
demonstrate yet again that there was no one, living or dead, who was his equal when it came to the steel
business. He would, at the same time, do the larger community a service by amassing yet more profits to be
given away when he retired. He had new dragons to slay, new competitors to best, and many more millions to
earn before the day arrived when he would turn his attention from accumulation to distribution.

The situation in the steel industry had been transformed in the past two years by the formation of several
giant new firms, including American Steel and Wire, Federal Steel, and National Tube. “I have had to take
general charge [of] our business for next year,” he had written John Morley in mid-December 1899. “Some moves
to be made to meet these huge Combinations which are really at our mercy. But my being at helm makes victory
easier. So thought my partners, but it is only a short postponement of withdrawal [retirement]. Ashamed to
tell you profits these days. Prodigious.”²⁷

The boom times that the steel industry had enjoyed in 1898 and 1899, with record high prices and profits,
encouraged a flow of capital into the industry. Old firms expanded production while new ones were started up.
The result was added capacity, which, when the “boom” was over—as it appeared to be by 1900—translated into
excessive inventory and a profit crunch. The new conglomerates, which had been organized to produce finished
products, like steel hoops, sheets, tubes, tin plate, nails, and wire, were hit hardest. To lower costs and
prop up profits, they integrated backwards. Instead of buying steel ingots and billets from Carnegie and his
competitors, they constructed their own blast furnaces to produce them, depriving Carnegie of substantial
orders. Carnegie’s response was to integrate production forward—into finished steel.

With Frick out of the way, Phipps in full retirement, and Tom Carnegie long gone, there was no one left to
restrain Andrew’s adventurism. “Urge prompt action, essential,” he cabled Schwab on July 7 from the telegraph
office he had set up at the Skibo lodge house. “Crisis has arrived, only one policy open; start at once hoop,
rod, wire, nail mills, no half way about last two. Extend coal and coke roads, announce these; also tubes.
Prevent others building…. Never been time when more prompt action essential, indeed absolutely necessary to
maintain property…. Have no fear as to result, victory certain. Spend freely for finishing mills, railroads,
boat lines [to transport ore on the Great Lakes]. Continue to advise regularly by cable.”²⁸

In his communications back and forth across the Atlantic that summer of 1900 Carnegie sounded much as he had
twenty-five years earlier urging on his partners to take risks, spend money, keep production up, and prices
down. On July 11, he wrote Schwab again: “Confirming my wire upon the situation let me say that all is coming
just as expected. There is nothing surprising; a struggle is inevitable, and it is a question of the survival
of the fittest…. We have a great advantage…running non-union, but I do not believe that we shall be allowed to
run non-union peaceably unless we give our men steady work; unless we run when others stop as we did for some
years previous to the boom.” The Carnegie enterprises had survived earlier crises of overproduction by
accepting orders at lower prices, keeping their factories running and their men at work. “You have only to
rise to the occasion, but no half way measures. If you are not going to cross the stream, do not enter at all
and be content to dwindle into second place. Put your trust in the policy of…running your mills full
regardless of prices…. Such is my advice.”²⁹

Carnegie’s competitive juices were flowing again. After Alexander Cassatt, on being named president of the
Pennsylvania Railroad in June 1899, declared his intention to eliminate the preferential freight rates his
predecessors had negotiated, Carnegie, with Schwab by his side, girded for battle. On his return to the United
States in the fall of 1900, he began talks with Jay Gould’s son George, who had plans to build a new east-west
rail network to compete with the Pennsylvania and the New York Central networks. If the older railroads
refused to give him preferential rates, Carnegie would shift his freight to the new Gould lines.

[image]

UNCLE SAM: “GIVE IT TO ’IM, ANDY! GIVE IT TO ’IM!”
Pittsburg, January 6—Andrew Carnegie’s decision to engage in the pipe business, as announced yesterday, it was
stated here today means a war of millions between Carnegie on one side and J. Pierpont Morgan and the railroad
interests of the country on the other.

None of this was good news for J. Pierpont Morgan, who had devoted his career to squeezing competition out of
American industry. The fact that Carnegie was threatening the joint sovereignty of the New York Central and
Pennsylvania systems was cause enough for alarm. Then, in January 1901, the situation grew more dire still
with the announcement that the Carnegie Company intended to spend $12 million to build the world’s largest,
most technologically advanced tubeworks at Conneaut on Lake Erie to compete with National Tube, the
conglomerate the Morgan interests had organized in October 1899. In choosing Conneaut instead of Pittsburgh
and pledging to invest millions to build the most modern plant anywhere in the world, Carnegie was signaling
that he intended to win this battle, as he had won every other he had fought.

Morgan, like Rockefeller before him, was astute enough to recognize that it made no sense to enter
head-to-head competition with Carnegie in steel. If Carnegie followed through with his plan—and he showed
every intention and capacity to do so—he would be as invincible in finished steel products as he was in
ingots, billets, rails, and structural shapes. No one was to be able to undersell him. Morgan regarded
Carnegie as a dangerous adventurer, an old-fashioned businessman who relished competition, eschewed
cooperation, and took greater pleasure in breaking agreements than in joining them. A way had to be found to
neutralize him.

Carnegie, for his part, had no use for men like Morgan who made their fortunes speculating in and trading
paper stocks and bonds. According to Charles Schwab, Carnegie was also appalled at the rumors that Morgan kept
mistresses. “Carnegie was always faithful and could not understand Morgan’s personal ‘freedom.’ Carnegie
frowned on anything savoring of the flesh and the devil. He was very narrow in some respects, and he had no
forgiveness for human weaknesses—because he couldn’t understand them. The two men were therefore not on
speaking terms—or hardly so.”³⁰

In the fall of 1900, Pierpont Morgan, determined to head off Carnegie before he built his new tube plant at
Conneaut, invited Schwab to call at his Wall and Broad Street office. “When I was in New York last week,”
Schwab informed the Carnegie Company board of managers at its November 6 meeting, “J. Pierpont Morgan sent
word he would like to see me. I did not comply for several reasons…but I did meet Mr. Steele, who is his chief
assistant, and was informed it was in reference to tubes; that the Morgan people had financed and put through
this new tube combination, and were much alarmed about our going into tubes.”³¹

On December 12, J. Edward Simmons and Charles Stewart Smith, two of New York’s most powerful bankers, held a
dinner for Schwab at the new, magnificently luxurious University Club, and invited Carnegie and Morgan to
attend. “Schwab’s dinner here remarkable,” Carnegie wrote Lauder four days before the event. “Mr. Smith tells
me that everyone invited has accepted and really the biggest men in New York. [Schwab] is a favorite indeed!
This makes him all the more valuable to us. I’m greatly pleased. I am going up for an hour. I must be at the
dinner of the Pennsylvania Society to speak on Industrial Pennsylvania.”³²

Pierpont Morgan, as befitted his standing in the financial community, was seated on Schwab’s right. At the
conclusion of the dinner, long after Carnegie had left, Schwab was called upon to make an after-dinner speech.
Instead of offering the usual lighthearted remarks and a toast of thanks, he delivered a lengthy speech on the
state of the steel industry, with recommendations for the future. The industry was facing a potentially
ruinous crisis of overproduction, he warned, which would lead to lower prices and vanishing profits. The only
solution was a massive new consolidation, which would eliminate overproduction and lead to new efficiencies,
new products, and an expansion of domestic and foreign markets. Chomping away at his black cigar, Morgan
listened intently. When the speech was over and applause had died down, he “took Schwab by the arm and led him
to a corner. For half an hour,” Burton Hendrick reports, “the two men engaged in intimate conversation.” At
the end of the evening, Schwab took the overnight train back to Pittsburgh.³³

Morgan had been won over by Schwab’s presentation, which more or less restated his own thinking on the dangers
of competition. He asked John W. Gates, the former president of Illinois Steel with whom he still consulted on
steel matters, to set up a meeting for him with the Carnegie Company president. Schwab again demurred. He did
not want to offend Carnegie by going behind his back to negotiate with Morgan. Gates understood, and suggested
that Schwab and Morgan might accidentally run into one another at the Bellevue Hotel in Philadelphia. Schwab
consented, but on arriving at the Bellevue at the agreed-upon date and time was told by Gates that Morgan had
been taken ill and was unable to travel. Throwing caution to the wind, Schwab took the train to New York,
where he had dinner with Morgan and two of his partners. At 3:00 A.M. the next morning, after a solid night of
talk, Morgan asked Schwab to prepare a list of the companies that should be included in the grand
consolidation he had outlined at the December 12 dinner. The two men met again days later, and Morgan, after
reviewing Schwab’s list, indicated that he was ready to move forward. “If Andy wants to sell, I’ll buy. Go and
find his price.”³⁴

The negotiations had proceeded at almost warp speed and under a veil of silence so that investors in the
companies to be acquired—and Carnegie himself—would not have time or opportunity to profit or interfere.
Carnegie may have guessed that something was afoot, but if so, he made no mention of it. Schwab, unsure as to
how he should approach the old man with Morgan’s offer, asked Louise for advice.

Louise had for years been pressing her husband to retire from business and spend more time with her and
Margaret. She worried about his health—and his age. Although quite active, with no physical complaints, her
husband was in his mid-sixties. Louise suggested that Schwab raise the subject of Morgan’s offer after a day
of golfing at the St. Andrew’s Golf Club near Hastings-on-Hudson. Carnegie had a “cottage” there and enjoyed
nothing more than spending a day playing golf, followed by a leisurely meal. Schwab took Louise’s advice.
After their golf game, he and Carnegie retired to the cottage, where Schwab presented Morgan’s offer.
According to Schwab, Carnegie professed some reluctance at first, but then agreed that it was time to sell.
With his blunt, stubby pencil in his hand, he wrote down the price he wanted for his properties. Schwab took
the slip of paper directly to Morgan. Carnegie’s price was $400 million. Morgan accepted it.³⁵

There was, Schwab insisted, no bargaining over price. Only after the negotiations had been concluded did
Morgan invite Carnegie on the telephone “to come down to Wall and Broad streets for a little talk.” As
Hendrick, who interviewed Schwab, tells the story, Carnegie thought the suggestion that he should visit Morgan
was “unbecoming.” “‘Mr. Morgan,’ he replied, ‘it is just about as far from Wall Street to Fifty-first as it is
from Fifty-first to Wall. I shall be delighted to see you here any time.’” Morgan took him up on this
invitation and called on Carnegie at home. Carnegie’s private secretary, James Bertram, later told Hendrick
that he had “kept a watch on the two men to see how long the session lasted. His timepiece showed that the
interview took exactly 15 minutes.” As he prepared to leave, Morgan grasped Carnegie’s hand. “‘Mr. Carnegie,’
he said, ‘I want to congratulate you on being the richest man in the world.’”[*][2]³⁶

The buyout plan called for the Carnegie Company partners to receive payment in common and preferred stock.
Carnegie insisted that he, his cousin Dod, and his sister-in-law Lucy be paid entirely in first-mortgage, 5
percent gold bonds. A stock certificate entailed an ownership right; a first-mortgage bond was evidence of a
debt, secured by a first mortgage on the company’s assets. Had he accepted stock in U.S. Steel, even preferred
stock, he would have been obliged to watch over its progress and profits. As a bondholder, he need do nothing
more than watch over his interest as it accumulated. The new company, as he well knew, was not worth the $1.4
billion of stock and bonds that were being issued; its tangible assets, however, were worth more than the $300
million he and his family members were receiving in gold bonds. Even if the company failed, which was
unlikely, the first-mortgage bonds would be redeemable at par.

On February 3, Carnegie wrote John Morley with his news: “Have been busy, very—ere this reaches you I may have
accomplished my purpose to retire which was frustrated—Morgan, the chief banker, has taken it up & I believe
will succeed. He had never failed yet…. You’ll see. I’ll have at least 50 millions [in pounds sterling] all in
5% gold bonds…. Ah then, well, I’ll tackle it. You’ll see—I could as well had 100 millions [sterling] in a few
years, but no sir. I’m not going to grow old piling up, but in distributing.”³⁷

The following day, the board of the Carnegie Company formally approved the offer and thanked Carnegie for all
he had done to make them millionaires: “Your sound judgment and profound business sagacity have been the
foundation stones on which has been built the fabric of our success.”³⁸

Samuel Clemens, a friend of Carnegie for many years, was one of the first to learn of the sale, perhaps from
Carnegie himself. “Dear Sir and Friend,” he wrote Carnegie on February 6, “You seem to be in prosperity. Could
you lend an admirer a dollar & a half to buy a hymn-book with? God will bless you. I feel it, I know it. N. B.
If there should be other applications, this one not to count.” The note was signed: “Yrs. Mark.” Just beneath
the signature, Clemens added: “Don’t send the hymn-book, send the money; I want to make the selection
myself.”³⁹

On February 26, Carnegie delivered his memorandum of understanding to Morgan. “Morgan has succeeded as I felt
he would,” he cabled Dod that same day.⁴⁰

On March 3, Morgan formally announced the organization of the United States Steel Corporation, the world’s
first billion-dollar corporation, capitalized at $1.4 billion—$304 million in 5 percent gold mortgage bonds
(for Carnegie, Dod, and Lucy Carnegie), $1.1 billion in preferred and common stock for the other partners.
Andrew Carnegie’s share came to $226 million, nearly $120 billion today.

“There is nothing new to report,” Carnegie cabled his cousin the following day. “Morgan has launched the ship
& it will reach port all right. We shall have our Bonds and there an end.” To escape New York City taxes on
real estate and personal property, Carnegie was scouting property in New Jersey to park his bonds. “Surrogate
of New York City assessed Vanderbilt 2¹/2 % on his 4 and 5 per cent Bonds—at present rate half of my 12 M per
year [the interest on his bonds] would go to NY City—that is if assessed at value and they can do this any
year. We are at mercy Tammany.” Carnegie’s tentative plan was to organize his own trust company in New Jersey
and “acquire a domicile in that state…New Jersey taxes nothing.”⁴¹

The next day, he cabled Dod again. There was no need for him to come to New York; he would take care of the
transfer of assets and have the new U.S. Steel bonds delivered to the “Hudson Trust Co. Hoboken New Jersey,”
where, he claimed, Morgan kept his securities. Again, he suggested that Dod “take a house somewhere in New
Jersey to be safe—can rent one at a few hundred dollars per year.” When, the next week, he wrote Dod again,
his ever fertile mind had hatched a plan to set up a Carnegie Steel millionaires’ colony in New Jersey,
complete with its own bank. “We ought to get in same neighborhood…. May build our own Trust Building and get a
charter…. This frees us all from taxes (outrageous ones) and also ensures freedom from surrogates
etc—Cornelius Vanderbilt’s fortune levied up fearfully and much trouble caused to Executors. I see it is
essential for all of us to get under cover—Lucy, you and I. Also Schwab—maybe HP (no doubt anxious to get in)
besides others of Carnegie Steel Co. who will have to remove here—We want a colony—near Greenwood Lake
suggested as beautiful belongs to Mr. Hewitt who offers me anything he has. But plenty of time for all this.
Pray sleep soundly—all is fixed—your Bonds and mine go as our partners go—into vaults.”⁴²

 

THE SALE OF Carnegie Steel to Morgan in early March 1901 and the formation of U.S. Steel was big news
everywhere. It was, depending on one’s viewpoint, the apogee of American capitalism or the death knell of
democracy. The unions were particularly disturbed at the consequences of the great consolidation. The
Amalgamated Association recognized, as David Brody has written, that “once firmly established, the Corporation
would be impregnable.” The first order of business was going to be an attempt to alleviate the crisis of
overproduction by closing redundant mills. There was no question but that the first plants closed would be the
unionized ones. To protect those plants and its future, the Amalgamated set out to organize every mill in the
combine. It began by presenting wage demands at the tin plate, sheet steel, and steel hoop companies. When
U.S. Steel refused to negotiate in good faith, a strike was called and quickly broken. The Amalgamated, which
had retained considerable strength in the non-Carnegie mills, would never recover from these early defeats.⁴³

None of this, of course, concerned Carnegie, who had other matters to contend with. Having discovered that he
did not have to move to New Jersey to protect himself from taxes, he was proceeding with plans made earlier to
build a New York City mansion for his family. The site had been purchased in November of 1898, at almost the
same time Carnegie bought Skibo. The West Fifty-first Street house, large as it was, did not have enough room
for the expanded Carnegie family.

Carnegie purchased a plot of land on Fifth Avenue across from the park but well north of the homes of New
York’s other millionaires. The site he chose, two full block fronts between Ninetieth and Ninety-second
Streets, was on the highest point of Fifth Avenue, or, as Carnegie would proudly refer to it, “the highlands
of Fifth Avenue.”⁴⁴

He and Louise expected to move into the new mansion when they returned from Scotland in the fall. His major
concern that spring was that Louise was wearing herself out trying to complete work on the building and
grounds. Her health was good, but there had been scares in the recent past. “I feel better get Louise away
from this new House,” he wrote Dod in February, “architects etc. too troublesome—especially on Furniture &
Decorations.” He planned to take her and Margaret to the South of France—Antibes and then Aix—to give her a
full “six weeks holiday…free from House & Housekeeping” before they settled in for the summer at Skibo.⁴⁵

In early March, still worried about “Lou,” he wrote Dod again to tell him that he had canceled the family’s
annual trip to Cumberland Island. “Lou needs a holiday badly—has had none for four years…. We shan’t get
South, wrote Lucy so yesterday—sorry but I saw Lou must have a rest—she works so hard at her new house
here.”⁴⁶

The following week, accompanied by their full entourage of nannies, nurses, and servants, the Carnegies sailed
for Europe. Interviewed by reporters at the pier, Carnegie insisted in a story carried on the front page of
the New York Times on March 14 that he intended to conduct no business of any sort in Europe. “I anticipate
one of the happiest trips of my life, and am anxious to get to work on the golf links. Golf is a great game,
and I am very fond of it.” Asked if he planned to found any new libraries, he “smilingly replied, ‘I have just
begun to give away money and if you ask me that question say about ten years from now I may be able to give
you an intelligent answer. No. I can’t answer that question now; I have only begun, you see, and don’t know
yet, myself.’”

What he didn’t tell the reporters was that he had authorized Robert Franks, his financial secretary and the
new president of the Home Trust Company in Hoboken, to transfer $5 million in U.S. Steel gold bonds to the
managers of the Carnegie Company in Pittsburgh. One million dollars was to be used to maintain Carnegie
libraries at Braddock, Homestead, and Duquesne. The remaining $4 million was for a Carnegie Relief Fund to
assist injured employees and the dependents of those killed in service and “to provide small pensions or aids
to such employes as, after long and creditable service, through exceptional circumstances, need such help in
their old age, and who make a good use of it.” The wording of the bequest made it clear that these pensions
were not to be given indiscriminately, but only to those workers specifically recommended by the
superintendents as “worthy.” The $5 million gift to his employes was, he announced, his first bequest since
retiring. “I make [it] as an acknowledgement of the deep debt I owe to the workmen who have contributed so
greatly to my success.” It was a generous offer, though it comprised less than 2 percent of the $226 million
he had just received.⁴⁷

Another $5.2 million in U.S. Steel bonds was delivered to John Billings, the director of the New York Public
Library, to establish a branch library system for New York. Billings, with whom Carnegie had been in
discussion for some time, had estimated the average cost of a branch library at $80,000. Multiplying that
figure by 65, the number of libraries Carnegie thought necessary, he had decided to give the libraries $5.2
million (more than $2.7 billion today). “Sixty-five branches strike one at first as a large order, but as
other cities have found one necessary for every sixty or seventy thousand of population the number is not
excessive.”⁴⁸

After a great deal of wrangling, the funds were divided up: $3.36 million went to the New York Public Library
for forty-two branches in Manhattan, the Bronx, and Staten Island; $1.6 million to the Brooklyn Public Library
for twenty branches; and $240,000 for three libraries in Queens. The agreement that was signed by the New York
City government obligated it, in return for Carnegie’s money, to provide sites for the libraries and
sufficient funding to maintain, repair, staff, and keep them open from at least 9:00 A.M. to 9:00 P.M. every
day but Sunday. There was some question about who was responsible for buying the books, but it was agreed in
the end that the city should do so.⁴⁹

The building process got under way at once. Between 1902 and 1909, fifty-five libraries were completed; it
would take until 1929 to complete the last dozen.[*][3] Carnegie was more involved in the planning and
building of these libraries than he would be with most of the others he funded. He joined the New York Public
Library board in 1902, and though he did not attend meetings or library dedications remained in close touch
with Billings. Three prominent New York architectural firms—McKim, Mead & White; Carrère & Hastings, which had
built the Central Library on Forty-second Street; and Babb, Cook & Willard, which was building his mansion on
Ninety-first Street—were chosen to design the buildings. Carnegie protested that more architects should be
invited in and the bidding process be made competitive, but Billings convinced him this would slow down the
process.

[image]

A BRAW LADDIE
Andrew Carnegie makes all the other millionaires look like the “thirty cents.”

Though no two libraries were exactly alike, they were designed as a collection, with large front windows to
let in sunlight, redbrick or limestone facades, and granite or limestone steps leading to a prominent front
entrance. Circulation and reference desks and a reading room were located on the ground floor, with a
children’s room above it, and a general reading room on the quieter third floor, farthest from the street. The
Manhattan branches—and a number of the Brooklyn ones—were set in the middle of their blocks and looked rather
like elegant town houses. Outside Manhattan, where property was less expensive, the libraries occupied corner
lots. Dignified, classical, but not elaborately ornate, the libraries were meant to attract readers—and they
did. The branch in Yorkville, the first to be opened to the public, was used by more than 40,000 readers in
1903, almost four times the number of patrons than the year before.⁵⁰

[1]: footnote27.html
[2]: footnote28.html
[3]: footnote29.html

## THIRTY-TWO

## “The Saddest Days of All,” 1901

IT IS DIFFICULT to picture Andrew Carnegie depressed, but there is no other way to describe his state of being
in the months following his retirement. Carnegie confessed as much in an early draft of his Autobiography, but
the editor John Van Dyke, chosen by Mrs. Carnegie after her husband’s death, perhaps thinking his melancholic
ruminations would displease her, edited them out of the manuscript.

In March 1901, before leaving for Skibo, Carnegie sent a farewell letter to his managers at the Carnegie
Company. “But [as] this written and farewell sounded in my heart, there was yet to come the saddest days of
all. I had to sail for our customary holiday in Scotland, and where were ‘my boys,’ several of whom were
always sure to see me off on the ship? Who of them were to be our guests the coming summer in Scotland? Alas,
alas, here was the keenest pang of all. I realized for the first time that I had lost my boys. I was no longer
their business parent. I was alone and oh so lonely as we drove to the pier…. All was changed. They had gone
from me and were now merely employees of stockholders. We were no longer one family…. We were all changed in
our relations to each other, all saddened, and oh the difference to me.”¹

Carnegie, as elsewhere in the published and unpublished sections of his Autobiography, was exaggerating for
effect. The truth was while he professed close ties with his “boys,” he was not particularly intimate with any
of them, except for Charlie Schwab. Still, he counted them all as his protégés, took great pleasure in their
achievements, had dinner with them when they were in New York, and enjoyed nothing more than showing off his
Scottish estates and teaching them to fish in his lochs.

The vast difference between life in retirement and as chief stockholder of the Carnegie Company was brought
home to him as he prepared to leave for Britain in the early spring of 1901. For close to thirty years, he had
scurried about for weeks prior to sailing tying up loose ends. There were documents to be signed, instructions
to be left with his partners in Pittsburgh and his private secretary in New York. Retirement brought an end to
this round of activities and a strange, inescapable melancholy. The only antidote was activity. He set out at
once to refocus his attention, as he had told Morley he would, from “piling up” dollars to “distributing”
them. The news that he had given away $10.2 million ($5.4 billion today) for New York libraries and his former
Pittsburgh employees was announced after he sailed for Europe. It created quite a stir in the daily
newspapers. The Hearst papers supplemented their coverage with a Frederick Opper cartoon, “How It Looks to
Some of Mr. Carnegie’s Fellow Millionaires,” which showed the “close-fisted brigade” of millionaires
exclaiming: “Good Gracious. He Must Be Crazy.” A St. Paul, Minnesota, newspaper, calling attention to the New
York City library bequests, ran a cartoon of Carnegie standing in his hallway hidden behind a pile of letters.
In the front yard, a mailman, the sweat pouring off him, unloads by shovel letters from a cart marked
“Requests for Libraries.” The caption reads: “Speaking of Libraries, How would You Like to be the Mail Man?”²

Arriving at Southampton, the New York Times reported on March 21, 1901, that Carnegie was greeted “by
delegations from various eleemosynary institutions which want checks…. The offices of the steam ship company
and the American Consulate were crowded yesterday with people inquiring when the St. Louis was likely to
arrive. The local manager of the American line, who has 160 letters and telegrams from all parts of the
Kingdom for the philanthropist, says the envelopes indicate that they are from all sorts and conditions of
people, from University Presidents to mendicants.” Carnegie, warned of the throngs of reporters and
check-hunters awaiting him on shore, “remained on the ship until the last minute,” then, just as the train for
London left Southampton, “jumped into a reserved compartment.” To the correspondent from the New York Times,
one of the few to reach him, he “expressed surprise that his donation for New York libraries had caused
anything of a sensation.” Informed that there was movement afoot in New York to run him for mayor, he
“pooh-poohed any inspirations in that direction.”³

Instead of staying in London, as was usual, Carnegie took his family to Antibes on the French Riviera. He was
sixty-five years old now, with a four-year-old daughter. “Baba,” an adorable-looking child, with a broad face,
like her father’s, and blue eyes did not, as a young girl, see a lot of her father, who traveled a great deal
without her. She claimed to remember the trip to Antibes, one of the first she took with her parents. The
night before they were to leave Antibes for the train ride north to Aix-les-Bains, “Daddy stopped the
carriage, took me out with him into the night. It was mysterious and wonderful. I had never seen the sky at
night, and he pointed to a star and told me it is the star in the Dipper that points to the North sea…. We
turned in another direction, and he pointed to the bright stars on the constellation of Orion. I am sure I did
not understand all he was talking about, but I never forgot the wonder of the experience.” Aix-les-Bains,
where her parents “rested and took the ‘cure’ for 3 weeks,” had less to offer a four-year-old. “There was not
much for me to do, but I loved walking along the country roads, and finding new and lovely wild flowers.” J.
Pierpont Morgan was, coincidentally or not, staying there at the same time. The New York Times correspondent
reported that the two men “had several conferences.” Though there is no mention elsewhere of any discussions
between them, they certainly had a lot to talk about and may have discussed the future of U.S. Steel and
Charles Schwab, who was one of the candidates for chief executive officer.⁴

The Carnegies’ next stop was Paris, “where Daddy met and talked with men he knew…and Mother shopped for
evening dresses and especially for the hand-stitched towels, sheets, pillowcases and table cloths for which
Paris was famous. A great deal of linen [was needed] for both Skibo and 2 East 91st and she bought lavishly.”
And then it was off to London for a fortnight at the Langham Hotel on Portland Place. Again Andrew met with
his friends, including John Morley; Louise went shopping; Baba was bored. Her mother had her doll’s pram
shipped from Skibo, and Baba, with Nana alongside, wheeled “my baby doll up to Regent’s Park…and walked
through Regent Crescent,” or at least this was what she claimed to have remembered seventy years later, when
she sat down to write her journal.⁵

Carnegie was determined to begin at once to give away the $200 million in gold bonds he had just acquired. He
had, he wrote Morley, received thousands of newspaper clippings, letters, and cables congratulating him on his
retirement and offering suggestions on how he might spend his money. “These nerve me for the long campaign
upon which I have just entered. No parade to Pretoria I well know, but one requiring me to clinch my teeth &
stand it. I don’t see it needs the same principles as acquisition—but it needs some of these. Tenacity and
steady sailing to the haven we clear for, a supreme confidence in one’s own ideas, or conclusions rather,
after thought—and above all placing use above popularity.”⁶

Morley had forwarded two clippings from The Times of London about a committee that had been established to
raise funds to enable the Scottish universities to compete with their English, American, and German
counterparts. Morley did not suggest outright that Carnegie contribute to the cause, but the implication was
unmistakable.

On arriving in London, Carnegie sent for Lord Shaw of Dunfermline, an MP from Scotland and an old
acquaintance. In 1897, Shaw had written an article for the Nineteenth Century in which he argued, as he had at
the dinner table at Cluny the year before, that university fees should be abolished for worthy Scottish
students. Now, several years later, his interest in the Scottish universities having been piqued by Morley’s
clippings, Carnegie informed Shaw that he was “disposed to realize your idea.” Shaw replied that £1 million
would do the trick. Carnegie asked Shaw to draw up a proposal and the two put together a list of men they
wished to serve on the board of directors of the “trust” that would administer the grant.

Shaw claimed in his memoirs that he left Carnegie soon after, “tumbling there and then into a hansom cab at
the Langham Hotel” and was taken directly to Westminster, where he enlisted Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, the
leader of the Liberals in the House of Commons; Lord Balfour of Burleigh, the current secretary for Scotland;
and Lord Reay, all of whom, on being told that Carnegie had committed £1 million, agreed to serve as trustees.
Carnegie added several other names to the list of what would become the board of the Carnegie Trust for the
Universities of Scotland.⁷

All seemed in order, but several of the lords chosen for the board, Shaw learned, had gone behind his back to
suggest to Carnegie that it made no sense to abolish fees altogether and that his money might be better spent
on scholarships for the worthy poor. While the Scottish universities—at Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow, and St.
Andrews—were not bastions of upper-class privilege like Oxford and Cambridge, the idea that they would be made
free to all was too radical for many, including the editors of the Scotsman, a leading Scottish newspaper.
Fees were only one part of the cost of sending a student to university, the Scotsman explained in a May 20,
1901, editorial. Carnegie’s plan would inevitably lead to an increase in university students—which would mean
an increase in the costs of university education borne by the state. The Scotsman editors insisted they did
not want to derail the plan entirely. They asked only that the proposal be revised in a way that would not
overburden the Scottish educational system.⁸

Arthur Balfour, at the time chancellor of the exchequer, suggested to Carnegie that his money would have a
greater impact if it were spent improving university research facilities and faculties. “According to my view
(which I think you share) we ought to regard our Universities not merely as places where the best kind of
knowledge already attained is imparted, but as places where the stock of the world’s knowledge may be
augmented…. And yet for sheer want of money our provision both in the department of teaching and that of
research is deplorably deficient.”⁹

John Morley had yet another perspective to offer. He hoped that “history, philosophy & literature shall have
at least an equal place” in the new Carnegie-endowed Scottish universities. “We expect you to show that you
have not been the friend of M[atthew] Arnold for nothing—to say nothing of humbler folk [like John Morley].”
Carnegie’s reply to his friend was rather testy. “Why institute comparisons & thus provoke antagonisms? I have
been repelled by such folly. We don’t get it in the United States & Harvard & Yale simply could not be
commanding Powers today if they ignored, or slighted their scientific Depts. You knew & I knew that for
us—yes, even for me, practical as I am—the flavor & philosophy of Poets & wise men is the sweetest of all
foods, but for others, not so & these the vast majority who must earn a living.”¹⁰

It was not going to be easy giving away his money, as Carnegie was quickly learning. Fortunately, he had
enough to satisfy everyone—almost.

“The main point is settled,” he wrote Morley on May 31. “I got Shaw to give way as to abolition fees which I
am convinced was unwise, at least impracticable. I increased gift to £2 millions, revenue £104,000 per annum.
I believe the total endowment…of the 4 universities is now only £72,000. The scheme is made a wide one…. It is
another proof of the adage, ‘The Gods send thread for a web begun.’ I began in total ignorance but have had
thread supplied by the Gods, you being one.” He had decided, he added in another letter to Morley the
following week, to donate additional funds for scientific research, because he considered science “the
Cinderella of the family of Knowledge in Britain. Her Haughty Sisters, Miss Greek, Miss Italian & others were
not chosen—Now all branches will be equal soon in Scotland I hope—none neglected.”¹¹

There was one outstanding question. How was he going to prevent well-off families from exploiting his good
intentions? Like any British liberal, he opposed government or bureaucratic meddling in private affairs and
had no intention of asking prospective students to divulge information about family incomes. His solution was
to require them to apply for grants and trust that only students who needed assistance would do so.

“As your Lordship is aware,” he wrote the ninth Earl of Elgin, the first chairman of the trust, in a letter
that was later distributed to all applicants, “my desire throughout has been that no capable student should be
debarred from attending the University on account of the payment of fees…. I hope that the honest pride for
which my countrymen are distinguished will prevent claims from those who do not require assistance.” The
Carnegie Trust for the Universities of Scotland would be the only one of his trusts to accept donations. It
was Carnegie’s hope that those who received assistance as students would later in life repay the trust. “This
will enable such students as prefer to do so to consider the payments made on their account merely as advances
which they resolve to repay if ever in a position to do so, and that this will protect and foster the spirit
of manly independence so dear to the Scot.”¹²

It is difficult to overemphasize the impact of Carnegie’s £2 million bequest (almost $10 million in 1901; more
than $5 billion today). There had never before been a grant for student assistance for this purpose or of this
magnitude. By 1910, the Carnegie Scottish Universities Trust was paying the tuition for fully half the
students at St. Andrews, Aberdeen, Edinburgh, and Glasgow. Though some claimed that Carnegie had “pauperized”
the universities by making it easier for the hordes to attend them, the students and parents who benefited
directly, and the people of Scotland in general, applauded—and still applaud—the gift and the good sense with
which it has been administered.

 

BY THE TIME the Carnegies arrived at Skibo, the begging letters from America were on their way. The news of
Carnegie’s first three gifts—totaling $20.2 million—had spread fast and widely. Frederick Holls, the peace
activist and international lawyer, visited Carnegie in August and wrote Andrew White, suggesting that he do
the same. “I found my visit to him extremely interesting from a psychological point of view, for the specimen
of the genus homo who not only has two hundred and fifty millions to give away, but who has been uncautious
enough to say so, is very rare and hence its observation is particularly interesting.” Carnegie, Holls wrote
White, had always been characterized by his “canniness,” but to this had been “added a certain restlessness,
tinged with suspicion of the intentions of every person who comes near him, and resulting in the most
contradictory states of mind coming in rapid succession—if they do not actually exist at the same time. He
wants to speak about his money and what to do with it,—yet, he does not want to speak about it.” Carnegie had
almost grown wary of conversation, afraid that at any moment, he would be solicited for funds. Yet at the same
time, that was precisely what he wanted: proposals on how he should spend his money. “He strongly impressed
me…with the idea that he is feeling the approach of old age and contemplating the possibility of his early
death.”¹³

The most disagreeable communication was probably the one from James Bridge, his erstwhile secretary,
researcher, collaborator, and, most recently, blackmailer, who resurfaced to demand that he be given the
rights to bring out a third edition of Triumphant Democracy: “The great prominence which you have attained has
greatly enhanced the value of all your books, most of all the one which has always been associated with your
name and principles; and I am assured that a new edition of Triumphant Democracy, published at once while the
whole world is talking about you and your unparalleled benefactions, will sell, if skillfully handed, into the
hundreds of thousands…. I am unwilling…to relinquish placidly and gratuitously my rights in this book, now
that they have for the first time attained a high commercial value.” When Carnegie ignored Bridge’s request,
as he had the blackmail threat three years earlier, his former secretary decided to take advantage of his
relationship to Carnegie by writing an “Inside History” of Carnegie Steel. Fortunately for both men, The
Inside History of the Carnegie Steel Company, published two years later, was not nearly as incendiary or
defamatory as Carnegie feared it might be.¹⁴

 

THE NEWS THAT Andrew Carnegie had given $10 million to Scottish universities must have come as a surprise to
American university presidents who for years had had their requests turned down. But Carnegie had decided long
before that America’s largest universities “such as Harvard and Columbia…were large enough; that further
growth was undesirable; that the smaller institutions (the colleges especially) were in greater need of help
and that it would be a better use of surplus wealth to aid them.” If he was going to spend money on higher
education, it was going to be for smaller colleges and technical “institutes.”¹⁵

Having learned in November 1900 that the Pittsburgh Board of Education was contemplating the opening of a new
technical school, Carnegie informed the mayor that he would donate $1 million if the city provided an
acceptable site for it. Asked whether Pittsburgh needed another school when it already had Western University
(which would, in 1908, change its name to the University of Pittsburgh), he answered that the “institute” he
intended to fund was not a university but an institution to provide “technical training” for manual laborers
or their sons “in the crafts and scientific vocations, so as to produce skilled workmen, such as machinists,
mechanics, decorators, and so on.” The model he had in mind was New York’s Cooper Union, to whose support he
had been contributing for several years.¹⁶

Simultaneously with setting up the Scottish Universities Trust, Carnegie had, in fact, been in correspondence
with Andrew White and Daniel Coit Gilman, who was retiring that summer from the presidency of Johns Hopkins
after twenty-five years. White had suggested that he donate money for a national university in Washington,
D.C., but Carnegie decided that rather than establish a university that might compete with Johns Hopkins in
Baltimore, he would give Hopkins funds to set up a new campus in Washington. “What do you think of the Idea?”
he wrote White in April. “Governor Stanford made a useless rival as you and I saw when in San Francisco, to
the State University [at Berkeley]. I could be no party to such a thing. Don’t care two cents about future
‘glory.’ I must be satisfied that I am doing good, beneficial work in my day. Better come to Skibo and
confer.” White agreed to join Carnegie and Gilman at Skibo to discuss the possibility of a national university
in Washington. In May, White dispatched a long memo, setting forth the rationale for establishing a large
university in D.C. that looked surprisingly like the one he had been president of in Ithaca, New York.¹⁷

White had known Carnegie long enough not to be surprised by anything he did. Still, even he was astounded by
Skibo. “The attractions of his wonderful domain, forty thousand acres, with every variety of scenery,—ocean,
forest, moor, and mountain,—the household with its quaint Scotch usages—the piper in full tartan solemnly
going his rounds at dawn, and the music of the organ swelling, morning and evening, through the castle from
the great hall—all helped to give me strength.” (White was in mourning at the death of his son.) At Skibo that
summer, White and Carnegie discarded plans to either establish a university at Washington or a branch of Johns
Hopkins. Instead, they came up with the idea for an entirely new type of institution, one without students or
a permanent faculty. The Carnegie Institution in Washington, D.C., was to be a research institution, which
would supplement the work of established universities by providing financial support to scientists to engage
in basic research projects. The objectives were broad and rather vague; the organizational structure
undetermined. Carnegie intended to work out the specifics when he returned to the United States in the fall.¹⁸

 

BY THE SUMMER of 1901, the main building at Skibo had been transformed through the efforts of hundreds of
local artisans and laborers, directed by teams of architects and contractors, from the Gothic mansion built by
the previous owner into a marvelously anachronistic twentieth-century castle, with Gothic Revival battlements
and towers, two hundred rooms, four hundred glass windows, electric lighting, modern plumbing, and leaded,
stained-glass windows in the front entryway, which, when completed in 1902, would tell the story of the lairds
of Skibo, from Surd, the tenth-century Viking chief, to Andrew Carnegie. One of the final touches remaining
was the library, which was as yet empty of books. Hew Morrison asked Lord Acton, the owner of the grandest of
all private libraries, for advice. “I have been thinking of the books people would like to find at a country
house, on a rainy day,” Acton replied. “You know Mr. Carnegie’s tastes better than I do, and I hope you will
warn me where I go wrong, and strike out whatever seems absurd.”¹⁹

The castle had been mostly completed by the spring of 1901, but there remained, as Joseph Wall has written in
his history of Skibo, several “even more ambitious projects…under way but far from finished: the new lake that
Carnegie had ordered to be created to the west of the castle, Loch Ospisdale, to be stocked with brown trout
which one could fish for from the bank; the smaller ponds, Lake Louise and Margaret’s Loch, for water lilies
and other aquatic plants; the building of a dam at the mouth of the Evelix River to create Loch Evelix with a
salmon ladder so that the salmon could still go up the Evelix to spawn and to be caught; the nine hole
course…and Carnegie’s special pride and joy, a great, enclosed swimming pool.” There were plans as well for
new farm buildings, dairies, barns, stables, coachhouses, cottages for the tenants and laborers, and a
baronial-style lodge house for the chief forester and his wife, the gatekeeper.²⁰

All that was now lacking from Carnegie’s wish list was a waterfall and that would soon be purchased from the
duke of Sutherland—with thousands of acres of moor that nearly doubled the size of the new laird’s
land-holdings.

The oversized splendor of Skibo stood in contrast to the restrained elegance of the new mansion he was
simultaneously building for his family on Fifth Avenue between Ninetieth and Ninety-first streets. Carnegie
felt much more comfortable spending millions on himself in Scotland than he did in the United States. The Old
World was used to such display; the New World was not. He had no trouble whatsoever adapting to his role as
laird of Skibo. “No man,” Bertram later recalled, “ever had a stronger feeling of possession. Those 40,000
acres were his, and he felt it in every fibre. He used to walk over them and survey them, and he found vast
satisfaction in adding to them. Nor would he suffer unwarranted trespassing. He was as set against poaching in
his lochs as the variest medievalist. He was especially jealous of Loch Migrate, and would not let uninvited
people fish it.”²¹

Carnegie did not hunt, but as a Scotsman, he understood full well the importance of the “Glorious Twelfth,”
August 12th, the opening day of the grouse season, which he celebrated by organizing massive hunting parties
on his lands. The freshly killed game was plucked, packaged, and sent south to his British friends. “What,
more grouse,” Herbert Spencer wrote on receiving his package in September. (In June he had been sent a package
of trout pulled from Skibo’s lakes.) “You will bankrupt me in thanks! I doubt not that these products of the
Sutherlandshire moors will be employed, as were the preceding ones, and there will be in the course of the
ensuing week (for we leave this day week) time enough to enjoy them. I hope the bracing air of Skibo Castle is
working its due effects after the excitements you and Mrs. Carnegie have passed through.”²²

 

THAT SUMMER, Carnegie, as he had been since 1898, was preoccupied with an anti-imperialism campaign. He had
done all he could to prevent the American annexation of the Philippines, but failing to do so had turned his
attention to British adventurism in South Africa, which he considered no less an abomination. That the two
branches of “the English-speaking race,” the two most civilized nations of earth, had engaged their armed
forces in such mindless violence as had occurred in the Philippines and South Africa disturbed him no end.

The immediate problem in Britain was that his friends in government—Morley, Harcourt, Bryce, and
Campbell-Bannerman, all of them outspoken anti-imperialists—were in danger of losing the next election and
their leadership positions in the Liberal Party to imperialists like Rosebery, who openly supported the war
against the Boers. Carnegie, a congenital optimist, could not accept the fact that British voters and
political leaders might continue to support irrational imperialist adventures in South Africa. With childlike
exuberance he informed Morley and Campbell-Bannerman, in separate letters in the early summer of 1901, that he
had told Rosebery (implying that Rosebery had listened) that South Africa was a lost cause and would have to
be abandoned. There would never be, he insisted, sufficient British emigrants to make the Transvaal republics
truly British. “It can’t be done…. No Use. Dutch can live out there. Britons can do better elsewhere…. As one
who wishes my native land well—and would save her from disaster I hope that she will never have to undertake
the task of suppressing the Dutch. It can’t be done. They are too much like the Scotch.”²³

Carnegie’s solution was to offer the Boer republics the opportunity to “federate” with the British Empire for
a certain number of years. “After that to be as Canada and Australia are. Free to go.”²⁴

Campbell-Bannerman mildly questioned Carnegie’s rather preposterous suggestion that the Boers might agree to a
trial membership in the British Empire. Lord Rosebery dismissed the “federation” idea by reminding Carnegie
how the United States, thirty-five years earlier, had dealt with a secessionist movement: “You laid your
country waste, spent hundreds of millions, and gave hundreds of thousands of lives to prevent that right. Just
now, when we have spent two hundred millions, and will have spent more, in a war to prevent the Boer States
being a menace of danger to South Africa, people would not be in a favorable mood to receive your proposition.
It would indeed keep up a permanent condition of unrest during the period.”²⁵

Carnegie did not accept the analogy. No twists of historical logic were going to deter him from his
anti-imperialism. As he wrote Sir John St. Loe Strachey, the editor of the Spectator, in October 1901, he felt
“very keenly for my native land. South Africa is lost but this will not injure Britain. It is the years during
which Britain will essay the impossible and waste men and money and incur the bitterest hostility of all
nation’s including the United States. Truly you are in the greatest danger and all for nothing worth while.”²⁶

 

IN LATE SEPTEMBER, as the family prepared to return to New York, Carnegie summed up his summer in one of his
strangely disjointed, all-encompassing, newsy letters to his cousin Dod. “Baba continues to amuse and surprise
us—Is now grasping management of some departments from her mother. Angus [the organist] gets his list of tunes
to be played from her…. Nothing like a day at sea for me…. Yacht goes into House Oct. 1st—for season. Sorry
it’s over—very—I am so well and so happy up here away from the maddening crowd.”²⁷

The family and entourage returned to the United States in October. Carnegie discovered that, even without the
demands of business, he had more than enough to occupy his time. One of his first and most welcome tasks that
fall was organizing the annual St. Andrews Society dinner. “You will receive a letter from the Secretary of
Saint Andrews Society begging you to be one of us on dinner night and speak on what is supposed not to exist,
‘Scotch Humour,’” he wrote his friend Sam Clemens in mid-November. “It is my solemn duty, in total disregard
of merciful consideration for you, to support the society’s prayer…. I remember the gods formerly came down
and visited mortals, and if your wings are in order you may sail down on the night of the 30th. Let me tell
you that many dining-out men have assured me that there is no dinner given in New York equal to St. Andrews
for sparkle. I have presided for two years; every ticket is sold long before they are on sale (how’s that?);
we cannot supply the demand. I think this has come about principally because I made a rule, no mss.; no
knowledge or instruction and no boring; 15 minutes is the rule.”²⁸

Clemens liked nothing more than trading wits with Carnegie—one of the few men who could keep up with him.
“Dear friend, St. Andrew,” he replied two days later. “I find I am to be there. Mrs. Clemens came in, a minute
ago, and furnished the information. If I had had another eighteen hours I could have made up my mind myself.
At bottom I am afraid of religious banquet, but now that the matter is settled I am not feeling so worried as
I was. To me, the clatter & clash of two or three hundred men rattling dishes & talking is maddening; so you
must let me feed at home & take my doze & my smoke and arrive at Delmonico’s at 9:20 or :30…‘Scotch Humor.’
That will do—let it stand. For lack of ammunition I may possibly apologize & talk about something else, when I
get there, but that won’t matter. I can’t prepare a talk; this is not for a lack of laziness, but lack of
time…. Put me in the speaker-list about No. 3—can’t you? Not earlier, and not more than one later.” As
promised, Clemens arrived only after Carnegie had offered the obligatory toast to Theodore Roosevelt and
Edward VII of England.²⁹

Traveling, feasts, and ceremonial dinners accompanied by “the clatter & clash of two or three hundred men
rattling dishes & talking” did not, by themselves, fill the vacuum in Carnegie’s life. He continued to spend
every morning in his library, with his secretary at his side, but instead of going over reports from
Pittsburgh, he read begging letters and proposals for funding, and decided how best to distribute his
millions. He began by expanding his library-giving. State and city governments had, by the turn of the
twentieth century, begun to accept it as their responsibility to build, maintain, and staff hospitals and
schools. But they resisted doing the same for libraries. Carnegie intended to change this. Private
philanthropy, no matter how generous, could not be expected to substitute its largess for costs that should
have been borne by public tax monies. “So,” as James Bertram explained to Burton Hendrick, Carnegie “hit upon
his scheme to get action out of the public authorities—which in the last resort meant the politicians. This
was to offer communities a building, on condition that they would fill it with books and tax themselves for
its maintenance. Carnegie himself described this as a ‘bribe’ to cities and town to establish libraries…. His
offer would crystallize public sentiment and force the hands of councils and boards of alderman…. His real
purpose was not to found libraries, himself, but to force the communities to do so.”³⁰

Since his gift of $5.2 million to New York City for branch libraries had received the widest possible
publicity, there was no shortage of requests from other cities and towns. Bertram was given the task of
developing a system for responding to these requests. He designed a “Schedule of Questions,” which required
applicants to supply information on the name, status, and population of the town they represented, whether or
not it had a library and, if so, where it was housed, whether it was private or public, and how many books it
had. Applicants had to provide assurances, as well, that there was a town-owned site available and a
willingness on the part of the population—and the politicians—to raise funds through taxation to support the
library.³¹

Carnegie trusted Bertram to make the decisions, though from time to time he would question a particular
application to make sure Bertram was paying attention. The communities that were approved were “notified to go
ahead with the buildings, and that payments would be made on their order as construction proceeded. The
financial office, that is, [Robert] Franks—would be instructed to honor these demands as they occurred, and
that ended the matter.” The applications poured in; the money poured out—in the form of U.S. Steel bonds.
Bertram’s record keeping was as meticulous and detailed as that of the accountants and department managers who
had worked for Carnegie at his iron and steel companies. Every donation was recorded in a “Daily Register of
Donations.” Money was never given all at once, but disbursed gradually as the project for which it was given
neared completion. Bertram had determined, and Carnegie agreed, that the amount of money allocated for each
library should be calculated on the basis of two dollars a person. Bertram relied on census data to verify the
population figures the library promoters provided. Some libraries, perhaps a third, carried the Carnegie name,
but this was never a requirement. Carnegie was often invited, but seldom attended formal dedications in the
United States. When library trustees requested busts, portraits, or life-sized photographs to display at their
openings, Bertram forwarded the name of commercial outlets that might supply them, but refused to pay for
them.³²

Carnegie’s first libraries had been attached to his steel mills or given to the municipalities of Allegheny
City and Pittsburgh. Through 1898, only four Carnegie libraries had been funded outside Pennsylvania—and one
of these was for Pittsburgh, Texas. As the profits ballooned at his steelworks in 1899 and 1900, he extended
his library-giving to thirty-seven cities, thirty-one of them outside Pennsylvania. What he called the
“wholesale” phase of the program began only after his retirement in 1901. In that year alone, he gave 132
library grants, followed by 128 in 1902, and 203 in 1903. One and a half million dollars went to Philadelphia
for a public library system like New York’s. The librarian from Philadelphia had requested funds for 30 new
branch libraries and asked for $20,000–$30,000 for each of them. Carnegie wrote back that he did not think
“this sum would be enough. You should have lecture rooms in these Branch Libraries and our experience in
Pittsburgh is that we have not spent enough upon them…. I think, therefore, it would be well for you to spend
Fifty Thousand Dollars for these Branch Library Buildings and it would give me pleasure to provide a Million
and a half Dollars,” provided that the city agreed to maintain the libraries “at a cost of not less than
$150,000 a year.”³³

Speaking at the dedication of the Washington, D.C., library in January 1903, Carnegie whimsically declared
that in philanthropy as in manufacturing he had become a “concentrator…. ‘I have seldom or never known a great
success made by a jack of all trades, the board member in twenty companies, the controller of none. I am in
the library manufacturing business and beg to be allowed to concentrate my time upon it until it is filled.’”
³⁴

During his lifetime, Carnegie would give 1,419 grants, at a cost of $41 million, several billion dollars
today, for 1,689 public libraries in the continental United States, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. One hundred sixty
library buildings were built in Indiana alone, 142 in California, 106 each in Illinois, Ohio, and New York,
101 in Iowa. From Honolulu, which got its grant in 1909, to Devils Lake, North Dakota, which got its in 1908;
from Houlton, 1903, Maine to Santa Rosa, California, 1902, the national cityscape would by 1919 be marked with
sturdy Carnegie libraries. An additional $15 million was spent to build 660 libraries in Britain and Ireland,
125 in Canada, 17 in New Zealand, 12 in South Africa, and smaller numbers in the West Indies, Australia and
Tasmania, the Seychelles, Mauritius, and Fiji.³⁵

 

JAMES BERTRAM proved so adept at systematizing library-giving that he was placed in charge of a related
program: the donation of organs to churches. This too was a carryover from earlier years. Carnegie donated his
first church organ to the Swedenborgian chapel he and his father had attended in Allegheny City and several
more to churches in and about the Pittsburgh area. It was in churches that most workingmen and their families
were introduced, as he had been, to sacred and classical music. So it was to churches that he gave his organs.
As he told his friend William Stead, with a smile, “the organ performance in the morning at Skibo…is my
substitute for family prayers.”³⁶

As with the library program, church communities anywhere in the English-speaking world could—and did—apply.
The demand for organs was even greater than for libraries. By 1919, some 40,000 applications had been received
and processed by Bertram and the administrators who succeeded him after the organization of the Carnegie
Corporation. During Carnegie’s lifetime, 7,689 organs were given away, costing more than $6.25 million: 4,092
in the United States, over 2,119 in England, 1,005 in Scotland, and hundreds more in other English-speaking
nations and colonies.³⁷

What was remarkable about the library and organ programs was how little time or energy Carnegie invested in
them. He and Bertram had designed their own scientific, corporate system of giving, one that guarded against
sentiment and made decisions based on hard data about population, taxation, and site availability. The benefit
of such a program was that it did not overwhelm Carnegie with details and small-scale decision making. His
staff, knowing clearly what he intended to pay for, followed his instructions as precisely as they could,
without bothering him. He had turned his giving into a business—a very efficient one. The “Daily Register of
Donations” for 1908 has ten to twenty entries for each day. Amounts vary enormously, from $625 for an organ
for North Warren on March 14 to $10,000 for a library in Charlotte the next day. Not a day goes by without
some money disbursed to libraries and organs in the United States and Britain.³⁸

Carnegie had designed a decentralized and highly efficient bureaucracy for giving away his money. His personal
staff of secretaries, assistants, and bookkeepers at East Ninety-first Street looked after library and church
organ donations. The trust for his workers was administered by the management of the old Carnegie Steel
Company in Pittsburgh. The New York library grant was administered by the New York Public Library. His
Scottish Universities Trust was ably managed by Lord Elgin. Only the national university proposal which he and
White had worked on at Skibo required his direct attention.

 

PART OF THE ALLURE of the Washington University project was that it brought him back into contact with the
Republican leadership. Nothing delighted him more than visits to the White House and closed-door meetings with
party officials; these he had willingly put in jeopardy with his outspoken criticism of President McKinley and
his weird, though short-lived, flirtation with William Jennings Bryan. The little Scotsman from Pittsburgh,
his Republican friends were beginning to conclude, was a loose cannon, ready to explode in unpredictable
directions at any moment. Carnegie was not unaware of these perceptions and tried to soften them, but not to
the point of tempering his antiwar, anti-imperialist rhetoric.

His rather studied silence from late spring of 1899 had eased tensions somewhat but not entirely erased the
discomfort occasioned in Republican circles by his dalliance with Bryan. In the fall of 1900, the North
American Review provided him with an opportunity to reaffirm his commitment to the Republican Party by
inviting him to contribute to a preelection symposium, “Bryan or McKinley?” Carnegie seized on the occasion to
deliver yet another attack on McKinley, but then, in a rapid about-face, endorsed him for reelection.
“President McKinley at present stands for war and violence abroad, but Mr. Bryan stands for these scourges at
home.” The Democrats’ reckless critique of the Supreme Court, their proposal for an income tax, and their
relentless championing of the silver standard were far more dangerous than the Republicans’ missteps overseas.
“President McKinley’s policy only requires our soldiers to shoot down men abroad guilty of the crime of
fighting and dying for their country’s independence”; Bryan, as president, would unleash a war at home that
would last far longer and pose an infinitely greater danger. “Class once arrayed against class at home, all is
lost; restoration of peace and order could only come in a far distant future.”³⁹

Carnegie’s endorsement of the president’s reelection was harsh and, because of that, effective. Few men of
standing in the nation, Democrats or Republicans, had opposed McKinley’s policies in the Philippines as
strenuously as he had. For him now to come out in support of the president was a signal to other
anti-imperialists to do the same. To ease his way back into the inner sanctums of the Republican Party,
Carnegie contributed generously to the reelection campaign, though precisely how much we do not know. McKinley
was again elected in 1900 by a plurality of 850,000 popular votes and almost twice as many electoral votes as
Bryan.

[image]

preparing to collect his campaign contributions.

His second term, officially inaugurated in March, came to an abrupt and bloody end six months later in
Buffalo, New York, at the Pan-American Exposition, while he was shaking some hands after an afternoon
reception. One of those standing in line to greet him was Leon Czolgosz, a thin, well-groomed man, who, as he
approached the president, pulled a revolver out of the handkerchief in his hand and fired twice at point-blank
range. One bullet was deflected off a button of McKinley’s waistcoat; the second hit him squarely in the
abdomen. A week later, he was dead and Theodore Roosevelt had become president of the United States.
“President McKinley gone—Isn’t it dreadful,” Carnegie wrote Dod from Skibo when he heard the news. “I was
quite depressed by the shock and not very confident about Roosevelt’s wisdom, but power may sober him.”⁴⁰

In November 1901, Carnegie took the train to Washington to meet with the new president, whom he had only the
year before referred to in a letter to Andrew White as a “dangerous man.” He was accustomed to visiting
Washington regularly to discuss tariff schedules, negotiate armor contracts, and meet with Republican Party
officials and colleagues in the steel industry. This time he came in his role as philanthropist to personally
apprise Roosevelt of the plans he had formulated that summer with White to build a national scientific
research institution in Washington.⁴¹

Past presidents had carefully cultivated their relationships with the “Star-spangled Scotchman,” but none with
the élan of the cowboy aristocrat who had been so unexpectedly thrust into office. Theodore Roosevelt was a
master of seduction. Like Carnegie, he was full of energy, always in motion, and relatively small, though his
broad shoulders and puffed-out chest made him appear larger. He welcomed Carnegie to Washington like a
long-lost friend. Not unaware of the rumors being spread that he was a trust-busting radical and a danger to
businessmen everywhere, Roosevelt could only benefit from having the former Pittsburgh steelmaker on his side.
Carnegie was happy to oblige.

On November 28, Thanksgiving Day, 1902, a few days before his meeting with the president, Carnegie sent
Roosevelt his plans for a Carnegie Institution in Washington. “Mr. President, believe me that I am made a very
happy man this day of thanksgiving by the thought that I have been so favored as to be enabled thus to prove,
at least in some degree my gratitude to, and love for, the Republic to which I owe so much.”⁴²

After his visit to the White House, Carnegie wrote again, this time from the Willard Hotel on Pennsylvania
Avenue and Fourteen Street. Thanking Roosevelt for his “cordial reception,” he added that he had all along
“felt sure you would be captivated by the Scheme.” He then rather presumptuously gave the president permission
to “pray take your own good time for sending matter to Congress.” He closed by reminding him in a postscript
that, unlike the corporations Roosevelt had attacked in earlier speeches, “Carnegie Steel Co. was no Trust,
but a Limited Partnerships. No Stock for sale—I never bought or sold stock on the Exchange. My Money was all
made in making Iron & Steel, no gambling.”⁴³

Carnegie wanted to give the government $10 million (more than $5 billion today) in gold bonds to establish an
institution which would be organized, like the Smithsonian, as a national trust. Roosevelt and his advisers
wisely concluded that the government could not accept and retain securities from a private corporation,
especially one as controversial as U.S. Steel. Carnegie immediately shifted course and vested control of the
$10 million in bonds in the board of trustees of a federally incorporated trust, the Carnegie Institution of
Washington. The board was comprised, as the board for the Scottish Universities Trust had been, of the
nation’s most influential politicians, including Secretary of State John Hay, Secretary of War Elihu Root,
Secretary of the Treasury Lyman Gage, former President Grover Cleveland, and, as ex officio members, the
president of the United States, the president of the Senate, the speaker of the House, the Smithsonian
secretary, and the president of the National Academy of Sciences. Daniel Coit Gilman, who had just retired
from Johns Hopkins, was selected as the institution’s first president.

The mission of the Carnegie Institution (as opposed the Carnegie Institute in Pittsburgh) was both visionary
and vague. Its stated goal was to “encourage investigation, research, and discovery, show the application to
the improvement of mankind, provide such buildings, books and instruments as may be needed; and afford
instruction of an advanced character.” Precisely how any of this was to be accomplished was left to the
trustees.⁴⁴

On New Year’s Eve 1902, the president sent Carnegie a “personal” note assuring him that he would serve on the
new institution’s board “with the greatest pleasure. Let me congratulate you upon the very high
character—indeed I may say the extraordinary character—of the men who you have secured as trustees; and I
congratulate the nation upon your purpose to found such an institution.” The deed of trust and the $10 million
in U.S. Steel gold bonds were transferred to the trustees in late January.[*][1]⁴⁵

Carnegie, as might have been expected, was extraordinarily pleased with his new institution, and with himself
for having pulled it together so quickly. On January 10, 1902, he wrote Lord Elgin to tell him he had “taken
the liberty” of sending Lady Elgin the gift of a “buckboard” (a four-wheeled, horse-drawn wagon). He also
enclosed a clipping about the Carnegie Institution. “The enclosed will show you how I am trying to do
something for the Republic…. We hope ultimately to make this the country that is looked to by the world for
the solutions of new problems in Science. Germany is so now at least in some considerable degree, although
Britain is not barren by any means.”⁴⁶

That same day, he sent Sir Campbell-Bannerman another clipping, this one headlined: “CLEVELAND HEADS CARNEGIE
TRUSTEES.” “You see from the enclosed what I am about here,” he wrote in his accompanying letter. “I believe
we shall make the Republic the Country looked to hereafter for the solution of many problems…I am very happy
in this work—A note from the President with whom I have consulted freely congratulates me ‘upon the high—the
extraordinarily high character of my Trustees,’ but I am used to this quality of trustees [a reference to the
Scottish Universities trustees, of whom Campbell-Bannerman was one].”⁴⁷

Despite its rather prosaic name, the Carnegie Institution of Washington was among the most imaginative of the
Carnegie gifts. It is difficult to know where Carnegie got the idea for his non-teaching, non-degree-granting
university. There were, at the time, medical research centers like the Koch Institute in Berlin, the Pasteur
in Paris, and the one Rockefeller was funding in New York City (later to become Rockefeller University). But
the Carnegie Institution, with its emphasis on non-medical pure research, was different.

Carnegie was, as Harvard President James Bryant Conant would comment in 1935 on the centenary of his birth,
“more than a generation ahead of most business men of this country [in understanding] the importance of
science to industry.” He recognized far better than his peers how vital basic scientific research was to the
applied research that industry fed off. George Ellery Hale, an astronomer and astrophysicist, later to be the
chief architect of the National Research Council, was astounded when he learned of Carnegie’s commitment to
pure research. “The provision of a large endowment solely for scientific research seemed almost too good to be
true…. Knowing as I did the difficulties of obtaining money for this purpose and devoted as I was to research
rather than teaching, I could appreciate some of the possibilities of such an endowment.” Hale applied for
funds to build an observatory on Mount Wilson in California, and got what he asked for. It would take until
1909 to build and install a 60-inch reflecting telescope in the observatory; in 1917, a second 100-inch
telescope, the largest in the world, was added.⁴⁸

The Mount Wilson Observatory—and the work of its astronomers and astrophysicists—was only one of the projects
funded in the early years of the new institution. Another, of which Carnegie was equally proud, was the
outfitting of the Carnegie, an oceangoing yacht with auxiliary engine, built of wood and bronze so that it
could collect geophysical data without the errors inflicted on compass readings by iron and steel. The ship
was launched in 1909; by 1911, Carnegie could claim that the scientists on board had already been able to
correct several significant errors on navigational maps.⁴⁹

In his deed of trust, Carnegie declared that his research institution in Washington should “discover the
exceptional man in every department of study whenever and where found…and enable him to make the work for
which he seems specially designed his life work.” That notion would remain the driving philosophy behind the
institution over the next century. Some of those “exceptional” scientists, supported by Carnegie money were
the astronomer Edwin Hubble, who “revolutionized astronomy with his discovery that the universe is expanding,”
and Barbara McClintock, whose work on patterns of genetic inheritance in corn won her a Nobel Prize.⁵⁰

Though his Washington institution got less publicity than his other trusts, Carnegie thought enough of it to
later add an additional $12 million to his initial gift of $10 million. The institution’s endowment now stands
at $600 million, which, with government grants, supports an annual budget of $60 million for the work of
scientists, fellows, and technical staff in six different departments, two in Washington, one in Baltimore,
two in California, and observatories at Mount Wilson, California, and Las Campanas, Chile.[*][2]

[1]: footnote30.html
[2]: footnote31.html

## THIRTY-THREE

## “A Fine Piece of Friendship,” 1902–1905

THE CARNEGIES returned to Britain in the spring of 1902. After their annual sojourn in London—and a speech at
Guildhall, where Carnegie was honored by the Worshipful Company of Plumbers—they traveled north to Skibo. With
the grand reconstruction of the castle and the outbuildings, Skibo had expanded to the size of a large resort
hotel. There was no end of rooms inside the castle and manorhouses, most of them filled all season long by
guests. During the summer of 1902, “the Rockefeller boy,” John Junior, whom Carnegie had always had a special
liking for, arrived with his wife Abby to spend a few days. So did the Polish pianist Ignacy Jan Paderewski,
who had made his triumphant Carnegie Hall debut in 1891 and returned many times in the years since then.
Paderewski, Carnegie wrote Morley after his Skibo visit, proved to be “a charming man as well as supreme
pianist.”¹

The highlight of this—and future—social season was the visit of King Edward VII, who had the year before
ascended the throne at the death of his mother, Queen Victoria. “One afternoon in October, 1902,” Burton
Hendrick writes, with details that could only have been supplied by Louise and Margaret, “a telegram came to
Skibo…. This conveyed the information that King Edward…was on his way to call on Mr. and Mrs. Carnegie. At the
moment Carnegie was enjoying his daily siesta and the news, when he was awakened, rather startled him. He
jumped up, however, and prepared to give an appropriate welcome. Glancing out the window, the King’s motor was
visible proceeding up the driveway, and Carnegie, clad in his informal togs, met His Majesty at the doorway.
The piper had barely time to get into his Highland garb, and the organist, who had been in the swimming pool,
just managed to scramble into his clothes and strike up ‘God Save the King’ as the royal guest appeared.”²

The king, who was in the process of remodeling Buckingham Palace, had come to see how Carnegie had managed to
incorporate all the modern amenities—including electric lighting and indoor plumbing—into his castle design.
He stayed for tea, which he took American-style with lemon, greatly pleasing Louise, who also took her tea
without milk or cream. Five-and-a-half-year-old Margaret was presented and, though she forgot to curtsey,
triumphed nonetheless. “I had been naughty,” Margaret recalled seventy years later, “and as usual on such
occasions, after Mother had talked to me, I was sitting alone in the upstairs sitting room to think matters
over until I was ready to say I was sorry. Mother never hurried me, but this time she had hardly left the room
until she was back…. The next thing I knew, I was in the garden picking roses with Nana…. Then freshly dressed
I was standing…in the drawing room with the flowers. A tall bearded man was bending over and asking if I would
give him a kiss. I never liked to kiss bearded faces [with the exception, one hopes, of her father]. They had
sloppy wet lips, but this face was very different. This man knew how to kiss little girls. I gave the roses to
him for the Queen, and a rosebud ‘for your ownself ’, which he put in his buttonhole.”³

The visit with King Edward, though harrowing, turned out well, Louise wrote Robert Franks in New York. “It was
delightfully informal and he seemed to enjoy it as much as we did.”⁴

The king, as Carnegie later wrote William Holland, the director of his museum in Pittsburgh, had been
attracted during his brief visit to the drawing of Diplodocus carnegii on the wall. “He wants one for British
Museum badly.” Carnegie took the king’s offhand request quite seriously and that winter made a formal offer of
a duplicate dinosaur to the British Museum. Museums were in the practice of exchanging specimens with one
another, but never the size of a dinosaur. On Carnegie’s instructions, William Holland got to work
constructing a duplicate. He hired two Italian modelers to make molds of each bone, then used the molds to
build plaster replicas. As there was no room in the museum for such a task, the work was done at the Western
Pennsylvania Exposition Society hall downtown. In December 1904, the duplicate plaster bones were shipped to
England, where, after a laborious process of unpacking and assembling, the duplicate Diplodocus was displayed
in May 1905. The molding process went so smoothly that in the years to come, additional casts would be made
and replica dinosaurs dispatched, as gestures of friendship, to Berlin, Paris, Vienna, Bologna, and St.
Petersburg.⁵

 

CARNEGIE’S newfound fame, the result of Morgan’s purchase of his company, created new opportunities for him to
spread his gospels of wealth, anti-imperialism, and peace. He seized on every one of them. In early 1902, he
agreed to Frank Doubleday’s recommendation that it was an apt moment to bring out a new collection of his
essays. The first of many editions of the book, entitled The Empire of Business, was published by Doubleday,
Page & Co. in 1902. As Carnegie explained to Lord Avebury, to whom he sent a copy of his book in June, he
found himself “in a strange position, the reported publisher of two books, Gospel of Wealth [published by
Century magazine in book form and edited by the daughter of Richard Gilder, the Century editor] and this
other. I only said to my two friends help yourselves you are welcome to publish anything I have written which
I am free to give you. They went to work and selected, I got first copies as presentation copies, that’s
all.”⁶

In that same year, 1902, Bernard Alderson, an English journalist, published the first full-length biography of
Carnegie. Frank Doubleday, after checking with Carnegie, bought the American rights and in June wrote Samuel
Church, secretary of the Carnegie Institute in Pittsburgh, to ask his assistance in revising the book for an
American audience. “Will you be good enough, also, to mark anything which occurs to you as untrue or improper,
and to add memoranda of any facts or interesting incidents which occur to you and which have not been touched
upon…. After this has been done, Mr. C. has expressed his willingness to read the book again and make any
suggestions he thinks desirable.”⁷

Doubleday was a shrewd enough publisher to know that the public was not going to accept “simply a sort of
glorification” of a controversial figure. On the other hand, he had no intention of defaming his subject,
whose essays he was bringing out simultaneously with the biography. Although the Homestead strike had occurred
a decade earlier, the public had not forgotten it. Doubleday confessed that he felt “hopelessly at sea” as to
how to discuss Homestead in the biography. “Could you not send us some material about this strike,” he asked
Church, “or write or dictate for us a few paragraphs which would help us in this matter? Anything, also, that
you could help us to get hold of as to what has been done for Homestead and for the workmen, in the way of
information or illustrations, we shall be extremely grateful for. As soon as I can get these things in shape,
I am going to set them all in type and we will send it to Mr. Carnegie for his reading.”⁸

Church asked William Corey, who still worked for Carnegie Steel in Pittsburgh and had been around at the time
of the strike, to write the Homestead paragraphs, but Corey refused to do so. “Mr. Corey thinks that the
[Alderson] book is a mass of errors,” Church wrote Doubleday, “that it is not written by one who is familiar
with what he is describing, and he thinks the point of view is so far away from the truth that the only way to
correct it would be to write a new book from beginning to end. This he is not prepared to do and he,
therefore, asks me to return the book to you. There is no lack of friendly desire to assist you in the matter
either on the part of Mr. Corey or myself, but to those of us who know Mr. Carnegie intimately and who are
familiar with the record of his past enterprises in Pittsburgh, this biography seems so far from being a true
portraiture of the man that it is simply hopeless for us to give it any real value by any amount of tinkering
that we might attempt to do with it.”⁹

Doubleday went ahead with the biography without Church’s or Corey’s assistance. In October, when the American
edition of Andrew Carnegie: The Man and His Work was published by Doubleday, Page & Co., Alderson wrote a
rather plaintive letter to James Bertram, requesting that Carnegie buy copies of the book or, at the very
least, acknowledge it in some way. “A word from him would greatly enhance the progress the book is making and
I wish that he could see his way to accept the biography.”¹⁰

There is no record of any reply from Bertram or from Carnegie, who apparently agreed with his colleagues in
Pittsburgh that the Alderson book was, though laudatory, useless. He was already collaborating with another
writer on another biography. We don’t know how Joaquin Miller, the California-based writer and poet, got
involved in the project, but by July 1902, he wrote Carnegie:

I have my, or rather your, Biography blocked out, about two hundred pages done. But it is crude, only the
skeleton, no soul or heart in it yet; as I must go to Penn. And absorb anecdote and incident. Not that I want
Washington’s hatchet stories or Franklin’s Poor Richard philosophy, but it is the little things that show the
big man and go to the heart of humanity. And I must have all your books and pictures of your castle and roomy
estate, also that of the old-time loom, if possible. In truth, as I go forward, the work, while fascinating,
grows almost formidable. I must leave everything else alone, for the time, if I am to do it well. I enclose
the preface. Please read it at once. I am sure that the work will do good. But you are so much wiser than I
that I shall defer entirely to you and if you do not greatly approve of the plan and purpose of the book I
shall regretfully lay it aside. I see that you are busy entertaining Bishops, big men and little children, yet
I hope for any early and an encouraging answer”¹¹

Miller’s biography never saw the light of day. It may have proved too “formidable” a project for him to
continue, or perhaps Carnegie, having read the preface, did not encourage him to finish it.

 

IN DECEMBER, William Stead published yet another profile of Carnegie in Christian Endeavor World, in which he
remarked, almost in passing, that while Carnegie remained an “inveterate optimist [with an] invincible faith
in progress,” his faith in the future had taken “one very ugly knock, when his countrymen went crazy for a
time over the Philippine conquest.”¹²

Although Carnegie had stopped protesting against America’s imperialist turn, he had never ceased to mourn it.
In the spring of 1902, when asked by the peace activist Frederick Holls to contribute funds for a peace palace
at The Hague, he refused. “Please let the idea rest for the present. Let us get our English-speaking race at
peace—This forcing ourselves upon unwilling peoples & shooting resisters down is so incongruous with Hague
Peace ideas…I am not going to think of it at present.”¹³

A month later, the “inveterate optimist,” had, once again, let his faith in the future get the better of him.
In May 1902, Carnegie published a surprisingly hopeful article for the North American Review, fittingly
entitled “The Opportunity of the United States,” calling on the Roosevelt government to grant independence to
the Philippine Islands, as if, in that act, it could erase the damage caused by the war.

On April 30, just before he sailed to Britain, he sent a copy of his article to President Roosevelt with a
handwritten note: “Will the President of the United States carefully weigh this article from one who wishes
him well?…Yours for true Americanism.” Scrawled across the top of the note Carnegie added: “Don’t fear the
People. They will rally round you if you once spoke the word.”¹⁴

The president’s response was vague but could be interpreted as encouraging, if one sought encouragement as
much as Carnegie did. “It was a pleasure to hear from you. As soon as you get back I would like you to come to
see me either here at Washington or at Oyster Bay. I am much interested in what you say about Cape affairs
[the Boer War], and I want to go over the Philippine business in its present aspect with you.”¹⁵

The cessation of hostilities in the Philippines had not brought an end to the controversy over the war and its
legacy. Letters from American soldiers published in newspapers across the country described in almost clinical
detail the use of the “water cure” and other tortures to secure information from captured Filipinos. At a
meeting in New York at the Plaza Hotel on April 29, chaired by Charles Francis Adams, the Anti-Imperialist
League established its own Philippine Investigation Committee, to which it appointed Carnegie in absentia. In
July, while Carnegie was at Skibo, the committee delivered its report to President Roosevelt. It began by
praising him for his attention to the question of troop “demoralization” and the brutalities that might have
resulted from it, but respectfully dissented from his and the U.S. Army’s conclusion that instances of torture
were isolated. The committee had, on the contrary, found that torture was not only widespread and systematic
but often condoned by superior officers. It asked Roosevelt to take action to investigate American atrocities
and punish those soldiers and officers found guilty of perpetrating them. The concluding paragraph, to which
the signatures of the members were affixed, informed the president that Andrew Carnegie had been a member of
the committee, but as he was overseas, it had “been impossible to consult him in preparing this communication
or to obtain his signature to it.” Instead, a copy of the report had been forwarded to him in Scotland “with a
request that he will, after due consideration, communicate with you directly concerning it.”¹⁶

The committee had indeed sent its report to Carnegie at Skibo, but he had never acknowledged receiving it.
Only after it was made public did he explain to Adams why he had “not wired to sign my name…. President has
written asking me to come to him either at Washington or Oyster Bay or wherever he is, upon my return as he
wishes ‘to confer with me upon present state of Philippines.’…I believe I can do more good by abstaining from
further action publicly after my outburst in the North American Review. That President Roosevelt would not
like to see the Filipinos independent and our Republic out of the mess I cannot believe. Now let us see if we
cannot help him—What may be our duty next Presidential Election is another matter—Meanwhile I am going to do
what I can…to get our party right.”¹⁷

Three days later, Carnegie wrote President Roosevelt to explain why he had not signed the “address made to
your Excellency in regard to the deplorable excesses which have occurred in the Philippines.” His reasons were
several. “First—War is Hell! Such hellish things as have occurred in the Philippines occurred in the Chinese
War, in South Africa, and will always be the accompaniment of war. In my opinion therefore the responsibility
rests with the statesmen whose policy leads to war…. Another reason that I did not sign the address to you is
because I believe that you have done what the President of the United States was called upon to do.” He did
not elaborate. A third reason: “I have faith in you,” and in Secretary of War Root. “There was a final reason,
that I had received your very flattering invitation to call upon you and talk over the Philippines question in
its present phase. I believe that one so privileged can exert whatever influence he possesses more wisely and
more effectively in friendly consultation with the President than he can possibly do by appealing to the
people. It is a privilege which I have enjoyed with three of your predecessors, and in more than one instance
I have been assured that I was able to do them some service. If I can be of service to the fourth, it will be
one of the most pleasant satisfactions of my life.”¹⁸

Carnegie grossly exaggerated the importance of the president’s invitation. The fact that Roosevelt was young
and inexperienced in international diplomacy convinced Carnegie that he was being called on to play a major
advisory role. This was, of course, far from the truth, as Charles Francis Adams tried to suggest. President
Roosevelt, Adams wrote Carnegie in late September, was running for election. He might speak out against the
“severities” in the Philippines as he did against the excesses of the trusts, but he would take no action
against either.¹⁹

Carnegie was in no mood to listen. He had all his life been far too trusting of men in power and men whose
intelligence he respected. Since James G. Blaine, he had not come across an elected official he admired or
wished to befriend as much as he did Teddy Roosevelt. He was not only more powerful and energetic than Blaine
had ever been, but more accomplished as an historian and a man of letters, and entirely accessible. “I never
enter the presence of the President without awe and reverence,” Carnegie wrote Morley in the late summer of
1902. “With friend Roosevelt however this feeling vanished before I knew it—a hearty shake, a slap and hail
fellow well met and he was Teddy—A splendid fellow but original. I am writing him today on the Philippines as
requested and shall go direct to see him upon my return—It is our duty to obtain influence with those in
authority, therefore I always keep in view what effect my action may have there.” Carnegie was, indeed, so in
awe of the presidency in general, and Roosevelt in particular, that he criticized Nicholas Murray Butler for
not bowing to the president before he gave his inaugural speech on being installed as president of Columbia
University. “I cannot understand how a man can be in the presence of the President without being awed. I have
known three Presidents intimately before they were Presidents, but when I entered their presence, after
election, they were surrounded by a halo & I was somewhat of a worshipper.” Butler’s only response was that he
was not guilty of disrespect but had indeed acknowledged the president before he spoke.²⁰

Carnegie was entirely captivated by Roosevelt, and had been so kindly treated that he had begun indulging in
fantasies of becoming his chief adviser, perhaps even his secretary of state. He wrote Morley that Roosevelt
had “asked me to advise him upon British question, Canada…troublesome just now, so you see if you cultivate
the King and I the President there’s no saying what we can do when we get our reward—You Premier don’t
laugh—character sometimes wins—And I Sec’y State—we’ll keep things straight, no war.”²¹

 

NOW IN HIS late sixties, Carnegie, whose appearance had changed little in a quarter century, was beginning to
take on the look of an old and rather strange white-haired man. The large head set on the trim body was more
gnomelike, his face increasingly puffy. He also shrank in size—or appeared to. Almost every visitor and
description noticed his lack of height, but no one wrote about it quite like his friend Sam Clemens who, in an
unpublished section of his own Autobiography, felt obligated to “dwell for a moment upon Carnegie’s stature—if
one may call it by that large name—for the sake of the future centuries. The future centuries will be glad to
hear about this feature from one who has actually looked upon it…. In truth Mr. Carnegie is no smaller than
was Napoleon; he is no smaller than were several other men supremely renowned in history but for some reason
or other he looks smaller than he really is. He looks incredibly small, almost unthinkably small. I do not
know how to account for this; I do not know what the reason of it is, and so I have to leave it
unexplained.”²²

As they aged, Louise’s height stood out a bit more, though she had learned to compensate for it by slouching a
bit and leaning in toward him when they stood together. Her features had softened with age, and, unlike her
husband, she had grown more handsome. As her cheeks filled out, her eyes seemed to recede deeper into her
face. There was a placidness, a gentleness, almost a world-weary calm to her.

Neither husband nor wife had allowed age to slow them down. Carnegie was, at seventy, as at thirty, incapable
of sitting still or remaining in one place for long. While he seldom appeared at the dedication ceremonies for
his American libraries, he never turned down a chance to open a British library and to receive the greatest
honor a British town could give: its “freedom of the city,” a medieval designation that offered the honoree
the privileges of the “burgher” enumerated on a parchment scroll encased in an elaborately carved
casket-shaped, usually jeweled, box. Every summer, with Louise at his side, Carnegie traveled from town to
town collecting his “freedoms” and being fêted with parades, dinners, receptions, and adulatory
speeches.[*][1]

Carnegie took this aspect of his life very seriously. Every library he opened, every “freedom” he received was
another opportunity to preach his gospel. For years now, he had been publishing his speeches in pamphlet form.
When James Swank, the former secretary and chief lobbyist for the American Iron and Steel Association, retired
in 1904, Carnegie hired him to assemble, publish, and distribute these pamphlets. “With regard to title, etc.
Make cover of pamphlet more or less the same as the sample I sent you, heading it, ‘More Busy Days,’ and
below, ‘Dr. Carnegie at Dingwall, Tain, etc. etc.’ With regard to the paternity, put underneath, ‘compiled and
edited by Jas. M. Swank, Philadelphia.’ No introduction or preface required. Color of cover brown or gray.”²³

In mid-July 1902, Carnegie traveled to eight different functions, then returned in August to a castle full of
visitors. Morley was due to arrive in mid-September. “I am looking forward to five days of pleasant roving
rambling talk. Only, I Beseech you, don’t ask me to go anywhere or to do anything, for I am as tired as a
hound…. What a pleasant time we’ll have!” A month later, after the visit of Paderewski had “closed the
season,” Andrew was off again, with Louise in tow, on another round of visits and speeches. “Madam and I this
week ‘orate’ at Perth—Freedom,” he wrote Dod on October 1; “Thursday Falkirk [library] opening also evening;
Friday Greenoch opening also evening—Saturday Sterling; Monday travel to Liverpool; Tuesday Hawarden Library
speech—Wednesday Library Liverpool—Banquet in eve. Twelve speeches…is a big contract but I’m in fine fettle &
shall no doubt go through all right as usual. Madam has two functions herself.—Hoop la!”²⁴

Morley, on being sent a copy of his friend’s speaking schedule, warned him to slow down. “Take care of
yourself, my friend. This progress of yours will be a strain—and strain has to be paid for in malt or in meal.
Don’t make so many engagements for a short span: spread them out: or don’t make them. Look how well I am. The
Oxford people want me to speak at the banquet on the tercentenary of Bodleian next week. No—say I.”²⁵

Carnegie pushed on through his twelve speeches, then proceeded to St. Andrews for the most important
engagement of the summer. The students at St. Andrews, the oldest university in Scotland, founded in 1411, had
the year before elected Andrew Carnegie as their rector, no doubt in recognition of his $10 million gift to
the Scottish universities. Carnegie had begun planning his inaugural address the summer before by reading
through a recently collected volume of addresses delivered by his predecessors. As many of these touched on
questions of “religious sentiments,” Carnegie decided to explain to the students “how his own had developed
and crystallized from year to year.” There was, he recognized, “one objection to the choice; it involves a
highly personal address; but there is one advantage; it will show you the flesh-and-blood man behind, and I do
feel desirous to get in close touch with you. Let us know each other.”²⁶

Religion was not a new subject for Carnegie. He had been a vocal agnostic since adolescence. His refusal to
believe in a personal deity had left such an impression on one old friend, Bobby Pitcairn, that when
Pitcairn’s wife died, he felt obligated to remind Carnegie that not only she but his dear father had been a
believer. “God bless him! Would that you had this consolation.”²⁷

Carnegie, who had taken such delight in religious disputation and debate as a young man, continued as he grew
older to find enormous satisfaction in playing the enlightened man of reason in debate with fossilized,
superstitious believers. His Dunfermline friend, Lord Shaw, who helped organize the Scottish Universities
Trust, recalled in his memoirs the great gap that stood between him and Carnegie “on the spiritual side…. The
old rigidity most righteously he despised. But the noble underlying spirit [of Christianity] such things made
him impatient; and he would—at least to me, for I declined positively ever to lower my flag to him—he would
fling out at you savage tenets of the Old Testament as if they were Religion!…Far and wide he voyaged—to
Confucius, to Zoroaster, to the world’s sages—seeking the truth if haply he might find it. And I do believe
that, after all those voyagings, and storms of argufying, and declamatory monologue, into which an uneasiness
of mind seemed ever to draw him, that at last his bark landed on the Christian shore.”²⁸

Despite Shaw’s protestations and Pitcairn’s hopes, Carnegie never would be reconciled to Christianity, though
in time his hostility to the organized religion whose tales of eternal damnation had so frightened him as a
child diminished. In his mid-sixties, he even consented to accompany Louise and Margaret to church in Dornoch.

That summer of 1902, in preparation for his “rectorial address” at St. Andrews, he took up again the subject
of religion in discussion and correspondence with his British friends. In a letter to Richard Haldane, he
proudly recalled that as a young man, he had thrown over “our dogmatic theology of our Bible and our Christ,
and all the fables of an ignorant past…. Then science brought me back to true Religion.”²⁹

In the draft of his address, Carnegie denied that science was an enemy of religion. On the contrary, “every
discovery of science has exalted and must exalt the Creator of these startling wonders to which science alone
keeps the keys.” Like Herbert Spencer, he believed in “the truth that there is an Inscrutable Existence…an
Infinite and Eternal Energy from which all things proceed”; and like him he denied that there was any one
preferable way to refer to this “unknown” or worship it.³⁰

Carnegie’s speech, though charming in parts, was unwieldy. He rambled on, dropping names as he went to show
the undergraduates and their professors that, though unschooled, he was not uneducated; that though an
opponent of organized theologies, he was a religious man. Principal James Donaldson of St. Andrews, after
reading the draft, suggested that Carnegie might choose another topic, as “theology and religion” was at that
moment in Scottish history too controversial a subject to be treated so personally. Carnegie, too, apparently
had his doubts as to whether this rather informal, autobiographical address was appropriate. He stowed the
talk away—it would not be published until after his death.

As a replacement for his address on religion, he took up a subject he knew well: American industrial
ascendancy and the economic future of Europe and Britain. This speech, delivered on October 22, 1902, and
widely reprinted, charted the decline of British industrial dominance. The present, he declared, belonged to
the United States, because of its enormous home market and abundance of natural resources, and to Germany
which had become Britain’s chief rival in Europe. The German economy had overtaken the British, its population
was greater, it was closing the gap in naval armaments, and it was led by a dynamic, ambitious ruler, Kaiser
Wilhelm II. Parroting Richelieu’s warning to the French king about Cromwell, Carnegie announced to his
Scottish audience that “‘a great man has arisen in Germany, the Emperor.’ It is impossible to follow his
doings without feeling that here is a personality, a power potent for good or evil, in the world…. He is at
once the Emperor and the vital force of the empire.”³¹

In his bluff, almost confrontational manner, Carnegie was using the St. Andrews address to alert and reconcile
the British to the changing balance of power. Nine years earlier, in the essay that became the concluding
chapter of his new edition of Triumphant Democracy, he had proclaimed that the only way for the British to
retain their exalted place in the world was to join with Canada and the United States in an English-speaking
union, with its headquarters in Washington. Now, speaking before an audience of Scottish college students, he
declared that the days when such a federation might have rescued the British were gone. Britain was too small
“in size and population [to] remain great in material products or material power.” “All thought of material
ascendancy, even with the empire united, must therefore be abandoned.” There was no hope for the British: they
would, in the years to come, have but two choices: to assume a subordinate place within Europe, or within an
American-led, English-speaking federation.³²

Having thoroughly depressed his audience by pointing to the inevitable decline of British wealth and power,
Carnegie concluded, bizarrely for a successful businessman and capitalist, by suggesting that “material
ascendancy” was not all that important. “Gentlemen…assembled in Scotland’s oldest university, the thought that
fills your heart and appeals to mine is what value is material compared with moral and intellectual
ascendancy—supremacy not in the things of the body, but in the those of the spirit!…What matters what part of
the world makes the steel, iron, cloth, or ships, if you produce the highest poets, historians, philosophers,
statesmen, inventors, teachers? Let others make more of the food for the body of man, if from you come the
best books for the soul, or the highest examples of lives grandly lived. Let more of the millions of the
people be clothed by other lands and other hands, as long as you educate and apparel the minds, leading men in
the higher paths.”³³

Carnegie’s 1902 address at St. Andrews was his way of setting his priorities in order, personally and
publicly, as he entered the final decades of his life, of telling the “men of letters” in his audience that he
wanted to be thought of as one of them. The St. Andrews students responded, two years later, by electing him
to a second term as rector, therefore guaranteeing that he would have one more chance to address them
formally.

 

LOUISE accompanied her husband to St. Andrews, as she did to most of his speeches. She had grown into the role
of companion to the great man but she was also, day by day, assuming greater responsibilities of her own. At
Skibo, her duties as lady of the manor had increased to the point where they occupied her full time. With the
assistance of her personal secretary, Louise planned for the arrival of new guests, decided where to put them,
welcomed them personally, and saw to it that they were escorted to their rooms and their bags unpacked. Every
morning, she met with the chief butler to determine how many guests might be expected at each of the day’s
meals and to arrange for the vehicles that would transport them to the golf course or to fish in the Shin
River or shop in Dornoch. She also planned the day’s musical selections with the organist and met with the
housekeeper and cook to discuss the day’s menus. In late morning, after her chores were done, and then again
after lunch, she consulted with the gardeners, looked after her personal gardens, picked flowers, and joined
her guests for a walk, a swim in the pool, a few holes of golf, or a carriage ride. By midafternoon, she was
back in the castle to pour tea in the drawing room. After tea, she retreated to her private rooms for a half
hour with her daughter and husband, then answered her correspondence, dressed for dinner, heard her daughter’s
prayers, and, having wished Margaret a good night, went downstairs again, where, escorted by the piper, she
led her guests into dinner.

On Sundays, there were “the rounds” to make: visits to the stables, kennels, poultry house, dairy,
greenhouses, nurseries; and calls at the cottages of senior staff members; then the carriage ride into Dornoch
for church services and hymn-singing. In the afternoon, she and her daughter together gathered blossoms for
the ladies’ finger bowls.

Louise, though uncomplaining, was exhausted by the strain of the Skibo season. Carnegie, for his part, doted
on her, fearful that her health might give way. Their only major disagreements came when she tried to
interfere in his grooming and get him to discard well-worn or replace ill-matched articles of clothing. He
deferred to her on all household decisions. But, at the same time, as he heaped more responsibilities on her
as lady of the manor, he wanted her with him everywhere: when he played golf or yachted or drove into town or
took guests on a picnic in the moors or traveled to other towns to receive his honors. He expected her as well
to help him welcome and entertain the presidents of the four Scottish universities for principals’ week in
September and the twenty-five trustees of the Carnegie Dunfermline Trust on their annual visit in July.

In mid-October 1902, after their first guest-filled season at Skibo, Carnegie wrote to tell Morley that he was
taking the family to Lake Geneva to “give Madam and Baba two weeks in high air. Madam should have a rest
between Houses (Palaces alas, alas)…. I don’t like going so far on continent but Madam needs a rest I think
and that settles it.” From this point on, upon arriving in Britain in the spring and before departing in the
fall, the family would spend at least two or three weeks at grand hotels in London or on the Continent so
Louise could enjoy a vacation from housekeeping responsibilities.³⁴

In the fall of 1902, the first family vacation in Switzerland was interrupted when all three Carnegies came
down with food poisoning. Louise and Baba recovered quickly, but Andrew, either from the food poisoning or
some other malady, did not. They returned to London, where Carnegie spent the next ten days recuperating.

The newspapers kept daily watch on his health and celebrated his return to New York on December 11. The New
York Times reported the next day that although he “said that he never felt better in his life…he looked a
little pale and shaken and his step had lost some of its accustomed sprightliness.” Asked if he was going to
present his new Fifth Avenue mansion as a Christmas present to his daughter, he laughed. “I haven’t seen the
house yet.”

At the conclusion of the interview, Carnegie, Louise, and Baba were driven uptown and through Central Park to
their new home at 2 East Ninety-first Street. It was quite unlike any other Fifth Avenue mansion—and that was
precisely how the Carnegies had planned it. He was reported as having told his architects that he “did not
want a palace,” but a house that was modest, roomy, and plain. To make sure he got this, he steered clear of
the usual society architects and hired Babb, Cook & Willard, who had designed several important buildings but
no palaces.[*][2]³⁵

Harry Phipps had constructed a beautiful, large, but plain marble home for himself on the corner of
Eighty-seventh Street. The Carnegies’ mansion was larger than Phipps’s but less elegant and much more
domestic. Instead of being built of marble or granite, it was constructed of redbrick with white stone trim,
giving it a Georgian look, like an English city mansion, complicated by a French Beaux-Arts-style canopy of
bronze and glass. It did not resemble the monumental structures further south built by the Vanderbilts and
Huntingtons in the 1880s, or the massive building that Henry Frick would construct for himself in the 1910s.
There was a colorful, lively feel to the property. The front entrance was of yellow brick; large blocks of
pink granite faced along the sidewalks. The entire property was surrounded by a black iron fence, but a
decorative one that invited passersby to look inside, between the well-spaced pickets.

The property extended the entire block from Ninetieth to Ninety-first Street, but the house appeared to have
been pushed back toward Ninety-first Street so that the south side of the property could be given over to
Louise’s gardens. As at Skibo, but miniaturized, there would be a central lawn, with paths, and a variety of
shrubs and flowers chosen to bloom in the spring and fall while the Carnegies were in residence. Around the
edges of the property, full-grown maples, poplars, and elms were planted, though, with the exception of a
single poplar, none survived long.

The iron fence did not provide the Carnegies with much privacy. From the moment the family moved in, as Louise
remarked in her diary, there were “very troublesome” reporters buzzing about. Everyone in town knew where the
richest man in the world lived and what he looked like. Carnegie was not one to hide out. He spent time in his
garden, in full view of passersby, and made full use of Central Park just across the avenue. Every afternoon,
at 4:00 P.M., he entered the park for his two-mile circular promenade around the reservoir (he sometimes made
two circuits), often with a friend or one of the journalists who lay in wait for him along the path.³⁶

The ground floor of the house was divided into two wings: one for the family; the other for Carnegie and his
assistants. Visitors entered through a small vestibule. If on business, they were directed to the right,
through an anteroom, and up a flight of stairs into a waiting room, then into James Bertram’s office. Just
behind Bertram’s office was a wood-paneled lobby that opened onto Carnegie’s private library, the largest room
in the mansion. Behind the library was Carnegie’s study. Carnegie did most of his work in the library at a
table so large he looked elflike sitting at it. In front of the table was his soft easy chair with footstool,
where he sat to give dictation to Bertram.

Other visitors and friends opened a second set of doors directly in front of the entrance. These led to a
foyer and a short stairway into the Great Hall, paneled in Scottish oak. The public and entertainment
rooms—parlor, dining room, reception room, breakfast room, conservatory, and gallery—were comfortable, but not
large by millionaire standards. There was no ballroom or banquet room, no outrageously expensive paintings or
sculpture in the art gallery, no Florentine furniture, oversized medieval tapestries, or ornately gilded
ceilings. The private family rooms on the second floor were reached by staircase and an elevator so modern it
was featured in newspaper stories. Andrew and Louise had adjoining bedrooms, with a dressing room for Louise.
There was a family library and sitting room and a day and night nursery for Margaret. On the third floor was
Stella’s room, some guestrooms, and storage space. The servant quarters on the fourth floor housed ten female
and four male servants. The chauffeurs and some other staff lived on Ninetieth Street at the Carnegies’
garage. The basement held the kitchen, laundry, rooms for the steward and chief housekeeper. In the
subbasement were state-of-the-art twin boilers that were fueled by coal delivered at the east end of the house
and transported over a small railroad track from the bin to the furnace, a quarter ton at a time.

Carnegie’s daily routine was much the same as at Skibo, with one slight difference. In Scotland, the household
was awakened by the piper. At Ninety-first Street, they rose earlier, at 7:00 A.M., to the sounds of the great
organ Carnegie had installed in the lower hallway, played by an organist from the Broadway Tabernacle. After a
leisurely breakfast, Carnegie repaired to his private study, where he read through the morning newspapers and
the letters Bertram thought he should look after. He dictated answers, memoranda, and instructions, and met
personally with those rare petitioners who were granted an interview. His “work” was generally concluded by
lunchtime, leaving the rest of the day free for other activities.³⁷

Most of the Carnegies’ entertaining was done at the mansion, including his annual “literary dinners,” held
jointly with his friend Richard Gilder of the Century. Every year a different man of letters was honored: Sam
Clemens, John Morley, Charles Eliot Norton. The tradition was for each of the guests to sign their names on
the tablecloth. The names were then embroidered and preserved as a record of the event. Carnegie also held
luncheons and smaller dinners at his home for visiting dignitaries and special events for his Carnegie
Veterans Association and the various organizations he belonged to and supported.

 

WITHIN WEEKS of returning to New York and taking up residence in his new home in the fall of 1902, Carnegie
took the train to Washington to meet with President Roosevelt and be honored at the dedication of his
Washington library. Carnegie, still courting and being courted by the president, returned every compliment.
Theodore Roosevelt, he told his audience, was not just the president of the United States but “a prince in the
republic of letters…I doubt not that of the books taken from this library his will rank high in the list. We
hail him to-day, therefore in the dual capacity of President and author, positions unsurpassed in their
several spheres, a rare and wonderful combination.”³⁸

Had they been closer in age, or had Roosevelt had the time or inclination to visit Carnegie at Skibo, they
might have become friends. Of Andrew Carnegie’s gifts, the one least appreciated was his talent for
befriending men he admired. He selected his friends as he chose his dinner companions: for their intellect,
their ideas, and their wit. Having chosen those he wanted to befriend, he cultivated them carefully. His
letters are replete with invitations to dine, visit, yacht, golf, fish, and travel with him. His warmth, his
flattery, his deference—when called for—his loyalty, and his dogged pursuit, usually bore fruit. In the end,
even the most restrained, re-fined Englishmen, like William Gladstone, Matthew Arnold, and Herbert Spencer,
were won over by his devotion. “His extraordinary freshness of spirit,” John Morley wrote in his
Recollections, “easily carried Arnold, Herbert Spencer, myself, and afterwards many others, high over an
occasional credulity or haste in judgment such as befalls the best of us in ardent hours.”³⁹

Carnegie gravitated toward those who, like him, had a puckish, self-deprecating sense of humor, could turn a
phrase, had published a book or two, and were liberals in the British style, that is, advocates of limited
government and opponents of socialist experiment and imperialist adventure. It was perhaps not coincidental
that many of his friends—Frick, Morley, Phipps, Hay, among them—were small like he was.

Those chosen to enter the Carnegie circle were showered with gifts, usually from Scotland: grouse, trout, and
the finest, smoothest Scotch whiskey available, which he dispensed with good humor and in large quantities.
“This is the best as well as the most fashionable medicine of the day,” he wrote Richard Gilder in early 1904.
“Please take half glass in water Lunch and Dinner as I do and report result—then take good care of yourself
and especially take exercise. Come and golf with me for instance…. P.S. This Liquor is from the King’s Vat
which Queen Victoria had for thirty years. Sip reverently, don’t gulp it.”⁴⁰

Dozens of friends were rewarded with Scotch whiskey, usually from John Dewar, on birthdays, holidays, special
occasions, or when they fell ill. At one point, Clemens, having perhaps run out, informed Carnegie by note
that he had been “in bed since last Sunday slowly wasting away under an attack of bronchitis complicated with
other unnecessary maladies, & I cannot get any Scotch whisky that isn’t rank & frank poison. If you will lend
me half a bottle I’ll be & remain gratefully your friend.” Every year, sometimes twice a year, Carnegie would
send a new supply and Clemens would find a new way to thank him. “Dear St. Andrew,” he wrote in February 1906,
“The whisky arrived in due course from over the water; last week one bottle of it was extracted from the wood
& inserted into me, on the installment plan, with this result: that I believe it to be the best & smoothest
whiskey now on the planet.” And again, in January 1908, “That whisky came very handy. I had a very wild &
exasperating cold, but a pint of the whisky tamed it in 3 minutes by the watch & I did not wake up again for
ten hours. I shall be out of bed tomorrow, I think, & I’ll break straightway for Bermuda.” Three weeks later,
having received yet another batch, he wrote that it had come “at the right time. Of course—for whisky never
comes at the wrong time.” And a year later, “Many thanks for the whisky. It goes to the right place, & finds a
hearty welcome there.”⁴¹

Grover Cleveland, who not only received Scotch whiskey but a personal visit in Princeton during his illness,
responded more solemnly to his friend’s “thoughtful friendliness…. In the midst of your many and large public
benefactions, I hope you find an especial gratification in the kind things you do within the sphere of
man-to-man relationships.”⁴²

While Carnegie was extraordinarily generous with his gifts and in paying for his friends’ travel and
vacations, he wisely stayed away from entering into business deals with them. He turned down Blaine’s offers
to invest in coal mines, Stead’s proposal that he join with him in publishing a partisan, opinionated morning
newspaper, and several of Clemens’s harebrained business ventures.

Clemens was somewhat of a wild man when it came to investing his own—and his friends’—funds. No sooner had he
gotten out of the debts incurred because of disastrous investments in a publishing and printing company than
he tried in 1900 to inveigle his friends in new schemes. He urged his financial adviser and savior, Standard
Oil vice president Henry Rogers, to share an exclusive option for U.S. rights to an Austrian carpet-weaving
machine, and when that failed, attempted to interest Rogers in investing with him in the U.S. and British
rights to another Viennese product, Plasmon, a food additive extracted from “the waste milk” of dairies. When
Rogers refused, Clemens, tongue in cheek, contacted Carnegie’s daughter to invite her to convince her father
to invest.

“You are so little that you probably can’t remember so large a bulk as I am,” he wrote Margaret, at the time
aged three, “but that is no matter I remember you very well and this is only a business letter anyway. My
scheme is this—a kind of conspiracy, you to be head conspirator, partly on account of your inexperience, and
partly on account of your influence with your father which I judge is considerable. Very well. When your
mother is not around, give him five or six fingers of Scotch and then talk. This will mellow him up and
enlarge his views and before he solidifies again you will have him. That is to say, you will have his cheque
for 500 pounds, drawn to order of ‘Plasmon Syndicate Ltd,’ which you will send to me and you and I will be
personally responsible that the money is back in his hands in 6 months and along with it 500 shares in the
Plasmon Company, all paid up.” There followed a three-page prospectus, written in Clemens’s exquisite hand, on
the future of Plasmon. Though no doubt amused by his friend’s outrageously imaginative pitch, Carnegie
declined to invest in this scheme, as he declined to invest in Clemens’s publishing company.⁴³

Carnegie’s reluctance to back his friends’ business schemes was no indication of stinginess on his part and
was not taken as such. On the contrary, as everyone who knew him recognized, if ever there were a man who
contradicted the stereotype of the tightfisted Scotsman, it was he.

“He was the most grateful man in the world and would always reward any kindness done him or his family…. He
never forgot,” Hew Morrison later recalled. His favorite device for helping out his friends in old age was to
provide them with private pensions, almost always unsolicited. “For years there was an old lady in Edinburgh
who drew a regular pension. Her only claim was that the Carnegies, emigrating to America, slept in her
father’s house the last night before they sailed.”⁴⁴

Hundreds of friends, family members, and former associates were pensioned off with Carnegie funds. In late
1901 or early 1902, he offered Grover Cleveland a private pension, fearful no doubt that the only ex-president
still alive might suffer the gruesome fate of Ulysses Grant, who was rescued from poverty when Sam Clemens
offered him an advance of $10,000 and an oversized royalty to write his memoirs. Cleveland had no such life
story to draw upon. Though a bill was winding its way through Congress to provide ex-presidents with an
annuity, its outcome remained uncertain. Not willing to trust to Congress to provide for the former president,
Carnegie offered to fund a pension by himself. Cleveland turned him down. “I was so touched and overcome by
your last letter that it has taken me some time to get myself to reply to it,” he wrote in January 1902. “So
far as the present is concerned, I am getting on I think as well as I deserve.” Cleveland closed by asking
Carnegie’s permission to approach him again if “the Fates are so hard with me that I must have a strong
friendly hand; and whether I have this permission or not, let me assure you that your kindness and what you
have offered to do, will always remain among my most cherished possessions.”⁴⁵

Carnegie, knowing how proud Herbert Spencer was, never offered him a pension, but according to Hew Morrison,
supported him in his later years by “surreptitiously” supplying money to his housekeeper.⁴⁶

Carnegie’s closest friend remained John Morley. The two had been friends for more than twenty years, though
they could not have been more dissimilar in temperament, background, and appearance. Carnegie was ebullient,
outgoing, optimistic, decisive, white-bearded, and the unschooled son of a Dunfermline weaver. Morley, to the
contrary, was dour, depressive, cynical, a procrastinator, clean-shaven, and the Oxford-educated son of an
Anglican surgeon. They had met at a London dinner party in 1883, when Morley was forty-five and Carnegie
forty-eight. Morley had already made a name for himself in London circles as essayist, editor, and adviser to
Gladstone and the Liberal Party hierarchy. In the decades to follow, Morley’s output as an author would remain
prodigious: philosophical ruminations, history, literacy criticism, and biographies of Cobden and Gladstone.
But he never permitted his literary career to interfere with his political. He had been first elected to the
House of Commons in the early 1880s and had joined Gladstone in fighting for but failing to secure a greater
measure of Home Rule for Ireland. His influence within the party grew steadily through the 1890s, as an
advocate of Home Rule and an outspoken opponent of the Boer War and imperial adventurism. All this only
endeared him further to Carnegie.

Morley did not fish or golf or motor, but he was, like Carnegie, a great reader, with a prodigious memory, and
though a bit diffident in the company of others, an enthusiastic conversationalist. The two friends spent
their time together walking and talking. “They were frequently disputing…Morley was a somewhat ponderous
thinker and lethargic talker,” according to Hew Morrison, “while Carnegie’s chief quality was nimbleness. His
mind skipped around rapidly and gaily—it was difficult to drive it into a corner. Morley was more subtle and,
of course, much more profound, but in a verbal set-to these characteristics are not the most useful.”⁴⁷

In 1902, Carnegie offered Morley the gift of Lord Acton’s library, which, with some 60,000 volumes, was
believed to be the largest private collection in London. Carnegie had become acquainted with Acton—and his
library—in 1890, when he learned from Gladstone that Lord Acton was deeply in debt and going to sell his
books. Carnegie offered to pay the interest and principal on a £10,000 (about $1 million today) loan on the
condition that his intervention be kept secret. When Acton died in 1902, the library passed into Carnegie’s
hands. Andrew White, who did not know of Carnegie’s connection to the library, wrote to suggest that Carnegie
purchase it and donate it to an American institution. “Britain, has, in the British Museum and elsewhere,
doubtless, collections as good or nearly as good: America has none. Why not send it there? Of course Cornell
would be glad to take it, and I should be proud to see it there; but probably the best place for it would be
either the New York Public Library or the Library of Congress.”⁴⁸

Morley, to whom Carnegie forwarded White’s letter, wrote back at once. “The enclosed does not at all surprise
me. If I were an American (which I am heartily glad that I am not) I should say just the same. Only don’t
overlook the fact that if you do send it over, you will lose a good slice of popularity in this country—I mean
England.”⁴⁹

Carnegie reassured Morley that he had never had any intention of acceding to White’s request. “Now, I sent you
White note to show what he, a Scholar thought of Acton Library. I wished to impress upon you its value. I have
no idea that it should ever go out of England. My intention has been and is now declared. The Library goes to
my friend John Morley. Your refusal of it because you had not room is no bar—You give it as you think best. I
pay all expenses but I advise you to throw upon the recipient the labor of attending to it—otherwise you will
be troubled with details—you keep your mind upon your present great work—The institution to whom you give it
has libraries and a staff, let them see to it.”⁵⁰

Morley was overwhelmed. “Your letter, my dear Carnegie moves me deeply. It breathes an air of friendship and
true kindness of feeling that refreshes me more than you can suppose. Your gift is the most magnificent
compliment that ever was paid to a man of letters. If I were by your side, and I wish I were at Skibo, I
should deprecate it with all my might. As you well know, I am not covetous of splendid possessions, and this
is indeed a splendid possession. But it would be ungracious and morose if I were to persist in baulking your
most gracious purpose. So in short I accept the noble charge you have laid upon me, with the keenest sense of
the honour that you do me…. I don’t think I’ve written the letter I meant to write: but you will know, my good
friend all that I feel.”⁵¹

Though his gifts were both generous and thoughtful, it was in his condolence notes that Carnegie revealed the
depths of his regard for his friends. Childhood deaths were more frequent in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries, but no less painful to the parents left behind. Carnegie lived through that pain with
several of his friends and colleagues, including Henry Clay Frick, James Blaine, Samuel Clemens, and Grover
Cleveland, whose daughter Ruth died at age thirteen. “Mrs. Carnegie and I could not write you, Silence,
Silence! was the word that came to our mind,” read his note to the Clevelands. “What words would not be an
intrusion upon you in your grief!…Mrs. Carnegie and I think of you at short intervals…we feel in our hearts
like going to you and asking cannot we do something, is there no avenue for us to pick a thorn out of your
pathway?…That you may both be able to suffer and not give way entirely is our earnest prayer.”⁵²

The prose is awkward, even labored; the sentiment a bit strong for our early twenty-first-century
sensibilities; but the sincerity is unmistakable. His friends were, especially in his retirement years, dearer
to him than anything else save his wife and daughter, and he wanted them to know this.

Carnegie got on best with men with whom he had no business relations. He befriended several of his young
partners, only to later turn around and gossip about them or berate them in public. William Abbott, who left
Carnegie’s employ as a relatively young man, recalled years later that while Carnegie never “treated his
associates other than justly,” he would also “abuse them, call them fools (‘he called me that many times’…)
and behave in a most outrageous manner.” That these outbursts “were purely temperamental, and quickly
subsided” did not reduce the pain the young men suffered.⁵³

Carnegie was cursed with a loose tongue—and looser pen. He was frighteningly unforgiving when he thought his
partners had suffered moral lapses. Charlie Schwab, who had replaced Frick, doubled profits, and then arranged
the sale of the Carnegie Company to Morgan, was, according to his biographer, nearly destroyed by Carnegie’s
criticisms. During the winter of 1902, Schwab, who had moved without a break from Carnegie Company to U.S.
Steel, took a long-awaited and desperately needed vacation in Monte Carlo, where he was spotted by a reporter
at the casino tables. The American newspapers took direct aim at the boy wonder who had engineered the largest
merger in American corporate history, with elaborately exaggerated stories about his gambling and poker games.
Though Schwab was no longer employed by Carnegie, the older man felt personally betrayed by his protégé and
suggested that Schwab resign at once. He wrote Morgan directly, apologizing for having recommended Schwab to
him. “I feel…as if a son had disgraced the family. Never did he show any tendency to gambling when under me,
or I should not have recommended him you may be sure. He shows a sad lack of solid qualities—of good sense,
and his influence upon the many thousands of young men who naturally look to him will prove pernicious in the
extreme. I have had nothing wound me so deeply for many a long day, if ever.”⁵⁴

Morgan made light of the matter and rejected Schwab’s offer to resign. Carnegie was not, however, prepared to
drop the matter. He had spent his lifetime trying to disabuse the public of the notion that capitalists were
gamblers, and now, his chief protégé had been caught red-handed. It was his worst nightmare. Carnegie kept at
Schwab, with letters and cables, letting him know, over and over, how disappointed he was. In March 1902, he
invited Schwab to visit him at Skibo, but Schwab turned him down, saying, “I have not as yet been able to
muster up sufficient courage to come to see you. Your very severe letters to me and especially your letter to
Mr. Morgan has depressed me more than anything that has ever occurred. I cannot see how you could have so
fully condemned me without every giving me a hearing,—no one else did.”⁵⁵

Though Morgan accepted his apology, Schwab’s days at U.S. Steel were already numbered. From the outset, he had
sought the same degree of power at the new company that he and Carnegie had exercised at the old. When he
learned that this was not to be, he backed away, defeated. Though he had just turned forty, his health
suffered—from overwork, anxiety, stress. In August 1902, he fled to Europe again. Arriving at the Ritz in
Paris, he found another letter from Carnegie, filled with new accusations. Someone—we don’t know who—had been
spreading further stories about Schwab’s gambling problem. Schwab could no longer tolerate the old man’s
meddling: “That you would be willing to listen to, and believe the stories some one has seen fit to tell you
was indeed a surprise to me…I am no gambler and if the stories published were true, of course I should be
condemned. But they are not true. But be what I may, there is no condition of affairs that would make me even
listen to a tale of such a character concerning you. I’d defend you or any of my friends until I knew the
truth. I admit I have made a serious mistake and one I shall probably never be able to rectify—and I will pay
the penalty. I have cabled Mr. Morgan again to-day saying that he must accept my resignation. My chief [pang]
is not my loss of position, or loss of public opinion, but the loss of your confidence and friendship. Do not
send for me for I should not come.”⁵⁶

Like summer storms, Carnegie’s bursts of anger soon blew over. When they did, he made believe they had never
happened. There were no apologies, no offers of reconciliation, and, except in the Frick case, no excuses or
explanations offered. In 1906, learning that Schwab was ill, he sent advice, as he would to any of his old
friends. “Have been on the eve of wiring several mornings to ask for the truth about you but desisted fearing
reply might reach the Press. Don’t like abscess on the thigh—in one so young—Blood out of order. Be a model
like me and keep well.” His recipe for recovery was a simple one:

Baked apples—Oatmeal—chicken Breakfast

Fish or chicken—oysters when in season Lunch

2 spoonfuls Old Scotch—

Soup, oysters—no meats—simple pudding Dinner

Sago, Tapioca or Rice

2 spoonfuls O.S. [Old Scotch]

Exercise every day, golf often—

Retire about 10 or 10:30

No wine—no liquor between meals

Listen to Madam—she will approve this, I’m sure.⁵⁷

Carnegie enjoyed good health for most of his retirement. But as he aged, so did his friends, and they were not
as fortunate as he. Other men might have sought solace in the thought that there was an afterlife where all
would meet again. Carnegie did not. “Every year,” he wrote Clemens from Skibo in the summer of 1905, when

I return to New York I am mourning the absence of one or more…. Why? Why? The everlasting Why. No response,
least of all in the realms of present Theology which gives an answer too terrible for credence—My friend we
have this only—do our duty here, obey the judge within and bravely meet the fate awaiting us. It is not any
future I dread…I ask for nothing better, only give us immortality here with one another (I don’t want to miss
you my friend)—No sir—heaven enough for me with those around me, the loved ones. Well. Well. Press the lips
and bear it. It is something that we lived & loved—let us so live that our remaining band of friends repeat
Burns’ lines over us:

If there’s another world he lives in bliss

If there be none he made the best of this.⁵⁸

[1]: footnote32.html
[2]: footnote33.html

## THIRTY-FOUR

## “Apostle of Peace,” 1903–1904

THE GREAT EVENT in my life of its kind has happened,” Carnegie wrote Morley in March 1903. “I am Laird of
Pittencrieff biggest of all titles to me—King Edward not in it.” Pittencrieff had been the estate of the Hunt
family, relative newcomers to the aristocracy who had extended their holdings by encroaching on Dunfermline’s
common lands. Carnegie’s maternal grandfather and uncle had fought back and, as a result, the Hunts had banned
all Morrisons and their descendants from entering the estate on the one day a year it was opened for townsfolk
to visit the ruins of Malcolm Canmore’s eleventh-century tower.¹

As was the fate of so many of the lesser nobility—and a symbol of evolutionary justice for Carnegie—the Hunt
family had, by the early twentieth century, fallen into debt, and sought out John Ross, Carnegie’s Dunfermline
solicitor, to see if the Scots-American industrialist was interested in buying Pittencrieff. After two years
of negotiations, a price was agreed to and Pittencrieff became the latest jewel in the Carnegie empire.

“This Pittencrieff ownership,” Carnegie wrote Henry Campbell-Bannerman, who had grown up in nearby Glasgow,
“is the sweetest event in my life in the way of material satisfaction. Bailie Morrison my uncle and all
Morrisons were excluded from it by the then owner—He and Uncle Lauder and my grandfather before them had
disputed the Hunts’ right to the Palace ruins and surroundings and finally triumphed in restoring part to
Dunfermline Abbey grounds. Pittencrieff is the world of charm to me and has been since childhood. No title is
precious in all the world as Laird of Pittencrieff.”²

Carnegie, who already had a fine estate at Skibo, had no intention of returning to live at Pittencrieff. “I’m
going to make it a public Park and present to Dunfermline,” he informed Morley soon after the purchase. “At
least this is my idea, but mum for the present.” He toyed with building a house for himself or his family or
the Lauder family in the park, but decided against it, after Ross made it clear that such an idea might not be
a welcome part of an otherwise magnanimous gift to his hometown.³

Dunfermline in 1903 bore little resemblance to the small town Carnegie had been born in. The hand-loom weavers
were gone, long ago displaced by mills and factories. The one constant was the trade with America, which was
still the major market for Dunfermline textiles. The population had nearly doubled in a half century to feed
the demand for laborers in the power loom factories. As the town grew in population, open spaces like the town
green were encroached upon. Dunfermline, in short, had become an industrial town, not as grimy and sooty as
Birmingham or Pittsburgh, but not the ideal place in which to raise one’s children. Carnegie now sought to
change that—and he may have succeeded in doing so. He couldn’t create better jobs or raise the pay of the
girls in the factories, but he could bring “sweetness and light” into their lives, or try.

Carnegie’s gift to Dunfermline was like no other: to pay the cost of transforming the moldering Pittencrieff
estate into a modern people’s park—and maintain it and his other Dunfermline benefactions—he donated $2.5
million in U.S. Steel bonds to the newly founded Carnegie Dunfermline Trust. (In 1911, he gave the trust an
additional $1.25 million.) The money was not to be spent for university fees or a new research institution, or
for another library or church organ. It was intended instead, as Carnegie put it in a letter to the trustees,
“to bring into the monotonous lives of the toiling masses of Dunfermline more of sweetness and light; to give
to them—especially the young—some charm, some happiness, some elevating conditions of life which residence
elsewhere would have denied…. My retirement from business enables me to act in my own lifetime, and the
fortunate acquisition of Pittencrieff, with its lovely Glen, furnishes the needed foundation upon which you
can build, beginning your work by making it a recreation park for the people…. Remember you are pioneers, and
do not be afraid of making mistakes; those who never make mistakes never make anything. Try many things
freely, but discard just as freely.”⁴

The trustees did as they were instructed and spent Carnegie’s money on 60 acres of beautifully landscaped park
close enough to Dunfermline’s factories, workshops, and residences to be used on a daily basis. Unlike Central
Park, in New York, whose founders had a half century earlier done everything they could to discourage working
people from playing games and ruining the pastoral paradise with sweat and noise, the Dunfermline trustees
constructed and maintained playing fields for football, hockey, and cricket, and greens for bowling. They
built paths for walking, erected swings for the children, added a teahouse, sponsored open-air concerts, and
created a Dunfermline Trust band to play for them. Encouraged to range far and wide in their benefactions, the
trustees spent part of the endowment to expand and improve the Carnegie baths and gymnasium and the Carnegie
library; they paid for medical examinations for the town’s schoolchildren and set up separate medical and
dental clinics for them; they established Scotland’s first College of Hygiene and Physical Education, as well
as a craft school and a Women’s Institute. Seldom before or since has a town profited so much from the
largesse of a native son.⁵

 

THOUGH CARNEGIE had successfully reinvented himself as a full-time philanthropist, he still took enormous
pride in his past accomplishments as businessman, capitalist, and steelmaker. One of the nasty byproducts of
the fight with Frick had been his junior partner’s allegations that Carnegie had played only a minor role in
the making of Carnegie Steel. The summer he became laird of Pittencrieff—these allegations were put before the
public once again when Carnegie’s former secretary, collaborator, and blackmailer, James Bridge, published The
Inside History of the Carnegie Steel Company: A Romance of Millions.

In April, Carnegie had been warned by his old friend Tom Miller that Bridge was out to get him. Bridge had
called on Miller ostensibly to ask for a photograph and then charmed him into conversing and giving up some
documents. “As he was writing up a history, I felt it due to myself to give him such facts as I possessed and
now I am sorry I did so, for I am quite sure he is biased, and I fear my statements may be distorted.”⁶

Bridge’s objective was to write an exposé demonstrating that every success Carnegie had had was due to the
genius, perseverance, and diligence of one or another of his partners or associates: his brother Tom, Harry
Phipps, and Andrew Kloman in the iron mills; William Coleman, Captain Jones, and especially Henry Clay Frick
in steel. In the course of his research and writing, Bridge had been assisted by Frick, who, Bridge later
acknowledged, provided him with the company minutes, “sent me half a dozen fat volumes of newspaper clippings
covering the entire period of his connection with the Carnegie interests,”[*][1] and arranged for Carnegie
Steel lawyer now Attorney General Philander Knox to read the proofs to make sure no illegalities had been
incurred by publishing hitherto confidential documents.⁷

In August, The Inside History of the Carnegie Steel Company was published in two different American editions:
the first, of 50 copies, sold to subscribers for $100; the second, limited to 450 copies, was sold for $25.
“Much speculation was indulged in yesterday as to the purpose of the book,” the New York Times reported on
August 9, the day after publication. “By some it is believed that it may be intended as a campaign document to
be used by Democrats in the next Presidential campaign, and this belief was strengthened when it became known
that the intention is to get out a popular edition at a cheap price.”

The same week, Carnegie wrote to Herbert Spencer’s private secretary, asking him to inquire of Mr. Spencer “if
he remembers writing me a letter putting me on guard against Mr. Bridge, to whom he had given a note of
introduction. Mr. Bridge has been trying to levy blackmail upon me for some years and has now vented his
spleen upon me for my dropping him completely…. He has written a distorted account of the Carnegie Steel
Company, which I am told shows great personal spite. What I would like to have is simply a statement that Mr.
Spencer recollects having done so, as I do not know where his note is.” There was no response from Spencer.⁸

Apparently contemplating action to block publication of an English edition, Carnegie wrote William Stead in
September, soliciting his help. Engaging in a bit of character assassination himself, Carnegie claimed that he
had dismissed Bridge when he found out that he had married a rich American widow even though he had a wife in
England. We have no way of knowing if this was true. We do, however, have evidence that Bridge had tried to
blackmail him on several occasions. Carnegie asked Stead to approach Everett & Company, which was planning to
bring out a British edition of the Bridge book. “If this house be men of standing would you do me the favor
[and] tell them just as much or little of this as you think due to honorable people. I do not wish to become
identified with Mr. B. or his book least of all to notice it, that would boom his venomous attack. Be very
careful not to get me into public notice in the matter…. [Bridge] has tried blackmail upon the wrong kind of a
man. He’s a bad one sure.” As a second P. S., Carnegie added his kicker: “Of course if Everett & Co. publish
the book knowing the facts they must be prepared to bear the consequences. It is possible I may have to take
action.” In the end, the company did not publish the Bridge book, though Limpus, Baker, a London publisher,
did.⁹

Carnegie took no action against Bridge or his publishers, other than to ask Harry Phipps to write a letter to
the New York Herald refuting a few of Bridge’s claims. The book, which accused Carnegie of no crime other than
being jealous of his more accomplished partners and ruthless in disposing of them, did no real harm. It was
not a flattering portrait, but there was certainly nothing libelous in it. It remains today an excellent
source and one of the better histories of Carnegie Steel.¹⁰

 

FOR ALL HE HAD accomplished, Carnegie remained, at heart, the undersized outsider with the funny accent who
had been uprooted from his home at age thirteen. His reaction to the Bridge book was symptomatic of his need
to protect and nurture his standing in the world. In his adopted land, he was the intimate of a president in
Washington, an ex-president in Princeton, mayors, congressmen, governors, senators, and cabinet members, as
well as Samuel Clemens, America’s most famous writer, and Richard Gilder, the editor of the Century, its most
respected literary journal. In Britain, his circle of acquaintances was, if anything, larger, grander, and
more regal still. He had conquered every personal, corporate, political, and ancestral foe, including the
Hunts of Pittencrieff. It was not enough. His insecurities about class and status were legion. Now approaching
seventy, and if not the richest, then surely one of the richest men in the world, he still sought out and
gloried in the approval and recognition of his contemporaries. It was one thing—and quite understandable—for
him to worry about his place in history. But what was most remarkable about Carnegie was that he appeared less
concerned with the judgment of history or his business peers than with the judgment of those beyond the
capitalist classes. Some of his Scottish friends, like Lord Shaw of Dunfermline, mistook his solicitousness
toward men above him on the social ladder as a “real weakness towards the aristocrat,” but this was not the
case. His best friends in England—Gladstone, Spencer, Arnold, and Morley—were not aristocrats (though John
Morley would, late in life, become Lord Morley). His first desire, and Shaw got this right, was to be
associated “with men of power.”¹¹

He wanted to be known and honored not simply for what he had accomplished, but for the company he kept. In
sections of Clemens’s memoirs that were withheld from publication during his and Carnegie’s lifetime, he
painted a portrait of his friend that was exaggerated and cruel, but captured his egomaniacal side.

“If I were going to describe him in a phrase I think I should call him the Human Being Unconcealed,” Clemens
wrote in 1907 here was something triumphantly transparent about his friend: “He never has any but one theme,
himself…. He is himself his one darling subject, the only subject he…seems stupendously interested in. I think
he would surely talk himself to death upon it if you would stay and listen.” Carnegie never bragged and seldom
mentioned his achievements as a businessman, steelmaker, or capitalist. Instead, he boasted continually of the
company in which he now traveled and of the great men who had paid him compliments. “He talks forever and ever
and ever and untiringly of the attentions which have been shown him.” Every honor, every appreciation was
carefully stored away, none ever forgotten. “He keeps the whole list, keeps it complete; and you must take it
all, along with the new additions, if there is time and you survive. It is the deadliest affliction I know
of…. It is not possible to divert him from his subject; in your weariness and despair you try to do it
whenever you think you see a chance, but it always fails; he will use your remark for his occasion and make of
it a pretext to get straight back upon his subject again.”

It was necessary that everyone he met, old friends and new, knew how important Carnegie was. At Ninety-first
Street and at Skibo, he would escort his visitors from room to room, wall to wall, pointing out mementoes,
scrolls, presentation books, autographed letters, photographs, “and so on, buzzing over each like a happy
hummingbird, for each represented a compliment to Mr. Carnegie.” He was shamelessly unaware of the impression
he made on others with his constant pursuit of more attention, more praise, more compliments for his good
works. He was that rare human animal, possessed of equal portions of modesty and vanity. The problem was that
he was modest where he should have been proud and vain where he should have been modest. “He is an astonishing
man in his genuine modesty as regards the large things he has done, and in his juvenile delight in
trivialities that feed his vanity.”

His letters and his conversation were sprinkled, as Clemens knew firsthand, with news that this or that
president or great man had “sent for him.” “If you let Carnegie tell it, he never seeks the great—the great
always seek him.” He was incapable, Clemens thought, of reflection or self-knowledge. “Mr. Carnegie is not any
better acquainted with himself than if he had met himself for the first time day before yesterday. He thinks
he is a rude, bluff, independent spirit, who writes his mind and thinks his mind with an almost extravagant
Fourth of July independence, whereas he is really the counterpart of the rest of the human race in that he
does not boldly speak his mind except when there isn’t any danger in it. He thinks he is a scorner of kings
and emperors and dukes, whereas he is like the rest of the human race: a slight attention from one of these
can make him drunk for a week and keep his happy tongue wagging for seven years.” Fours years before, King
Edward had visited Skibo, and “Mr. Carnegie cannot leave the King’s visit alone; he has told me about it at
least four times, in detail. When he applied that torture the second, third, and fourth times, he certainly
knew that it was the second, third, and fourth time, for he has an excellent memory…. He has likable qualities
and I like him, but I don’t believe I can stand the King Edward visit again.”

And yet, despite all these qualities, Clemens sought Carnegie out, listened to just about everything he had to
say, and when given the opportunity to dine with him, even if the occasion was one of the frightening
businessmen’s banquets Clemens had come to abhor, grabbed it. Carnegie was, he had to admit, “always a subject
of intense interest for me. I like him; I am ashamed of him; and it is a delight to me to be where he is if he
has new material on which to work his vanities where they will show him off as with a limelight.”¹²

Clemens’s portrait, though insightful, was incomplete. Carnegie’s conundrum was that while he truly believed
he belonged in the company of the world’s most powerful men, few of his friends or contemporaries shared this
belief. And so he took it upon himself to persuade them that he was indeed the confidant of kings, presidents,
and emperors. His enormous success as businessman and capitalist marked him, he was convinced, as a man of
destiny—one whose talents were perfectly suited for the era in which he lived. He had demonstrated in the
accumulation of millions of dollars that he understood the way the world worked and the directions in which it
was moving, two steps forward, one step back, or, as Spencer had described it, citing the French historian and
premier François-Pierre Guizot, “progress, and at the same time resistance.”¹³

Carnegie had prospered and survived through periods of “progress” and of “resistance” and in so doing had
proved himself among the fittest of his generation. His belief that he embodied a new species of modern-day,
industrial-era philosopher-king was not pure hubris, but a logical extension of the Spencerian evolutionary
philosophy he lived by. Was there anyone living who better understood the workings of the world that
industrial capitalism had made? He thought not—and had over $200 million of 5 percent U.S. Steel gold bonds in
his safe as evidence. He expected to be called upon for advice and for that advice to be followed.

McKinley’s assassination and Roosevelt’s ascension had reopened doors in Washington, and Carnegie was ready to
march through them into the corridors of power. He was not interested simply in socializing and being seen in
their company, as Clemens implied, but in influencing their future actions and setting the world right again
after the recent follies in the Philippines and South Africa.

It was, he well knew, fruitless to argue any longer, as he had in years gone by, that America should be
satisfied with tending its own garden. As the boundaries of time and space receded, with new advances in
transcontinental communications and transportation, Americans had been thrust onto the world stage. Carnegie’s
self-appointed task was to define the role his nation would play in the developing international drama—not as
a competitor in the race for colonies, but as an honest broker, committed to organizing new institutions
dedicated to the peaceful settlements of international disputes. The globe was marked by points of tension
that might easily escalate into war. Though hostilities had ceased in the Philippines and in South Africa, the
British and the French remained at loggerheads in the Sudan; the Austrians and the Russians in the Balkans;
the British, the French, and the Germans in Morocco; the Russians and Japanese in the Far East. Had the
British been more cognizant of the dangers and more willing to confront them realistically, the threats to
world peace might have been diminished. But under Conservative leadership, with Joseph Chamberlain as colonial
secretary, the British government was unprepared to compromise or cede its dominant role as the world’s
leading imperialist power.

It was clear to Carnegie that with the British and Germans at one another’s throats and the globe pockmarked
by danger zones, only the organization of some sort of international conference, court, or tribunal could
prevent war, the inevitable denouement of the race for empire. A “Permanent Court of Arbitration” had been
established at The Hague in 1899 to settle disputes between nations, but it remained largely ceremonial and
restricted to hearing cases that were voluntarily submitted to it.

As neither the Germans nor the British appeared likely to make any moves toward strengthening the
international court, Carnegie hoped to capitalize on his newly renewed entrée to the White House to enlist
Theodore Roosevelt to take the initiative. Roosevelt, it was true, had been on the opposite side of Carnegie
on every major question of foreign policy since the Venezuela crisis of 1895, but he had flattered the older
man by inviting him to the White House, seeking out his opinions, and making a show of reading his articles.
It was, ironically, Roosevelt’s actions in a second Venezuela crisis, in late 1902–early 1903, that convinced
Carnegie that the young president might be the man of destiny he was looking for to assist him in setting the
foundations for world peace.

The Germans and the British, in a rather unique display of international cooperation, had joined forces to
blockade Venezuela, which, both governments claimed, had refused to pay its debts. The Venezuelan government
responded by calling on the United States to arbitrate the dispute. The British appeared to agree to the
proposal; the Germans did not. Roosevelt, fearful that Kaiser Wilhelm had declined arbitration because he had
designs on Venezuelan territory, threatened the German ambassador with military action to protect Venezuela
should the kaiser not stand down. The kaiser agreed to arbitration, and Roosevelt, wisely, instead of
arbitrating the matter himself, announced on December 26, 1902, that the issue would be submitted to The Hague
tribunal.

“The world took a long step upward yesterday,” Carnegie wrote the president on December 27, “and Theodore
Roosevelt bounded into the short list of those who will forever be hailed as supreme benefactors of man.”
Later that week, in a “New Year Greeting” published in the New York Tribune, Carnegie repeated the tribute in
public. Theodore Roosevelt, in “breathing life into The Hague tribunal, the permanent high court of humanity,
for the peaceful settlement of international disputes,” had taken action toward the “coming banishment of the
earth’s most revolting spectacle—human war—the killing of man by man.…The complete banishment of war draws
near. Its death wound dates from the day that President Roosevelt led…opposing powers…to the Court of Peace,
and thus proclaimed it the appointed substitute for that which had hitherto stained the earth—the killing of
men by each other.”¹⁴

In his New Year’s greetings to his friend John Hay, whom Roosevelt had asked to stay on as secretary of state,
Carnegie was exultant. The United States, he declared, was under Roosevelt and Hay’s leadership, firmly set on
a new path in international relations, as a peacemaker among nations. “I am so happy (& proud excuse me) that
I have known you John Hay. You make the Republic what its Founders intended—Something different—Something
higher than the governments which preceded its birth.”¹⁵

Teddy Roosevelt’s sudden and rather shocking rebirth as a man of peace had proved a godsend for Carnegie.
Carnegie had always preferred the company and friendship of practical men of action to dreamers; he moved
closer to Roosevelt and Hay because he placed them in the former category. In February 1903, in response to a
request for funds for the Anti-Imperialist League, Carnegie wrote a $2,000 check but insisted in a note to
Charles Francis Adams that he did not want the money to go toward the work of the committee investigating
American atrocities in the Philippines. “I do not believe in that. It is good in its way but I am satisfied it
will be an impediment to our obtaining the greater end we have in view. We have only to dub ourselves as
blackeners of the American troops to render ourselves impotent for all good to the people of the Philippines….
P.S.—I expect men to be beasts when they go out to kill other men. War is hell, as General Grant said.”¹⁶

The year before, in a mood of bitter despondency, he had refused to give money to establish a permanent
headquarters for the international court of arbitration that had been established at The Hague. Now, in April
1903, his spirits lifting after the agreement to submit the Venezuela dispute to arbitration, he wrote Baron
Gevers, a representative of the Dutch government, committing $1.5 million for the “erection of a Court House
and Library (A Temple of Peace).”¹⁷

Carnegie found himself agreeing with the new president on a number of issues, including the best route for an
isthmian canal. There had been talk for decades of the need for a canal across Central American that would
provide access for the U.S. Navy and commercial vessels to move from east to west and vice versa without
having to circle South America. The routes contemplated were through Nicaragua, and through Panama, which was,
at the time, part of Colombia. Roosevelt favored the Panama route, as did Carnegie, who made his opinion known
in a series of open letters to Senator Thomas Platt of New York.¹⁸

In January 1903, Secretary of State Hay negotiated a treaty with the Colombian ambassador, which granted the
United States the rights to lease a six-mile-wide “zone” in Panama for ninety-nine years for a payment of $10
million and an annual rent of $250,000. The U.S. Senate approved the treaty in March; the Colombian Senate
delayed until August and then unanimously rejected the treaty, demanding more money and more sovereignty over
the leased land. Roosevelt was left with two options: renegotiate the treaty with the Colombians or build the
canal in Nicaragua. He manufactured a third and let it be known that he would provide naval protection for
Panamanian rebels should they declare independence from Colombia.

On November 2, the Nashville, an American battleship, arrived at Colón, Panama; on November 3, the nationalist
junta secured control of the isthmus and declared independence; on November 6, the Americans recognized the
new government of Panama and urged Colombia to do the same. The Colombians, who could not send troops overland
through the jungle and were blocked by the U.S. warships from landing them by sea, had no way to reclaim
Panama. “A new nation the size of South Carolina was born…. The only deaths were a Chinese citizen who had
gotten trapped in some desultory shelling, a dog, and according to some reports, a donkey.”¹⁹

The anti-imperialists mercilessly attacked Roosevelt and Hay for their blatant disregard of international law
in blockading Panama so that the Colombians could not send troops to put down an illegal secessionist
movement. Carnegie held his fire, though he too was dismayed and not a little disgusted. His greatest fear was
that the president’s action would give the Democrats a weapon with which to dislodge him from the White House
the following November. “We are all just a little frightened about our irrepressible President,” Carnegie
wrote Morley on January 11, 1904. “He’s so rapid—Lunched with him recently—His re-election endangered—people
afraid to trust him—Panama badly done…Democrats have a good chance as matters stand at present.” On January
18, in his regular Sunday letter to John Morley, he expanded on his fears. Roosevelt’s “management of Panama
and other impetuosities endanger his election provided Democrats nominate Cleveland—He would probably win, any
other not so probably. Still any one of the three others [being discussed as candidates] would make close
contest…. This Panama folly has hurt many people and alarmed them—so needless—game flying to our
hands—patience only required. Now we are in false position with our Southern Republics naturally jealous, or
afraid of us—all for nothing. Many friendly to President asking if he does such wild impetuous things now what
won’t he do if in for four years.”²⁰

Roosevelt’s adventurism in Panama notwithstanding, Carnegie supported him because he believed he was committed
to international arbitration and would, with prodding from his friends, agree to negotiate a bilateral treaty
with Britain, pledging each nation to arbitrate future disputes. “We shall get an Arbitration Treaty this
time,” Carnegie wrote Morley on January 11. “President, Secretary of State, Senators, etc. feeling strong for
Britain.” There was a new buoyancy to Carnegie’s political activism, brought to the surface by his sense that
he was now working with the White House. Carnegie regarded Roosevelt much as he had Frick and Schwab: as a
brilliant young man with the best of intentions who needed his guidance and advice to realize his potential.
Roosevelt had convinced him that on essential questions of domestic and foreign policy, they were in full
agreement. The president continued to respond promptly to Carnegie’s letters, to invite him regularly to the
White House, and had arranged for him to meet his friend, conservationist Gifford Pinchot, and his new
secretary of war, William Howard Taft, with whom he hoped Carnegie would “have a chance to discuss Philippine
matters.”²¹

Carnegie was spending more time than ever in Washington, as a peace activist rather than a businessman. In
January 1904, he addressed a mass meeting called by the National Arbitration Conference to draw attention to
efforts under way to pass an Anglo-American arbitration treaty. “Mr. Carnegie,” the New York Times reported on
January 13, “was introduced as ‘the great apostle of arbitration and peace.’ He recalled that it was eighteen
years ago when he first appeared in Washington to urge arbitration. He said he appeared again to-day to labor
in the same cause which had risen phoenix-like, and could not fail. ‘We have abolished the duel,’ said he.
‘Let it be our race that takes the first step to abolish international dueling.’” The following day, Carnegie
accompanied a committee of notables from the conference to present President Roosevelt with
“resolutions…recommending the negotiation of a treaty with Great Britain.” The president, the New York Times
reported on January 14, welcomed the committee and stated “that he was heartily in accord” with its
recommendations.

In March, Carnegie signed a petition to the nominating conventions of both political parties “asking them to
pledge their constituents to secure to the people of the Philippines independence upon terms similar to those
under which Cuban independence was established.” The petition drive had been organized by Charles Francis
Adams, who had assembled a distinguished list of peace activists, writers, clergymen, and college presidents
to sign it.²²

Taft, the former governor of the Philippines, answered the petition on behalf of the president and the
Republican Party. At a dinner of the Ohio Society (to which Carnegie had been invited but was unable to
attend), Taft argued that the U.S. government would grant independence as soon as the Filipinos were ready for
it—and not a moment before.

Carnegie was disturbed by the tenor and content of Taft’s remarks and wrote the president to say so. “Up to
the time of the Ohio Dinner, I had reason to believe that Judge Taft could not possibly make a mistake, but he
talked two hours after Dinner, so I know he is human and vulnerable. My dear Mr. President, he is like an
ostrich, only his head is hid, his whole body exposed.” Why, Carnegie wanted to know, was Taft dissembling and
disguising Roosevelt’s policy, which, he assumed, was to grant independence to the Philippines? He urged
Roosevelt to set the matter right by declaring his intentions. “Judge Taft is peculiarly anxious for the
Filipinos. Now I confess I am more anxious for the good of the Americans in what I urge. I see grave
complications probable in the unfair attempt, as I think it, of enforcing the Monroe Doctrine on our own
continent, and yet claiming the right to interfere in other continents. ‘America for Americas’ implies Europe
for Europeans, Asia for Asiatics, etc.”

Carnegie thanked Roosevelt for suggesting that he meet with Taft “to talk over Philippines,” but regretted
that he would have to postpone, as he was about to sail for Europe. He looked forward to Roosevelt’s
“nomination by acclamation in June,” and assured him that he intended to “be here in the Autumn to cast my
humble vote for you, offering up in silence and anxious prayers that ‘the lesson of the day’ will continue to
exert its sacred influence over you.” He closed with a bit of name-dropping by attaching to his typewritten
letter a handwritten postscript, marked “Private,” in which he gossiped about British politics—wrongly
predicting the fall of the Conservative government and the offer of a high cabinet position to his friend
Morley. He also informed the president that he had been invited to “visit German Emperor—Queen Holland—King
Belgians,” but that he considered all these proposed meetings “poor affairs compared with President in
Washington.”²³

 

THE CARNEGIE FAMILY sailed for Britain on March 20 on the St. Paul. For Carnegie, the spring ocean passage to
Europe remained one of life’s treasures. His beloved Baba, now seven, felt much the same way. On board ship,
she had her father to herself in a way that was not possible on land. “Our voyages across the Atlantic,”
Margaret recalled in her journal, “were full of memories. Many of the family and friends came to the ship to
see us off. It was all very hectic until the whistle blew half an hour before sailing and the stewards went
along beating on gongs and calling ‘all visitors on shore.’ Masses of flowers and fruit kept arriving at our
staterooms after the ship sailed. It was all very exciting to me and fun to watch.” The first thing father and
daughter did was to see that the supply of tripe that Koelsh, their butcher, had sent along for the ocean trip
was safely stored in the ship’s refrigerator. “During the voyage Daddy feasted on this and always included me
in the feast.” Though she still spent more time with Nana than with her parents, she enjoyed special moments
with her father on board ship that were possible nowhere else. They visited the engine room and watched the
“huge pistons” and the stokers who kept the engines going. “Daddy always made friends with the chief engineer,
who took us around…. We stood on the Bridge and watched the sailor who was steering the ship. I was allowed to
put my hand on his, and ‘feel’ how he did it.”

The westward voyages in the fall were often quite rough, but Baba appeared to be as fine a sailor as her
father: “Daddy took me up to see the waves…. We would stand as far forward on the deck as we could get and
watch the plunging bow, spray washing our face at times. When the ship steadied down for a bit, Daddy recited
Shakespeare [Henry IV ]…. It was wonderful to hear those words spoken so beautifully by Daddy while standing
with him on a pitching ship. We always waited for one more big wave…. Then Daddy would raise his arm and
shout, ‘What care these roarers for the name of King.’” Most passages ended with a formal-dress concert “for
the Benefit of the Seaman’s Charities. My Father was always asked to be Chairman.” Baba was immensely proud of
her father at these moments: “The audience responded to the remarks he made, warm and friendly, but full of
fun and humor, with long and loud clapping.”²⁴

Carnegie was remarkably fit for someone approaching seventy, though he was more likely now to be sidelined
with some minor ailment, each of which, it appeared, was fully reported in the press. Louise had hoped—and
expected—that his retirement would mean more time with the family, less running around, and fewer strains on
his health. But that was not to be. To Louise’s dismay, he pushed himself even harder than before. His
campaign for international arbitration entailed regular trips to Washington. He had accepted election to the
executive committee of the National Civic Federation, to the rectorship of St. Andrews, and to the presidency
of the St. Andrews Society in New York and the Iron and Steel Institute in London. Each position brought with
it specific responsibilities, dinners, receptions, speeches. “I am to be busy while in London, three of the
old Guilds honor me,” he wrote Morley in February 1904, his schedule for the coming spring already beginning
to take shape. “Can’t decline.”²⁵

That spring was spent in London, with Carnegie racing from one honorary event and speech to the next. As the
weather got warmer, the family moved north to Skibo to enjoy a month alone before the visitors descended. “We
are all so happy up here,” Andrew wrote Dod in late May. “I’m free of ‘Lionizing’ which is harder than you can
know…but having got into harness one has to live up to it. Bertram says one day last week he refused five
invitations to perform ‘functions.’ Just now I’m a drawing card, & like the Trombonist when a fly lighted on
his music ‘He blayed im’—but I’m cautious now and don’t comply. Two electric motors here. George & his men
learning fast—They will I think relieve many horses for station work. Trout plenty, salmon not running now—our
new organ fine—I say my prayers with more unction—(a good word).”²⁶

When, a month later, James Donaldson of St. Andrews asked if he would stand for reelection as rector, he
agreed. “Anent Re-election, this is new, had not dreamt of it—I cannot deny I am pleased with my position and
think often of it—and do really just love the Dear old Lady University of Saint Andrews, but Madam says she
wishes me to give up some things that involve attention. I point out that Rectorship doesn’t…. She thinks it
does, but an address every three years isn’t much. We have adjourned the subject.”²⁷

Louise insisted that Andrew slow down and spend more time with her and Baba. Running what had become a virtual
resort hotel at Skibo was becoming too much for her. In years past, Carnegie had given her a month off in
London before and after the summer season at Skibo, but that was not enough. He decided to rearrange the Skibo
schedule so that the family could spend three weeks by themselves in total retreat—at Auchinduich, a stone
lodge on a hilltop about twenty-five miles from Skibo. Even his dearest friend John Morley was asked to
reschedule his visit so as not to conflict with Louise’s vacation. “Touching July 23—‘The Family’ go into
retreat July 22—to August 10th away up the high moors ‘Auchinduich’—Cottage on the Shin [River]. Madam thinks
higher air for two weeks best for Baba. She also gets a rest preparatory to shooting season. It is an
experiment we are to try—I think a wise one. She wished to postpone it until next year when you wrote you
could come but I insisted you could and would come later, or sooner.”²⁸

Carnegie, who had been invited to write a life of James Watt for a “Famous Scots” book series, seized upon the
enforced retreat to get started. As he wrote Morley from the lodge, the “Hilltop Experiment” had proved “a
decided success. Lou and Baba and I get a chance to live with each other. We are enjoying our holiday in this
delightful cozy lodge. Everything very nice.” He was particularly delighted with his new writing project. “It
is fascinating. I tell you I have a great mind—a genius to portray. I am in love with my hero and enjoy
leisurely penning a few paragraphs of the book.” His full-length biography, well researched and written with
his usual fluency, was published the following May to good reviews. The book was an old-fashioned hagiography,
with a quite lucid description of the science that had gone into the invention of the steam engine. Much of it
was composed of long passages imported wholesale from other writers, but such was the style of the day.
Richard Gilder asked if he might have permission to serialize the biography in the Century.²⁹

The stone lodge at Auchinduich, though off the beaten path, was close enough to Skibo for Carnegie to get mail
and newspapers. With Roosevelt up for election to a full term in the fall, he kept a careful eye on American
politics from his perch on the Shin River. On July 28, he wrote Morley of his fears that Roosevelt might be
defeated. “Poor fellow—his path isn’t so easy as it promised to be—He failed to keep in touch with our Leaders
in the Senate…I warned him and one or two of his set that all was not well—Then his extreme militancy, Big
Navy, etc. etc.—chill many. Cleveland would have beaten him and [Alton] Parker [the Democratic nominee] may.
Odds slightly against this however, I think.”³⁰

In October, the Carnegies sailed back to New York, accompanied by Morley, whom Roosevelt, after reading his
biography of Gladstone, had invited to the White House. Carnegie, who had for years begged his friend to visit
America, seized on the opportunity to plan a triumphant national tour, culminating in a visit to Pittsburgh to
speak at Founders’ Day, the annual tribute to Carnegie put on by the Carnegie Institute. Morley suggested a
few possible lecture topics. Carnegie thought “‘The Man behind the Book’…generally the more interesting,”
though he warned Morley not to expect too much, or, for that matter, too little of his Pittsburgh audience.
“You will have a reading audience not in the main—but an element quite strong…. Pittsburgh is the seat of
materialism (Birmingham) but it has in the Scotch element a race that reads and is supposed to think after a
fashion. The German is also to the fore. Scotch Irish prominent also.”³¹

 

CARNEGIE had, three years into his retirement, succeeded in shifting shape: from ruthless steelmaker to
peacemaker and advocate of international arbitration. On Sunday, November 6, two days before Roosevelt was
elected to a full four-year term, Carnegie sat down for an artfully illustrated interview with William
Griffith of the New York Times. The article was headlined “ANDREW CARNEGIE, APOSTLE OF PEACE.” Grabbing with
both hands the pulpit offered him, Carnegie championed “The Hague Peace Tribunal as the greatest and most
enduring monument of modern civilization. Never has the eminent philanthropist and patron of the Peace
Congress,” the reporter gushed, “expressed himself more clearly and comprehensively concerning a supreme
ambition of his life—to see the dream of international arbitration come true—than in thus throwing the light
of his searching and vigorous intellect upon many vital and far-reaching questions of the hour. Since
returning from abroad a month ago other interests with him have been subordinated to studying the Peace
Congress idea in its many opposing phases. It was from a mind thoroughly saturated with the subject that the
great ironmaster and donor of libraries delivered his remarkable prophecy as to the future amalgamation of the
power of Europe.”

The Times interview marked a turning point in the public presentation of Andrew Carnegie. He was now the
“apostle of peace.” There was no mention of tariffs, Homestead, or strikes. Instead, Carnegie, with the
authority of a seasoned statesmen, discoursed on the Russo-Japanese War, the amalgamation of Europe “into one
centralized government,” and the future of Canadian-American relations. When asked about the “Philippine
problem,” he prefaced his remarks by reminding the reporter that he had “just returned from Europe and [had] a
pretty clear knowledge of European opinion.” To bolster this assertion, he had his secretary fetch some
“letters and articles,” evidence that his views were sought on both sides of the Atlantic. The illustrations
that accompanied the article carried forward the theme. One showed Carnegie with head bent and hands touching,
as if in prayer. He looked older, wiser, determined, almost stoic. The article ended with Carnegie’s taking
his leave of the reporter “to spend a brief half hour hearing his favorite tunes [played by his organist]….
Perhaps he has taken a chair in front of the fireplace…. Perhaps a mist has gathered between the shrewd gray
eyes of the great philanthropist and the fire into which they are so intently gazing. Of peace—if not of peace
congresses—the bowed figure is perhaps thinking—thinking and dreaming.”³²

As fawning as the portrait was, it was not untrue. Though Carnegie would continue to attract more publicity
for his library donations, he was personally invested in the crusade for world peace in a way he had never
been in his libraries. For every other philanthropic endeavor he was involved in, he delegated authority to
handpicked lieutenants. The peace campaign alone required his personal attention—or so he believed. Money was
not going to buy peace in the same way that it might purchase organs or libraries or college fellowships or
“sweetness and light” for the working people of Dunfermline. Only the world’s leaders could bring peace to the
world—and only Andrew Carnegie had access to all of them.

[1]: footnote34.html

## THIRTY-FIVE

## “Inveterate Optimist,” 1905–1906

AS HE ENTERED his seventieth year, Andrew Carnegie had become something of a national monument. With his
distinctive accent, his deep voice, and his seeming joy in letting his opinions fly, he had long before become
a favorite of reporters. His words were now frequently illustrated with his likeness. The image of the small,
troll-like body, with the full white St. Nicholas beard, and dark, alternately brooding and sparkling eyes,
appeared with greater and greater frequency after the turn of the century. He took as much joy in being
photographed and having his likeness portrayed as he did in being quoted. Lining the walls of his New York
study were dozens of portraits, few of them terribly flattering. During an interview with the New York Times
Sunday Magazine, published on November 6, 1904, he turned to the man sketching him and “citing a ludicrous
caricature on the wall…laughingly warned the artist not to omit any lines from his face, lest he pass
unrecognized among his friends.”

There was little danger of this. His had already become one of the most recognizable visages in the country.

What captivated the press—and the public—was his willingness to speak his mind on so many different issues. He
was seldom without a quip or a word of wisdom for the reporters who followed him. In an interview in the New
York Times published on April 27, 1905, Carnegie, before sailing for Britain, “defied the reporters to ask him
a question which he couldn’t answer. He seemed to take great delight in the volley of questions fired at him,
and when the newspaper men ran out of ammunition Mr. Carnegie supplied them with new subjects.” Asked what he
thought about his niece Nancy marrying a riding master, he responded that he was delighted that she had not
married some worthless duke. That comment, of course, called for a rebuttal, quickly forthcoming from the Duke
of Manchester, who defended the nobility, thereby giving Carnegie yet another opportunity to make his point.

[image]

WHEN MR. CARNEGIE’S MONEY IS GONE.

Articles about him appeared with great regularity. When he came down with food poisoning in Switzerland,
indigestion in Atlanta, and lumbago in New York, the incidents were fully reported on, with follow-up stories
as his condition improved. Every time he gave a speech, it was excerpted or summarized in the next day’s
papers. His views were entirely unpredictable. In the fall of 1905, he told reporters that he considered
William Randolph Hearst, an independent candidate for mayor for New York, “extraordinary” and “sincere,” and
endorsed his call for municipal ownership of public utilities. The following year, when Hearst ran for
governor, this time as a Democrat, Carnegie attacked him fiercely, maintaining that the contest between
Charles Evans Hughes, the Republican candidate, and Hearst was not a simple party contest, but “a contest of
the best people against the worst people.” He was willing to support Hearst when he took on Tammany Hall, but
not when he ran against Republicans. Carnegie’s attack so rankled Hearst and Clarence Shearn, his campaign
manager, that the latter felt obligated to go after “this unlettered laird of Skibo, Scotland,” with
remarkable venom the next morning, declaring that Carnegie was guilty of all sorts of foul deeds from “stock
watering” to manufacturing defective armor to “corrupting Pennsylvania officials” to “defying the laws of the
United States by taking millions in secret rebates.”¹

Carnegie’s appearances at public meetings were guaranteed to draw attention. In December 1903, he attended the
annual meeting of the Educational Alliance, held at Jefferson Street and East Broadway and was accompanied
into the hall by a phalanx of reporters. “By what he said formally and informally, Andrew Carnegie added
interest,” the New York Times reported on December 14. “During the reading of the eleventh annual report by
the President, Isidor Straus, Mr. Carnegie looked wonderfully like a man who was dozing, but in his speech
afterward he showed that he had lost no point in the document.” He came out vigorously in opposition to
attempts to regulate or restrict immigration, then praised the immigrants’ capacity for assimilation. “Ladies
and gentlemen, language makes race. Show me the man who speaks English, reads Shakespeare and Bobby Burns, and
I’ll show you a man who has absorbed the American principles…. Let, say, a Russian come here, and he will soon
learn that any man’s privilege is every man’s right. You needn’t be afraid that he won’t become an American.”
He continued to perform for the reporters long after the speeches had ended. “Out in the hallway, after the
meeting, while a solicitous friend was tying a muffler about his neck, Mr. Carnegie held a little reception…‘I
think the Scotch a pretty smart people, but I must say I think the Jews are smarter. I think I’m a little
afraid of them.’ ‘You needn’t fear, Mr. Carnegie,’ replied Mr. Straus promptly and good-naturedly, ‘The Jews
are not likely to invade Scotland—that is the only country in which they cannot live.’”

By the turn of the twentieth century, the Andrew Carnegie story, told and retold in his own articles, books,
and speeches, and paraphrased in dozens of interviews and profiles, had become so well known that an
enterprising Cleveland woman, Mrs. Cassie Chadwick, used it to manufacture a sidebar all her own.

In 1902, the year after Carnegie retired with his $226 million in U.S. Steel gold bonds, Chadwick confided to
some rather prominent Cleveland lawyers and bankers that she was the illegitimate daughter of Andrew Carnegie,
who, being a forthright, responsible man, wished to establish a $10 million trust to care for her after his
death. With these rumors, reinforced by a forged trust agreement and several forged “notes,” Mrs. Chadwick
borrowed hundreds of thousands of dollars from men who were only too happy to lend Andrew Carnegie’s daughter
whatever she asked for.

By the fall of 1904, as her debts approached the million-dollar mark, creditors began to call in her loans.
Unable to pay back anything, she tried to declare bankruptcy and escape unharmed; but as it became clear that
she had defrauded almost every bank in Cleveland, local authorities indicted her for forging Carnegie’s name
to a series of documents. The newspapers seized on the story with gusto, not because they put any credence in
Chadwick’s claims, but because she had been so brazen in her larcenies. Day after day, Carnegie’s name
appeared in news headlines in Cleveland and across the country. Would he or would he not be subpoenaed to
verify that the signatures were not his own and that he was not related to Mrs. Cassie Chadwick? Would he
comply?

Carnegie, of course, would have preferred to have been left alone in New York. When the first subpoena arrived
in December, he claimed that he was too ill to travel to Cleveland and delivered a note from his medical
adviser, Dr. Garmany, who confirmed that his patient was suffering “from acute lumbago.” By March 1905, he
could hold out no longer and made the trip to Cleveland—by private railway car. He arrived in time for jury
selection, spent a day in the courtroom, and then left without giving testimony or making any statements to
the press. Though the defense attorney tried to make much of Carnegie’s disappearance, it did Cassie Chadwick
little good. She was sentenced to jail, where she died in late 1907.

Though news of the Cassie Chadwick scandal was splashed across the front pages from November 1903 through the
spring of 1904, the story has not been covered in any of his biographies. It is significant, nonetheless, not
because there is a scintilla of evidence that Cassie was Carnegie’s illegitimate daughter—she most certainly
was not—but because the construction of the story and the notice it was given in the daily press tell us a
great deal about Carnegie’s place in American culture and society at the turn of the century. Cassie Chadwick
was no fool. She had chosen Carnegie, not John D. Rockefeller or James J. Hill or Henry Clay Frick, because
Carnegie almost alone among the robber barons of his generation was not known as an ascetic. He was instead a
man who took his pleasures seriously. He was also extraordinarily generous. Had he fathered a daughter out of
wedlock in his twenties, he would have supported her lavishly for the rest of her life, as every one of
Cassie’s dupes believed.²

 

FROM THE mid-1900s on, Andrew Carnegie began to gather more headlines, though of a quite different nature, by
adding his name and dollars to the cause of simplified spelling. He had been persuaded to enter the campaign
by two rather distinguished New Yorkers, Melvil Dewey, the inventor of the Dewey decimal system, and Brander
Matthews, a Columbia professor and drama critic. Carnegie seized on the idea of simplified spelling as not
only a logical evolutionary improvement of the language but as a vehicle for world peace. Simplified spelling
would bring English-speaking people closer together by eliminating the inconsistencies between English and
American-English spelling and promoting English as a truly global language. (It would also have made life
simpler for Carnegie, who was a notoriously poor speller.)

The Simplified Spelling Board, supported in large part by Carnegie funds, recommended that the first steps
toward reforming the language include substituting “f” for “ph”; dropping the “u” the English used to spell
“honour” and “labour”; and eliminating silent “e’s” everywhere. The movement, though endorsed by President
Roosevelt, who urged his administration to use simplified spelling in official documents, went nowhere. One by
one the distinguished gentlemen who had signed on returned to the old ways. Only Carnegie refused to
capitulate. Since his days at the telegraph office, he had employed a form of “telegraphese” in his
letterwriting, with incomplete sentences connected by lots of dashes. From about 1906 onward, he insisted on
using spellings like “enuf,” “delite,” “hart,” “hav,” “offerd” in his personal letters and public
communications. The effect was maddening. Even Sam Clemens tried to wean his friend from his new obsession. At
a dinner given for Carnegie at the New York Engineers’ Club in December 1907, Clemens admitted that while
Carnegie’s face was “fairly scintillating with fictitious innocence,” as if he had “never committed a crime in
his life,” he was in truth more dangerous than Torquemada. “That old fellow shed some blood in the
Inquisition, but Mr. Carnegie has brought destruction to the entire race. I know he didn’t mean it to be a
crime, but it was just the same. He’s got us all so we can’t spell anything.”³

After dutifully forwarding $25,000 a year to the Spelling Board and winning a few victories, “catalog” and
“thru,” among them, Carnegie abandoned the campaign in 1915. “A more useless body of men never came into
association, judging from the effects they produce,” he wrote of the Simplified Spelling Board directors. “I
think I have been patient long enuf. I have much better use for twenty-five thousand dollars a year.”⁴

 

WHILE THE newspaper-reading public may have been titillated by the Cassie Chadwick scandal and amused by
Carnegie’s forays into simplified spelling, it could not help but admire the way the “Star-spangled Scotchman”
was setting an example for his fellow millionaires. As the New York Times reported in a Sunday Magazine cover
story on June 12, 1904, Carnegie was a major figure in the transformation of “private charity” into “organized
business.” According to figures supplied by the Charity Organization Society, $80 million had been “expended
in philanthropical and charitable donations” over the past twelve months, $40 million of it by individuals
residing in New York City. “Giving away money on a large scale,” the Times reported, “has become a regularly
organized business.” Leading the way was Andrew Carnegie, who not only disbursed far more funds than any other
individual ($95.9 million to Rockefeller’s $32.9), but had evolved the most highly developed and “methodical
system” for doing so. “Perhaps the general public has the illusion that Andrew Carnegie shelved his business
cares and responsibilities when he retired from active commercial life. A glance at his daily life in his
Fifth Avenue mansion will dispel this illusion.”

Carnegie’s most recent endowment had been $5 million for a “hero fund.” The impetus for the new trust had been
the January 1904 mining accident in Harwick, a town about fifteen miles northeast of Pittsburgh, in which 179
miners, the majority of them boys in their teens, had been killed. In the aftermath of the disaster, there
were two more deaths: of “heroes” who descended into the mine to rescue survivors.

Carnegie’s first impulse had been to establish a private pension fund to support the families of the deceased.
But as he thought more about the disaster—and read Richard Gilder’s poem about the “heroes of the land”—he
decided instead to establish a new trust to provide for these and other fallen heroes. In March 1904, before
sailing for Britain, he signed the deed of trust conveying $5 million in U.S. Steel gold bonds to the Carnegie
Hero Fund Commission, which was to be overseen by twenty-one hand-picked commissioners. Included among the men
he chose as commissioners were his old Allegheny City friends Bobby Pitcairn and Tom Miller; Thomas Morrison,
his distant cousin who had earlier managed the Duquesne and Edgar Thomson plants; Thomas Lynch, who, as
president of Frick Coke, had once been his sworn enemy; and William Abbott, whom he had blamed for the 1889
Homestead settlement, but subsequently reconciled with.

The Hero Fund, like Carnegie’s other philanthropies, was run as a business operation. Responsibility for
oversight was delegated to commissioners who were charged with seeking out “heroes” who deserved honor—and
support—for their deeds. The grants were intended for private citizens or those who worked in the “peaceful
vocations.” No grant was “to be continued unless it is soberly and properly used, and the recipients remain
respectable, well-behaved members of the community.” Medals would accompany all rewards.

Carnegie was prouder of his Hero Fund than he was of any of his other programs, because it was the only one he
had created from whole cloth, without any help from friends or advisers. In a letter to the English writer
Frederick Harrison in June, he referred to the “Hero Fund [as] my pet child—Here’s worship of Humanity in its
highest form—Heroism.” “No one suggested it to me,” he explained in his Autobiography. “As far as I know, it
never had been thought of; hence it is emphatically ‘my ain bairn.’”⁵

The Hero Fund, Frederick Lynch, one of the original commissioners, insisted, could only have been conceived by
Andrew Carnegie. “It grew out of his intense conviction that it took just as much heroism to save life as it
did to take it, whereas the man who took it got most of the recognition. How often I have heard him say: ‘The
more men you can kill the greater hero you are’; and again, ‘Most of the monuments in the world are to
somebody who has killed a lot of his fellowmen.’”⁶

There was, as Carnegie knew, something both innovative and untimely in his attempt to draw attention from the
martial virtues by honoring civilian heroes. As a disciple of Herbert Spencer, Carnegie not only hoped but
believed that the age of barbarism, savagery, bloodlust, and war was coming to an end, and would be succeeded
by an era of peace in which non-martial values and definitions of true manliness would prevail. “The heroes of
barbarism past wounded or killed their fellows; the heroes of our civilized day serve or save theirs. Such the
difference between physical and moral courage, between barbarism and civilization.”⁷

The first twelve heroes honored included a seventeen-year-old boy from Wilkinsburg, Pennsylvania, who had
risked his life rescuing two drowning friends, and a miner from Sherrodsville, Ohio, who had died attempting
to save a comrade from suffocation. Recipients of awards—or their heirs—received medals, with the inscription
from the New Testament: “Greater Love Hath No Man Than This, That a Man Lay Down His Life for His Friends.” In
its first one hundred years of operation, the Carnegie Hero Fund Commission, based in Pittsburgh, dispersed
$27 million to honor and support over nine thousand Carnegie heroes in the United States and Canada with cash
awards, college fellowships, pensions, and medals. Hero Fund commissions remain in operation today in the
United Kingdom, the United States, and nine European nations.⁸

 

CARNEGIE was delighted with Roosevelt’s election in 1908. As an unelected president, Roosevelt had been
constrained to follow the mandates of the man whom the people had elected in 1900. Now, after March 1905, he
could jettison the legacy of imperialism handed him by McKinley and become the statesman for peace he was
meant to be. Carnegie was still not entirely comfortable with Roosevelt—and would never be. The president was
too much of a militarist, too committed to building battleships, and too much of an imperialist. “He needs to
be watched,” Carnegie told a New York Times reporter in a front-page interview on October 24, 1904, “but
really he is a man of peace.”

Unbeknownst to Roosevelt, Carnegie had appointed himself presidential adviser on arbitration treaties. Early
in 1905, after Roosevelt’s election but before his inauguration, the Senate amended the arbitration agreements
with Great Britain, France, Germany, Switzerland, Norway, and Sweden that Secretary of State Hay had
negotiated by adding a clause requiring explicit Senate approval before any matter could be submitted to
international arbitration. Roosevelt, convinced that the Senate amendments rendered the agreements
meaningless, threatened to withdraw them. Carnegie urged him not to do so. “May I venture Mr. President to
pray you consider well before withdrawing these treaties…. We shall have the substance & this is what you are
after—fit additions to your great service rendered peace by sending [the disputing sides in the Venezuela
conflict] to The Hague.”⁹

Roosevelt, barely containing his anger at Carnegie’s presumption in offering him advice on diplomacy and how
to deal with the Senate, responded bluntly in two separate letters. “I do not agree with you about the
treaties. I am not willing to go into a farce” and approve treaties so weakened by amendments that they were
virtually meaningless. In the second letter, marked “Personal,” Roosevelt “supplemented” his note to Carnegie
by stating that Secretary of State Hay agreed that the treaties should be vetoed. Carnegie let the matter
drop.¹⁰

The president was in no mood to enter into debate with Carnegie on toothless treaties while events in the Far
East required his attention. On February 8, 1904, the Japanese fleet had launched a surprise attack and siege
on the Russian naval squadron at Port Arthur, Mauchuria. Now, in the second year of the war, Roosevelt was
trying to broker an agreement between Russia and Japan. In June 1905, he succeeded, when both nations accepted
his invitation to negotiate peace terms in Portsmouth, New Hampshire. On August 30, the newspapers, with
banner headlines, announced that agreement had been reached on the terms for a final treaty. The following
day, the New York Times published on page two a small item headlined “KAISER WILHELM OVERJOYED. Congratulates
President, Who Thanks Him for His Co-Operation.” Directly underneath, given equal prominence, was a second
article: “CARNEGIE AND GUESTS HAPPY. Party at Skibo Castle Send Thankful Congratulations.”

Though Carnegie had had nothing to do with the negotiations, not even pretending to offer advice on them, in
sending his congratulatory telegram and releasing it to the press, he was signaling to the president that,
absent though he might be at Skibo, he was ever present in the campaign for international arbitration. The
signatories on his telegram included the Archbishop of Canterbury, Columbia University president Nicholas
Murray Butler, Secretary of Agriculture James Wilson, and John Morley, who had left Skibo the day before the
telegram was drafted and sent. Carnegie, knowing how much Roosevelt admired Morley, had tacked on his name,
expecting that it would add luster to his own.

Morley was not amused. “Between such friends as you and me frankness is best, and I have something to complain
of,” he telegrammed Carnegie on September 5. “Surely it is rather a strong order to put my name to a message
to the President without my leave, and not even to think it worthwhile to tell me that you had done so? Don’t
you think it is? At any rate, I do. In a very small way I am a sort of public man, and a public man cannot
safely allow even his best friend to use his name at large, can he? I daresay I should agree with what you
said; still I prefer to put things in my own way…. I feel bound to make my humble protest, and then pass
on.”¹¹

Carnegie wrote back the same day offering a rather offhanded apology in the form of a blow-by-blow account of
how Morley’s name had come to be appended to the telegram. “We celebrate Peace (Madam keeps all flags) and
table finely decorated. Walls also…. Proposal [is made to] cable Congratulatory Message to
President—Carried—Much applause. A voice [adds] we ought to have Mr. Morley’s name with some others to cable….
I said if he were here he would be among first to sign—He is not entirely outside our party his shade still
hovers about us. I’ll take responsibility add his name…. Had you not been of the party no one would have
suggested your name of course, but it did seem you still had some share with us. You expected to be
present—called away. While I must expert a stern verdict, let it be please, not guilty but don’t do it again.
I promise. I was and am still so certain that you would have been glad of the opportunity to sign, that I
cannot regret having got you in—I think it was Butler who suggested it but am not quite sure. It was an
enthusiastic moment.”¹²

If ever the future looked bright for peace, it was now. The British and the French had, the year before,
signed the Entente Cordiale, an historic treaty of friendship settling, they hoped forever, their disputes
over the Sudan and Morocco. In a letter to the editor of the Echo de Paris, republished in the New York Times
on October 9, 1905, Carnegie expressed his hope that America would join the alliance. “It does not seem to me
that this should be a chimera. Shall not this be the first achievement realized in the twentieth century? And
may we not see in the near future the incorporation in this pacific alliance of the German power, already
practically the kinsman of England and the United States. Then never more could the dangers of war be conjured
up between Germany and France, America, or England, or between any other two of these powers…. Truly the world
does move forward.”

That same month, Carnegie returned to St. Andrews to deliver his second rectorial address, in which he called
upon the students to dedicate themselves to the cause of peace through arbitration. “You will find the world
much better than your forefathers did,” he began. “There is profound satisfaction in this, that all grows
better; but there is still one evil in our day, so far exceeding any other in extent and effect, that I
venture to bring it to your notice…. There still remains the foulest blot that has ever disgraced the earth,
the killing of civilized men by men like wild beasts as a permissible mode of settling disputes.” He then
proceeded to reproduce citation after citation, in no apparent order—from Rousseau to Homer, Euripides,
Buddhists, St. Irenæus, Luther, all stating in their own words that war was hell. After mini-lectures on the
history of “reforms in war” and the arbitration movement, he put away the results of his and his assistants’
research and returned to the present. Not only was war immoral, uncivilized, ineffective, and contrary to the
tenets of all the world’s great religions, but preparation for it was sapping the vitality and prosperity of
the great nations of Europe. Returning to the notion that had animated the development of his Hero Trust
program, he attacked head-on the false and dangerous idea that war “develops the manly virtue of courage.” On
the contrary, war enhanced only man’s capacity for “physical courage, which some animals and the lower order
of savage men possess in the highest degree. According to this idea, the more man resembles the bulldog the
higher he is developed as man.” Carnegie ended this overstuffed, overlong sermon with a direct appeal to the
students of St. Andrews to commit themselves to “this holy work and hasten the end of war” by forming their
own “Leagues of Peace.” “Drop all other public questions, concentrate your efforts upon the one question which
carries in its bosom the issue of peace or of war. Lay aside your politics until this war issue is settled.
This is the time to be effective…. If in every constituency,” he concluded, “there were organized an
arbitration league…it is surprising how soon both parties would accept arbitration as a policy. I know of no
work that would prove more fruitful for your country and for the world than this. It is by concentrating upon
one issue that great causes are won.”¹³

For a man who believed in accomplishing reform by working from the top down, with presidents and prime
ministers, Carnegie’s suggestion for the students of St. Andrews was rather startling. He was, it appeared,
returning to the tactics used by his Chartist and unionist forbears, who had organized local, often secret
societies to agitate for reform in Dunfermline. “The way of the reformer is hard,” he had written his cousin
Dod in March, “but both Lauders and Carnegies were always agitators until present generation.” Had any
individual or group approached him at St. Andrews to ask for financial support to organize “Leagues of Peace,”
he would no doubt have granted it. But as no one did, his idea was left to languish when, directly after the
speech, he left St. Andrews and Britain to return to the United States.¹⁴

 

“JUST HOME, not yet settled,” Carnegie wrote Morley from New York City on November 1. “Head whirls a little.
Much to take up and finish. Twenty-five Presidents Universities—all day session here & lunch Wednesday—on Ten
Million Pension Fund.”¹⁵

Carnegie was referring to the first annual meeting of the board of yet another of his trusts, the Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. He had, as had become his practice, announced the establishment of
the trust—endowed with $10 million of U.S. Steel gold bonds—in the spring before sailing to Europe. The
foundation’s mission was “to provide retiring pensions for the teachers of universities, colleges, and
technical schools in our country, Canada, and Newfoundland…without regard to race, sex, creed or color.”
Faculty of public institutions were excluded, because Carnegie believed the states would want complete
autonomy in all financial matters.

Because the interest on $10 million was not enough to provide pensions for all professors and because he had
no intention of giving money to institutions that were church-affiliated, he empowered his board to determine,
within these guidelines, which institutions would be eligible for Carnegie pensions. It is doubtful that he
had any idea, in doing so, of the unintended consequences of his action. His board of directors, comprised of
the most distinguished presidents of the most distinguished American universities and colleges, did. Carnegie
pensions would, in a relatively short time, change the face of higher education in America. Those institutions
that were given the right to award Carnegie pensions reaped enormous rewards as potential professors
gravitated to them. The most controversial aspect and, in the long run, one of the most important of the
provisions in the deed of grant was Carnegie’s prohibition on giving pensions to professors at sectarian
colleges. Colleges and universities that had once been church connected but were now “free to all men of all
creeds or of none” were invited to apply. Those which were “under control of a sect, or require Trustees (or a
majority thereof), Officers, Faculty or Students, to belong to any specified sect, or which impose any
theological test, are to be excluded.” Carnegie was adamant that these rules be followed. Institutions that
sought pension support were required to fill out a questionnaire and attach a “memorandum explaining sectarian
connection.” No exceptions were made, not even for schools like Brown and Northwestern, which considered
themselves fully nonsectarian but had provisions in their charter that reserved trustee seats for members of
particular denominations.¹⁶

In the long run, one of the board’s most significant decisions, with which Carnegie had little to do, was to
restrict eligibility to institutions with endowments of at least $200,000 and to require that students
accepted for matriculation must have previously taken a minimum number of academic courses in high school
(later defined in terms of “Carnegie Units”). As the biographer Joseph Wall, who served for many years as a
college dean, would later remark, “By 1909…the Carnegie Foundation had become the national unofficial
accrediting agency for colleges and universities.” It would function as such until at least 1949, when the
National Commission on Accreditation was organized.¹⁷

In March 1908, Carnegie gave the foundation an additional $5 million, so that it could begin funding pensions
at state universities. In 1913,$1.25 million more was donated. When, by 1918, it became apparent that the
foundation would never be able to provide pensions for more than a portion of the nation’s ever-expanding
supply of college teachers, the trustees devised and funded a new contributory pension plan, known as the
Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association.

 

CARNEGIE had long been in the habit of writing to his friend John Morley on Sundays. When, on November 2,
1905, a Thursday, he sent off his second letter in two weekdays, Morley must have sensed that something was
amiss. Carnegie began with his usual chitchat about his business schedule: “I’m going to Boston to deliver
address Scots Society 248th anniversary, true.” He then segued into the real reason for the letter: Louise had
intended on going with him to Boston, but had decided against the trip at the last minute, because she was
consumed by anxiety about eight-year-old Baba, who had injured her leg in Scotland, apparently by falling off
a swing. It was thought at first that Baba had sprained her ankle and she was given a cast to wear for six
weeks. Upon her return to the United States, a “leading specialist” was called in. He removed the ankle cast
and replaced it with one which “enveloped entire leg.” The prognosis was as uncertain as the diagnosis. The
doctors didn’t know what was wrong with the leg or whether it would entirely heal. Margaret’s cousin Nancy,
who was an infant at the time, recalled later that “there was something the matter with her legs and she could
not walk. It was said that it came from eating strawberries with the sun on them at Skibo.” Margaret herself
was told years later that she had suffered from some form of tuberculosis of the limb. Whatever the cause, the
illness or injury was, Margaret thought, badly handled.¹⁸

Carnegie was frightened both for himself and for his wife, who, he feared, would not be able to bear the
strain. Nothing in his previous experience had quite prepared him for this. “We are having the first acute
pang of grief,” he wrote Morley. “Baba’s leg in plaster cast…. She has fixed stilts for it & can hobble about
a little—is very patient & cheerful but it does go deep into our hearts, deep, deep—It may only be result of
sprain but I fear Edinburgh specialist Prof. Stiles believed it to be more serious—We are so anxious, can’t
tell for three or four months & naturally fear the worst. It is terrible.”¹⁹

For the next two and a half years, from ages eight and a half to age eleven, Margaret would remain a virtual
invalid, her leg encased in plaster casts or splints, supported by an iron brace so that she could hobble
along without putting weight on her foot. As she grew taller, the plaster casts were removed and replaced with
new ones. “On the whole,” Margaret remembered years later, “it was not too bad, but grim at times. The good
side was the new and delicious things I was given to eat—juicy broiled lamb chops, fresh lettuce and
grapefruit…. The grim side was not being able to walk easily and play, and being pretty uncomfortable at
times.” Her long convalescence was “especially hard for Mother.” While Louise refrained from spoiling her
daughter with gifts, “she always thought of the right things to do for ‘me.’ The first Christmas that my
splint was on, she gave me a baby doll and all the clothes for day and night, and a bassinet with sheets,
pillows and pillowcases.” Lu-Lu, the doll, would, in the years to come, provide hour upon hour of pleasure for
a little girl who could only play sitting down. Her father was mostly absent during these years, though
Margaret seemed to take this in stride. “I did not see so much of Daddy, but when I did, it was always
exciting. He believed in Fairies, and made me believe in them too. When he gave me his soft long-drawn out
whistle, something for me was dropped in his pocket! At times other lovely mysterious presents were found
under my pillow when I went to bed at night—amethyst, rose quartz,” and other beautiful polished stones.²⁰

During the next three years, though his concentration was at times broken by worries about Baba and the toll
her illness was taking on Louise, Carnegie committed himself anew to the struggle for world peace through
arbitration. Nothing, it appeared, could dampen the optimism of the new “apostle for peace.” When news reached
America of the slaughter of the Russian Jews in 1905, Carnegie joined in the relief effort by sending a check
for $10,000 to his friend Oscar Straus. “The terrible crimes being committed,” he wrote on November 11, “are
such as might lead one to lose faith in humanity…. Do not be discouraged, however. Under the law of evolution,
we must steadily, though slowly, march upward, and finally reach the true conception of the brotherhood of
man.”²¹

On November 25, 1905, Andrew Carnegie celebrated his seventieth birthday. Ten days later, he received the best
of belated birthday presents when the Liberal Party in Britain won its first election in more than a decade.
The cabinet, which was installed in December, was filled with friends and acquaintances. It was, Carnegie
would later joke to Morley, “a Skibo-Dunfermline cabinet.” Lord Elgin from Dunfermline, who headed up
Carnegie’s Scottish Universities Trust, was named colonial secretary; Campbell-Bannerman, from nearby Glasgow,
became prime minister; John Morley took up the India office; Richard Haldane, James Bryce, and Herbert
Asquith, all of whom served with Elgin and Morley on the Scottish Universities board, were appointed secretary
for war, chief secretary for Ireland, and chancellor of the exchequer; Gladstone’s son, Herbert, was named
home secretary.²²

Carnegie took off at once for Washington to celebrate the news of his friends’ ascendancy and make sure that
everyone knew how welcome he would now be in the corridors of British power. He had begun to consider himself
something of a Washington insider, and indeed he was, with direct access to the president and Elihu Root, who
had been called back to Washington as secretary of state on John Hay’s death in July. “Saw President & Root,
etc.,” he wrote Morley on December 17, just after the British elections, and “told them no fear of any
discrimination against America from the Government all of whom were well wishers.”²³

What Carnegie did not know was that while Roosevelt afforded him unparalleled access and appeared to take his
policy recommendations seriously, he had nothing but contempt for the little Scotsman. The athletic, patrician
New York-bred cowboy who had chosen public service over business found little to admire—or respect—in
Carnegie’s achievements as a businessman and philanthropist or in his single-minded dedication to peace.

In mid-November 1905, having learned of Carnegie’s October “rectorial address” at St. Andrews and his insults
to the manly, martial virtues, the president confessed to Whitelaw Reid that he had

tried hard to like Carnegie, but it is pretty difficult. There is no type of man for whom I feel a more
contemptuous abhorrence than for the one who makes a God of mere money-making and at the same time is always
yelling out that kind of utterly stupid condemnation of war which in almost every case springs from a
combination of defective physical courage, of unmanly shrinking from pain and effort, and of hopelessly
twisted ideals. All the suffering from Spanish war comes far short of the suffering, preventable and
non-preventable, among the operators of the Carnegie steel works, and among the small investors, during the
time that Carnegie was making his fortune…. It is as noxious folly to denounce war per se as it is to denounce
business per se. Unrighteous war is a hideous evil; but I am not at all sure that it is worse evil than
business unrighteousness.²⁴

What rankled Roosevelt most—and one can see how it might—was that the same little capitalist who urged the
president to do the right and moral thing in the Philippines, Panama, and international diplomacy had never
done the right or moral thing as a businessman. It was a harsh criticism, but not entirely uncalled for.

 

CARNEGIE, though tormented by Baba’s distress, refused to let his anxieties slow down his crusading for peace.
“I have numerous engagements,” he wrote Morley in mid-December. “Speech in Boston. Three here last week. One
at dinner to Mark Twain 70th birthday [Clemens, born on November 30, 1835, was five days younger than
Carnegie]—a notable gathering. But I must not forget to report Doctors gratified at Baba’s progress—decidedly
so although unable to pronounce until March upon its nature. It looks more favorable however and this lessens
the throbs that come so suddenly. They are not quite so keen with agony.”²⁵

Three days after Margaret got her Christmas doll, the family packed up and went south to Cumberland Island.
“We are all off tonight for own sister’s island off coast Georgia to spend winter because doctors insist upon
our little darling escaping New York winter,” Carnegie wrote James Bryce. “She has a sprained ankle and
sunshine and sea beach demanded. It is quite a change but everything must bend for her sake.”²⁶

They moved into the “delightful cottage” close to Lucy’s house, left vacant when Andrew’s nephew, Thomas
Morrison Carnegie, moved to New York to work for his uncle’s “professor pension program.” In a letter to
Morley on January 14, 1906, Carnegie sounded a bit more upbeat. “We are happy. Happy because our little
darling has improved so much. Our own Doctor came with us for a week & has no doubt the trouble will be
outgrown—It is of Gouty nature & not as the Edinburgh specialist feared. This seems decided, a heavy weight is
lifted from our hearts. Although we cannot but be anxious—Baba is happy playing on the Smooth Sandy beach
quite near, & in driving about. We have everything here. Houses, Boats, Yachts, Autos, etc. Weather sunny &
not too warm. The swelling of her legs almost gone. She eats & sleeps well & in short a speedier recovery
could not have been made so far.”²⁷

Every morning, Margaret was pushed down to the beach in a wheelchair and then transferred to a specially
constructed low wooden cart, from which she could bend over to pick seashells, as she was pulled along by her
nanny. On Sunday mornings, Andrew and Louise accompanied her to the beach, with her father pushing her chair.
“There was a bench on the way to sit on. Mother and I stopped there while Daddy went for a walk along the
beach.”²⁸

Carnegie, exiled from New York to Cumberland Island, returned to writing his “Memoirs—am trying to tell the
Story for our friends.” He found it ironic that while Morley was giving up his literary work to enter the
cabinet, he, Carnegie, was again writing. This did not mean that Carnegie had any intention of abandoning his
own political work. In mid-January, he wrote Morley to tell him that Prime Minister Campbell Bannerman’s
“suggestion of a League of Peace has struck a responsive Chord here” and that he had proposed to Elihu Root
that Roosevelt publicly “express his approval.” The president was, he added in a “private” parenthetical
notation, “studying disarmament…just now wondering if that isn’t next best step.”²⁹

In late March, from Hot Springs, Arkansas, where the family stopped off en route north after their three
months on Cumberland Island, Carnegie sent off a long, rather rambling, handwritten letter to Roosevelt, with
NONOFFICIAL scrawled across the top. Like a garrulous, slightly daft and aging uncle, he saluted Roosevelt’s
attempts to get Congress to pass legislation regulating railroad “rates,” and then proceeded to tell the
president the story of his own battles with the Pennsylvania Railroad. He closed with a halfhearted apology:
“Sorry to intrude, think of you often as the most oppressed man in the land.”³⁰

“So far all is well,” he wrote Morley at the same time. Margaret was improving, the doctor thought. She and
her mother were heading back to New York City, while he planned to stop over in Tuskegee to celebrate its
semicentenary with Booker T. Washington, President Eliot of Harvard, and Seth Low, and then on April 24 “I’m
off on stumping—tour Canada in Private car, taking Butler (Columbia) & Gilder (Century) with me as chums.” On
his way north, Carnegie planned to stop over in Washington to lobby President Roosevelt and Secretary of State
Root on Campbell Bannerman’s “League of Peace” suggestion.³¹

 

IN YEARS PAST, the family had departed New York for Liverpool in late March or early April, stopping over for
a month in London so as not to arrive at Skibo until the weather turned warm. Baba’s illness changed
everything. Anticipating that neither she in her splints and brace nor her mother would be comfortable in
London, Carnegie delayed sailing until mid-May.

“I should reach London Sunday,” he wrote Morley from New York on May 15, three days before they were to
depart. Carnegie, who had barely seen wife or daughter since leaving Hot Springs in late March, planned to
remain in the London area to give some talks and receive some honors, while Louise took their daughter
directly to Skibo. “Baba improving but Doctors say six months more needed before she is free [she had already
been in plaster for at least eight months]—Lou & I disappointed. It seemed to us her improvement was so rapid
we might have her free from splits sooner, but No, they are certain it is needed—That all goes well however is
sure, and that’s the Main thing.”³²

Just before sailing for Europe, in yet another sign of the domestic disruptions his daughter’s illness had
caused, Carnegie took over from Louise the task of hiring a new organist for Skibo. “We are particular about
the music,” he wrote John Ross, “no fancy pieces, these prostitute the organ. The fine old hymns—Wagner’s
finest religious pieces Lohengrin—Siegfried March, etc. Played slowly, feelingly—no bounce—no flare.”³³

When Andrew arrived at Skibo in mid-June, after a month in London and traveling through England, he found his
daughter looking “very much better” but his wife “thin & worn.” He was so concerned that, as he wrote Morley,
he decided “we must close Skibo this season to many we should otherwise like to have. Too much of a strain for
Madam. Dr. Simpson strongly urges this but it makes the visits of the few intimates more precious, the ‘old
shoes’ we really are intimate with—Madam will be benefited by those so hope Mrs. Morley and you may be able to
come—All the Doctors agree that only time is required to ensure recovery.”³⁴

 

ALL SUMMER LONG, Carnegie was engaged in a round-robin exchange of letters with President Roosevelt, Secretary
of State Root, and John Morley, who as a cabinet member in the Liberal government had become his liaison with
Prime Minister Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman and Foreign Secretary Sir Edward Grey. The international peace
conference at The Hague, originally scheduled for 1906, had been postponed for a year, leaving plenty of time
for backroom deals among the major powers. In early July, Secretary of State Root sent Carnegie “two printed
papers which must still be kept very confidential”: one was the U.S. government’s instructions to its
delegates at the Rio conference on Pan-American affairs; the second,

“correspondence…relating to the…conference at The Hague.” Root cautioned Carnegie to “please keep these papers
where nobody will get hold of them,” but added that he had “no objection to your telling your friends in the
British Government what our positions are as you find them exhibited in these papers.” Carnegie, of course,
did just that, and more. He sent excerpts from Root’s memorandum to Morley and asked that he forward them to
Sir Edward Grey.³⁵

Carnegie’s goal was to try to locate the common ground on which Britain and the United States could formulate
an agenda for The Hague conference. “Surely nothing could be more popular in Britain,” he wrote Morley in
mid-July, “than any step which brought into closer co-operation the Race across the Atlantic. Even if we fail
to dominate the conference and get some important changes, something would be accomplished by having the Race
standing together before the world.” In his letters to Roosevelt, he assured him that the British were
prepared to follow his lead. “What a relief it must be to you, harassed as Presidents must be under our faulty
system with petty political & personal affairs [a reference to Roosevelt’s difficulty getting his legislation
through Congress], to mount into the high arena of world problems & as in this instance leading mankind to a
higher civilization, the only sure passport to enduring fame…. Pray don’t forget that you are called upon to
lead in the world’s work.”³⁶

In early August 1906, Roosevelt wrote Carnegie a long letter in which he did his best to dampen his
correspondent’s hopes that much would be achieved at The Hague conference. He began by expressing his lack of
sympathy with revolutionaries, extremists, and utopians, even those whose stated objective was world peace, a
category in which we know he placed Carnegie. He assured Carnegie, nonetheless, that he hoped “to see real
progress made at the next Hague Conference. If it is possible in some way to bring about a stop, complete or
partial, to the race in adding to armaments, I shall be glad; but I do not yet see my way clear as regards the
details of such a plan.” He added, almost parenthetically, that the world needed “some system of international
police” to bring peace, order, and stability to troubled spots around the globe. Without such a “system” in
place—and he saw no hope of one in the foreseeable future—it was sheer folly to believe that half measures
would make much of a difference. “The one thing I won’t do is to bluff when I can not make good; to bluster
and threaten and then fail to take the action if my words needed to be backed up…. I believe in peace, but I
believe that as things are at present, the cause not only of peace but of what is greater than peace is
favored by having those nations which really stand at the head of civilization show, not merely by words but
by action, that they ask peace in the name of justice and not from any weakness.”³⁷

Roosevelt’s reference to “weakness” was shorthand for his opposition to American disarmament. He was willing
to support stabilization of the naval arms race, but not to withdraw from it.

Carnegie wrote back to suggest that Britain and the United States, short of disarming, might agree not to
accelerate naval building. He also proposed a slight alteration in the “League of Peace” plan he had earlier
supported. Why couldn’t the world’s major powers agree to a voluntary arbitration treaty in which they
“intimated” that they would “view with disfavor an appeal to force until an offer to arbitrate has been made
and rejected?” Roosevelt had in an earlier letter expressed his unhappiness that the “ironclad custom which
forbids a President ever to go abroad” precluded him from meeting personally with the leaders of France,
England, and Germany to set the groundwork for The Hague conference. Carnegie offered himself as a substitute.
He had, he informed the president, been invited twice to meet the kaiser, who claimed that he had “read every
word of my first Rectorial Address, dealing with the present and future of nations. Like you I have wished to
have a talk with him as being the great power in Europe. I should urge him, as I do you, to take up with each
other arbitration of international disputes.” He was fishing for the president’s approval of such a mission,
but none was forthcoming. Carnegie closed this long letter, as he had previous ones, by flattering Roosevelt
with the intimations of immortality that would follow should he accept Carnegie’s advice: “The man who passes
into history as the chief agent in banishing or even lessening war, the great evil of his day, is to stand for
all time among the foremost benefactors…. Only as strongest apostle of peace of your day you can take
permanent rank with the very few immortals whom the tooth of time is not to gnaw into oblivion. I envy you
when I think over the destiny you may fulfill.”³⁸

Carnegie was so convinced that Roosevelt would agree with his suggestions and use him as unofficial
plenipotentiary that he asked Morley to arrange “an interview with Secretary Navy…and any Cabinet members, so
I could report to the President & try to get the two powers to speak as one…. I should like to see the Prime
Minister & perhaps be bearer of a message to the President who is studying the League of Peace idea…. I am
certain the President will go hand & hand with Campbell-Bannerman & his band & that he longs to do so. I think
Britain should respond. She has no such ally—there is none equal to the one of her race.”³⁹

Not for the first time, Carnegie had badly misjudged Roosevelt, who promised only that he would “go over with
Mr. Root whether it is possible to make somewhat such a proposal about arbitration as you suggest.” Roosevelt
instead, aware that Carnegie had access to Liberal cabinet members, including the prime minister, let float a
trial balloon for Carnegie to convey to his British friends. “I have been thinking more and more that we might
at least be able to limit the size of battleships, and I should put the limit below the size of the
Dreadnought [the British battleship which, with ten guns rather than usual four, was larger and more
invulnerable than anything else in the water]. Let the English have the two or three ships of the Dreadnought
stamp that they have already built, but let all nations agree that hereafter no ship to exceed say fifteen
thousand tons shall be built.”⁴⁰

Carnegie communicated Roosevelt’s plan to Morley, who took it to the prime minister and the foreign secretary.
Carnegie suggested that Chancellor of the Exchequer Asquith should also be brought into the discussion.
“President could & would take strong ground against further increase either in number or size [of new
battleships], if he only felt Britain would give it welcome—I should think the Lord Chancellor would be a
tower of strength in this…. He’s surely with us.” In a second note to Morley, Carnegie repeated his hope that
Campbell-Bannerman “and his shipmates will respond cordially to President’s idea. Even if it fail it would be
creditable (& I think popular) to attempt United action of the English-speaking race in favor of no increase
Naval power…I should like to be in position to tell President overture warmly received—can depend upon
cooperation in any attempt to limit armaments or size—Truly I feel now is the psychological moment—something
may be accomplished.”⁴¹

Roosevelt’s halfhearted attempt to open negotiations on a proposal to limit the size of warships, though duly
conveyed by Carnegie, met with no response in London. Carnegie’s suggestion that the British and Americans
formulate some sort of joint proposal or at least pledge to stand together at The Hague was not even
discussed. Carnegie, the eternal optimist, was not in the least discouraged. Having opened a channel of
communication between the two governments and established himself as a liaison, he had accomplished a great
deal for himself—and, he was convinced, for the cause of peace.

## THIRTY-SIX

## Peace Conferences, 1907

HAGUE CONFERENCE DRAGS,” Carnegie wrote Morley from New York in mid-January 1907, “but I think it will meet.
President not disposed to be frustrated.” Neither was Carnegie, who had high hopes for the conference and was
disposed to do whatever he could to make it a success. He had accepted the presidency of the National
Arbitration Conference, which had scheduled its inaugural meeting for April 1907, just before The Hague
conference, in an attempt to focus attention on it.

The previous August, Roosevelt had suggested that nothing much would come out of any Hague conference. World
courts without an internal police force to back up their decisions were, he argued, meaningless. Roosevelt had
intended his disparaging remarks to serve as an excuse for inaction. Carnegie, however, took him at his word
and formulated a new proposal for the organization of an “international police force.” “Why should we
peaceable powers be compelled to increase and maintain great navy fearing attack otherwise,” he asked Morley
rhetorically. “Let us organize International Police to keep the Peace. War disturbs all Nations and we have a
right to say we shall be freed from danger—I am surprised how many hitherto supine warmly support this.”¹

Though he knew that Roosevelt had little sympathy for a “league of peace,” much less for an international
police force to enforce its decisions, Carnegie continued to press forward. “An ‘International Police’ that
really should be the aim at the next Hague conference,” he wrote Roosevelt in February 1907. “If the German
Emperor could rise to his destiny & stand with you, favoring this, instead of pegging away, trifling over
petty questions—chasing rainbows in form of a colonial empire which he cannot get & which would do Germany no
good if he did.” Roosevelt did not appreciate being told what to do. But Carnegie ignored this and urged the
president to write the kaiser “a private letter & suggest if he take the lead in Europe alongside you in
America, between you, war could be banished.”²

Roosevelt ignored Carnegie’s suggestion. He wrote instead to tell Carnegie that he would not be able to accept
his invitation to the “Great Peace Society” conference in April, but was delighted that Root had decided to
attend. Knowing that his curt reply left much unsaid, he invited Carnegie to lunch with him, “if you are here,
on Wednesday, March 27th. If so, I will get one or two of our friends to meet you, especially Root.”³

Carnegie’s arrival in Washington for luncheon with the president, the vice president, the secretary of the
Treasury, and other high government officials proved something of a godsend for Roosevelt. In mid-March, the
stock market had crashed. While Wall Street blamed Roosevelt’s antitrust policy for the crash, Carnegie, on
exiting from his meeting with the president, declared that as far as he was concerned, the president was a
friend of business and “the best friend the railroads have…I mean by that that the president’s railroad
measures are moderate…I indorse the President’s position on the railroad question without reservation. His
influence on that subject I regard as entirely wholesome and conservative.”⁴

The following day, Carnegie did the president another great service by attacking Wall Street gamblers, this
time with such colorfully venomous language that the story appeared on the front page of the New York Times
for March 29. “Let me speak as a plain business man,” Carnegie told the reporter. “Wall Street is not America,
and even in New York there are other places than Wall Street. Gambling is not business; it is a parasite
feeding on values and creating none. It is time for us business men to rise and decline to recognize the men
who make money and render no value for it by manufacturing something or giving something in exchange.” With
his usual self-righteousness on the subject of stock market manipulation, Carnegie proudly declared again that
he had never “made a dollar by gambling in stocks.”

 

IN LATE MARCH, after a two-month stay at sister-in-law Lucy’s estate on Cumberland Island where he and Louise
believed Baba’s recovery was sped along by the sun and seashore, Carnegie returned to New York City, via
Washington, to preside over the National Arbitration Conference. No sooner had he arrived than he began a
round of speaking engagements that would extend over the next four weeks. On March 28, he addressed the
reunion of the Civil War telegraphers at the Hotel Manhattan. A few days later, he was at the Hotel Savoy to
address five hundred members of the Phi Beta Kappa fraternity. On Friday, April 5, he hosted three hundred
members of the National Civic Federation at a dinner at his home. Somewhere in between he composed the “plea
for peace” that was published on April 7 in the New York Times Sunday Magazine. All month long, his name was
on the front pages. Had he been interested in publicity alone, he would have attained nirvana. But he wanted
more than the opportunity to stoke his already considerable ego or add to the collection of famous men and
statesmen he called his friends. It is easy to poke fun at his egomania, his penchant for self-advertising,
his almost intolerable self-confidence. That he was far from selfless in his campaign for world peace does not
mean that he was any the less committed to the cause.

In the months preceding the opening of The Hague conference, Carnegie pushed himself to the point where more
than once he collapsed in exhaustion and was forced to take to his bed. He had earlier suggested, and it had
been agreed, that the National Arbitration Conference would be held in New York one week after the dedication
of the Carnegie Institute building in Pittsburgh so that the European guests he had invited to the opening
ceremonies in Pittsburgh could also attend the peace conference in New York. When Frederick Lynch, one of the
organizers of the arbitration conference, asked gently if Carnegie thought those attending the Pittsburgh
dedication, most of whom were professors or museum directors, had “thought much on this particular matter of
international peace,” Carnegie answered, “‘Never mind…we will make them speak, and then they will have to
think about it.’ And then he added, with a twinkle in his eye, ‘We’ll make them put themselves on record.’”⁵

From April 1, every steamship arriving in New York, including the Kaiser Wilhelm II, the Baltic, and the
Caronia, brought several of Carnegie’s distinguished guests. They were met at the pier and taken to the Hotel
Belmont. Among them were a world-famous astronomer from Cambridge; the master of Jesus College, Oxford; John
Ross, Carnegie’s Dunfermline solicitor; William Stead; Baron d’Estournelles de Constant of the French
government; Baron Descamp, a member of The Hague Court; representatives of the German Reichstag and Kaiser
Wilhelm II; the directors of the Louvre Museum and the Luxembourg Gallery; the principals of the major
universities in Scotland; and the editors of several London newspapers and opinion journals. One of the less
credentialed visitors, the provost of Dunfermline, explained that he had been invited because “Mr. Carnegie
and I are old friends. My father used to play in the streets of Dunfermline with Mr. Carnegie when both of
them were barefooted youngsters.” Asked how the “old folks” who remembered Andrew as a boy looked on him now,
the provost answered: “Why, they look upon him as one of the wonders of the world…and they love him dearly.
Mr. Carnegie is the most democratic of American millionaires. He remembers the old townspeople, and he talks
to them as though he were still one of them.”⁶

The demands on Carnegie were extraordinary: he was called upon to play the roles of celebrity, spiritual
leader dispensing wisdom to the masses, public relations officer, liaison to Washington, and chief of
logistics for a traveling assembly of distinguished statesmen.

Early on the morning of Tuesday, April 9, after a week of receptions, dinners, and meetings in New York,
Carnegie, with Louise beside him, secretly left the city in the midst of the season’s last snowstorm and
boarded a private car for the all-day train trip to Pittsburgh. It had been six years since Carnegie had last
visited the city. This time around, there were to be no meetings downtown with his partners, no visits to
Homestead or Duquesne or Braddock, no interviews with the newspapers about iron or steel, tariffs or labor
contracts.

He was returning as a philanthropist and peacemaker to preside over the opening ceremonies of a vastly
expanded Carnegie Institute. The original building had covered 5 acres; the new one took up almost 14. The
bizarrely misplaced Venetian towers on either side of the Music Hall had been removed and a sumptuous grand
foyer with a gilded ceiling and green marble columns added. The library had expanded outward into the wings
that had once housed the museum and art gallery. Around the corner along Forbes Avenue had arisen the new
Carnegie Museum and Art Gallery, with separate halls of architecture and sculpture, and a gallery with more
than five hundred paintings assembled for the eleventh International exhibit. Much of the space in the
addition was devoted to the Museum of Natural History, which took its place at once as one of the great
museums of the world. It was here that the Carnegie collection of dinosaurs, including Diplodocus carnegii,
found its final resting place.

Carnegie had left New York with Louise on Tuesday morning so that the two of them could enjoy a full day
touring the new building. The following day, his thirty-five European guests, accompanied by 160 pieces of
luggage, boarded their train for Pittsburgh. The first day of festivities opened on Thursday morning and
concluded with a lengthy evening concert by the Pittsburgh Symphony at the Carnegie Music Hall. Carnegie was
so worn out by the travel, the excitement, and the responsibilities in front of him that he stayed in bed the
following morning, then skipped the second day’s events, recovering only in time to host the banquet dinner at
the Hotel Schenley. The following morning, Saturday, he and Louise took their second daylong train ride in
five days, this one back to New York.⁷

On Monday afternoon, Carnegie was on the podium of the hall that bore his name as the first session of the
National Arbitration Conference was gaveled to order. Carnegie and the organizers had hoped that Roosevelt
would open the conference, but when the president declined, Carnegie innocently asked if he might dictate “a
short letter to be read…expressing your hopes of some decided advances through the coming Hague Conference.”⁸

Instead of a short letter, Roosevelt composed a six-and-a-half-page memorandum. He was, he insisted, in
sympathy with the conference organizers, and it was in that spirit that he sought to “make to you some
suggestions as to the practical method for accomplishing the ends we all of us have in view. First and
foremost, I beseech you to remember that it is our bounden duty to work for peace, yet it is even more our
duty to work for righteousness and justice.” He cautioned those who did “not themselves…bear the
responsibility of upholding the nation’s honor” not to insist on the impossible when it came to formulating
their peace proposals and not to call for any sort of “general disarmament [which] would do harm and not good
if it left the civilized and peace-loving peoples…unable to check the other peoples who have no such
standards, who acknowledge no such obligations.” His administration, he claimed, had sought peace in the
Philippines, Panama, Cuba, the Caribbean, Mexico, Santo Domingo, and Central America, but “in a spirit
untainted by that silly sentimentality which is often more dangerous to both the subject and the object than
downright iniquity.” He announced that the American representatives to The Hague Peace Conference would
propose discussion on the limitation of armaments and would sign a general arbitration treaty that increased
“the classes of cases which it is agreed shall be arbitrated.” But he expected little of consequence to happen
at The Hague. “It is idle to expect that a task so tremendous can be settled by any one or two conferences and
those who demand the impossible from such a conference not only prepare acute disappointment for themselves,
but…play the game of the very men who wish the conference to accomplish nothing. It is not possible that the
conference should go more than a certain distance further in the right direction.”⁹

Carnegie disagreed with most everything the president had written but, responding to an advance copy of
Roosevelt’s letter, referred to “only one point that seems to me weak,” the president’s assertion that while
it was the nation’s duty to work for peace, it was “even more our duty to work righteousness and justice.”
This, Carnegie believed, was sheer nonsense. In every dispute, he reminded the president, each side claimed
that it was seeking “righteousness” and “struggling for what is just.” The essential question was “who is to
decide” where “justice” and “righteousness” lay? “No one, according to you; they must go to war to decide not
what is ‘right’ but who is strong. Pray, reflect. I wish you had time to give a few minutes thought to this.
Maybe you would modify the sentence.”¹⁰

Roosevelt released the letter to the press as written.

While the newspapers made much of the fact that the president’s “sentiments toward international peace [were]
not altogether in accord with those of Andrew Carnegie,” Carnegie refused to acknowledge their differences
publicly. He opened the arbitration conference by giving his prepared speech, with only a short paragraph
interpolated to respond to Roosevelt’s letter.”¹¹

He was omnipresent for the next three days. Frederick Lynch recalled later that Carnegie “was the happiest of
men throughout the whole period and was the presiding genius. Nowhere have his amazing versatility and his
rare sense of humor been more fully revealed than in his introductions of the various speakers and in his
impromptu remarks at the various sessions.” When, in the first evening session, Harvard professor Hugo
Munsterberg argued that the building of the army had posed no burden on the German people, Carnegie rose from
his chair on the podium to answer him directly. “I have heard Professor Munsterberg make the most
extraordinary statement that I have heard for a long time: that conscription in Germany was not regarded as a
great burden. I should like to have the gentleman visit our mills in Pittsburg and ask thousands and thousands
of Germans what influenced them to leave Germany for this land.” Later he interrupted William Stead, who had
exceeded his time limit, confiding to the audience in a loud stage whisper, “He is wonderful, and he has been
speaking ever since he landed in this country; and some of us, careful of his health are taking care to limit
him…. Besides we have other speakers…. It is now after ten o’clock, and all well regulated families should
have the heads of the families at home before eleven o’clock.”¹²

The conference came to a close with two grand banquets for one thousand guests each. Former Mayor Seth Low
presided at the Waldorf-Astoria, Carnegie at the Hotel Astor, with after-dinner speakers shuttled back and
forth from one ballroom to the other. Just before Carnegie adjourned the festivities at the Astor, Baron
d’Estournelles, representing the French government, arrived to award him “the rank of a Commander of the
Legion of Honor…. ‘Let me consider now that you are an American, as well as an Englishman, an Englishman as
well as a Frenchman, a citizen of the world. You have done great work and we thank you.’” Carnegie, who had
not known about the award and had prepared no remarks, spoke extemporaneously of his regard for France, its
friendship with Scotland and the United States, and the wisdom of its people, who had in a recent vote, with
millions of ballots cast, chosen Louis Pasteur as the hero of French civilization, relegating their greatest
soldier, Napoleon, to seventh on the list.¹³

 

IN MID-MAY, much later than usual, the Carnegie family and servants sailed from New York Harbor for their
annual trip to Britain. The sea air cured the “grip” he had been suffering from, Carnegie wrote Morley upon
arriving at the Oatlands Hotel near Weybridge in Surrey, where the family was to stay for ten days. “We have
our New Argyle Motor. I mean to run about a good deal. Madam has much to do in London not having been there
last year—Baba is doing so well—New York Doctors say splint comes off upon our return [it would remain on for
almost a year more]. Happy days for us all—Madam is pretty well, rather thin & overworked but she will soon be
right—the ten days will give her a rest or at least a change. With our Pittsburgh & New York celebrations etc.
& entertaining our Guests we have all been very busy. Doctors certain my case was one of infection—I was so
well & so happy—all at once brought low. But Richard’s himself again [a reference to a line from Shakespeare’s
Richard III].”¹⁴

There was to be no letup in Carnegie’s one-man campaign for peace. He intended that summer to visit the peace
conference at The Hague and, en route, stop off in Kiel in northern Germany, where Kaiser Wilhelm II was
hosting his annual regatta. Carnegie had several times that past year publicly hailed the kaiser as the one
man in Europe who could, if he chose, decide whether the coming century would be marked by war or peace. In a
note to Morley, marked “private” and signed “The Peace Maker,” he insisted that “no other Man has the power to
draw a League of Nations competent to keep the peace for an agreed upon period…. He has the Cards—May the
‘holy spirit’ light upon & lead him heavenward. Fortunately he’s very devout—very…. Never was holy Father more
thoroughly convinced of his Mission than I am of mine. I Know I offer H.I.M. [his imperial majesty] the plan
that makes him the Greatest Agent known so far in human History.”¹⁵

Morley’s response was muted, but to the point. “That you can inflame him with your crusader’s zeal I am not
sure. But the effort is noble.”¹⁶

The Kiel Regatta, to which the Carnegies had been invited, was heavy with “court functions…glittering
receptions and ceremonial dinners with heel-clicking generals and administrators, trumpets, brass bands,
military marches, and goose-stepping soldiers.” It was at Kiel Week that the kaiser hosted foreign dignitaries
and statesmen he wanted to meet, showed off the latest addition to his navy, rooted for the German yachts, and
met with his ministers, most of whom, according to the historian and biographer Michael Balfour, “spoke to
their sovereign only once a year, the occasion, strangely enough, being the Kiel Regatta.”¹⁷

Carnegie was one of hundreds of guests and had little opportunity to engage the kaiser in more than small
talk. After his second day of receptions, banquets, balls, naval exercises, and yacht racing, Carnegie took
time to write to Margaret, who had been left behind in Britain: “Well Darling, here it is the end of the week
and your telegram just came a few minutes ago, and before going to bed I thought I would just write you a
note. We have had a busy time here. Warships, yachts, sailing boats, motor boats crowding the bay. I have had
one talk with the Emperor, who is very nice indeed. Also I dined with him one evening and he lifted his glass
and drank my health and I did drink his. He laughs and talks and you may be sure he tells that he is Scotch.
We have great fun.”¹⁸

Though he had no substantive talks with the kaiser about peace or, for that matter, anything else, he came
away even more convinced that Wilhelm II was “a Man of Destiny.” Six months earlier, Carnegie had confessed as
much in a letter to the kaiser in which he declared that in his “reveries you sometimes appear and enter my
brain. I then imagine myself ‘The Emperor’ and soliloquize somewhat as per enclosed.” He enclosed an account
of how Andrew Carnegie, transformed into the kaiser, “communes with himself.”

“God has seen fit to place me [Andrew Carnegie as Kaiser] in command of the greatest military power ever
known. For what end? Surely for good and not for evil; surely for peace and not for war…. Thank God, my hands,
as yet, are guiltless of human blood. What part, then, can I play worthy of my power and position? It must
be—shall be—in the direction of Peace on Earth…. I become the Peacemaker of the world—the curse of centuries
lifted at a single stroke. ‘Alone, I did it.’…Yes! This is my work! Thank God. Now I see my path and am happy.
To this I consecrate my life, and surely, ‘The highest Worship of God is service to man.’” ¹⁹

We don’t know if the kaiser ever read Carnegie’s letter or took anything away from their brief conversations
at Kiel.

On June 23, at five in the morning, the Carnegies boarded the special railroad car provided them by the
Prussian government for the last leg of their trip to The Hague. Usually such a journey required at least
three changes of train, but the Prussian and Dutch governments, the New York Times reported on June 24, had
arranged for the Carnegies’ private railroad car “to go through by the most direct route” with no changes.

The Carnegies arrived at The Hague while the peace conference was in session. They spent two days there, as
private citizens, and attended a brief formal ceremony at the site on which Carnegie’s peace palace was to be
built. In an impromptu press conference reported in the New York Times on June 26, 1907, Carnegie expressed
his “great satisfaction at his recent meeting with Emperor William at Kiel, adding that he had gained the
impression that the Emperor was a most sincere advocate of peace and would do all in his power to prevent
conflicts.”

He was quite pleased with himself. “Dear Saint Mark,” he wrote Clemens from Brown’s Hotel in London, on his
return from the Continent. “Madam & I just in from hobnobbing with the Emperor feel the want, (I do, not Madam
who is sinless) of my Father Confessor—feel it badly & all over—Hence this call. We are off tonight for Skibo.
When are you coming to see us there in your holy capacity, sinner-saint. We hope soon.” In the margins of the
final page, he squeezed in one final message: “Great character the Emperor. How he might enjoy you—He’s
bright.”²⁰

The sad truth was that neither his visit to Kiel nor The Hague Peace Conference had achieved very much. There
was no discussion at The Hague of Carnegie’s pet projects: compulsory arbitration or an international police
force. Ever the optimist, Carnegie took some satisfaction in the fact that Germany, though unwilling to
discuss disarmament, had agreed with the Americans—against the British—on a proposal to exempt private
property at sea from seizure. “You notice how finely Germany is standing with us at The Hague,” he wrote
Roosevelt from Skibo at the end of July.²¹

The president responded in a note marked PERSONAL & CONFIDENTIAL that he was less troubled by the failures at
The Hague than by increasing tensions with Japan, occasioned by attacks on immigrants in California and
Hawaii. “He asked no advice,” Carnegie wrote Morley, “but I felt I had the Solution so clearly I wrote him my
views fully adding ‘no reply desired.’” Carnegie’s “solution” was that Roosevelt should continue to pressure
the Japanese government to voluntarily limit immigration. There was no other way to stop the violence. “We
must recognize that whites everywhere object to them.” What was occuring in San Francisco was no different
from what was occurring elsewhere in the English-speaking world, in Britain, South Africa, Australia, and
Canada.²²

Carnegie was overjoyed when the president wrote back that though “no answer is required to your letter I must
allow myself the pleasure of stating that for downright, condensed, good sense it is one of the most
refreshing communications I have had…. I hope you will be on this side when I return to Washington as I want
to see you at the White House.” This was precisely what Carnegie wanted to hear.

Few responses have equaled that I think & I am really ‘set up’ to know that I have been able to serve my
Country. So you must not think me mad in seeing the Emperor on a Mission I was impelled to undertake—I hit the
bulls eye you see with the President & may yet with the other. I know he—the President—& the Cabinet saw I had
the true solution in one case and have adopted it & the President is troubled no more. Why shouldn’t the angel
of Light choose a dreamer now & then just for a change & not stick always to the combination of
Author-Statesman [Morley] for a working miracle?²³

Carnegie exaggerated the significance of Roosevelt’s note. The fact that in this one isolated instance the
president had taken Carnegie’s advice did not mean that the kaiser of Germany was going to do likewise.

 

THE CARNEGIES sailed from Liverpool for New York on October 17, after an extraordinarily hectic season abroad.
While they were on the high seas, the “Panic” of 1907 hit first New York City, then Washington, and the rest
of the country. Prices on the stock market fell, interest rates rose, loans were called in, and the major New
York trust companies came close to collapse—if they went down, it was feared, the banks would crumble with
them. The day before their ship docked, Carnegie busied himself writing a “statement” to deliver to the
reporters he knew would be waiting to interview him. “Cable just rec’d this morning,” he wrote Morley on
October 25, “asking me say some judicious words upon financial situation. Very serious now but panic was
inevitable…. Hard times would affect Roosevelt’s future but not I think change it—He will be reelected against
his real wishes…. Am going to Washington for a day or two.”²⁴

Upon arriving in New York, Carnegie uncharacteristically refused to take reporters’ questions. “The present
situation,” he explained, was “not one to be discussed off-hand.” In his prepared statement, which was
published in the New York Times and other papers on October 27, he assured the public that “nothing unusual or
unexpected has occurred,” that the panic was in the nature of a temporary readjustment after an extended boom.
He concluded by asserting that it was his belief now, and had been for the past two years, “that the interests
of our country would require and the Republican Party demand that the President be reelected a second time. He
has only been elected once.”

Through November and December, Carnegie shuttled back and forth to Washington to meet with Roosevelt and his
cabinet members on the financial crisis and to urge a new round of peace initiatives. “I am going to
Washington this week by request, excited times in financial World,” he wrote Morley on November 10. “I am
going to advise President to invite nations to make treaties [of] arbitration, first asking Britain…. I hope
to be of some use.”²⁵

Roosevelt, Carnegie soon learned, had no intention of taking up the question of disarmament. On the contrary,
he had decided to recommend an increase in the size of the U.S. Navy. He had hinted as much to Carnegie “at
the luncheon table” in mid-November, causing his would-be adviser “deep anxiety.” Carnegie warned him that if
he reversed his earlier decision and increased the size of the Navy, he would inevitably “appear as either
frightened by conditions which you alone know and which are dangerous, or you will render yourself open to the
charge of your enemies, exclaiming that here is an impulsive, excitable ruler, who don’t know one year what he
desires the next…. Mr. President, you stand today the foremost ruler for peace and pledged not to increase our
navy. Pause and reflect how the world will regard and bemoan your sudden change…. Why? Why? Verily, the
question needs your most serious attention. I hope my fears are groundless, but cannot refrain from appealing
to you to think well before you thus stultify yourself. Great rulers cannot reverse their policies suddenly
without their astonished people asking why.” At the bottom of the last page of his letter, Carnegie added in
his own hand: “Pardon me Mr. President. My main interest & general admiration not unmixed with affection for
you prompts this letter.” He signed it, “Always Your Friend.”²⁶

Roosevelt answered the next day in a curt, no-nonsense letter of eight sentences, the first six of which began
with his imperious “I.” “I shall recommend an increase in the navy. I shall urge it as strongly as I know how.
I believe that every farsighted and patriotic man ought to stand by me. I will give sufficient reasons in my
message. I can not state all the reasons in my message, and I certainly will not state them in a letter to you
or anyone else or state them verbally save in strict confidence…. You say the question needs my serious
attention. It has had it; and, as I say, I can not imagine how any one, in view of the known conditions of the
world and of the absolute refusal of The Hague conference to limit armaments, can fail to back me up.”²⁷

Roosevelt had thrown down the gauntlet, clearly annoyed by Carnegie’s continued attempts to tell him what to
do. Years before, Carnegie had felt no compunction about going behind President McKinley’s back and lobbying
his advisers. He dared not do the same with Theodore Roosevelt who, unlike his predecessor, ran a tight ship
and countenanced no hint of mutiny.

After another “fine visit to Washington” in late November, Carnegie confided to Morley that while the
president was in “excellent form…not a few of his ‘judicious friends’” were upset about his plans for new
battleships. Carnegie intended to visit him again on December 9. For the moment, the talk in Washington and
New York was of the “panic,” which was about to ruin several of Carnegie’s friends and associates. “Busy these
days doing a consulting business, friends in trouble—helping some of them out of course. Strange getting back
to business affairs. Glad I’m out.”²⁸

On November 25, 1907, Carnegie celebrated his seventy-second birthday, though when the New York Times referred
to it as his seventieth, he did not correct the error. His “birthday message” was reprinted in full on the
front page of the Times on November 24. “The world is growing better…. Men are more kindly disposed, more
charitable, more solicitous for others, less selfish…. The time is coming, much more rapidly than we dream
when war will be a thing of the past. Oh, yes, indeed!” There was, he admitted, much he still did not
understand in his eighth decade. “I can’t see why a good, omnipotent Power should allow suffering, why He
allows poverty, sickness, and sin. It isn’t clear to me why He allows men to have still such dreadful
delusions as that it is necessary for some of them to kill some others in the savagery of war…. In particular,
I don’t at all understand the mysterious law of evolution, according to which the higher forms of life live
upon the lower, rising through slaughter and extinction. That is profoundly, tragically obscure and
perplexing, but we must accept and bow our heads and murmur to Universal Law, ‘Thy will be done.’” The motto
by which he lived his life remained “All is well, since all grows better.” Evolution was for him more than
“the ruling principle of scientific thought.” It had become a “comforting personal creed.” He did not worry
about the possibility of a “future life…. Our duty is to pitch this one high.”

## THIRTY-SEVEN

## Tariffs and Treaties, 1908–1909

AS CARNEGIE AGED into his retirement, he craved the limelight more than ever. A night without a concert, a
reception, a dinner, or a speech was an evening wasted. He accepted invitations to speak at a Lotos Club
dinner for Sam Clemens and a Delmonico’s banquet for the new sheriff of New York County; and sit at the guest
of honor’s table at a Pilgrims’ dinner, again at Delmonico’s, to honor Whitelaw Reid. He became a fixture at
benefit dinner dances at the Plaza and the Waldorf-Astoria and concerts at Carnegie Hall, at society weddings,
and the funerals of notable bankers and railroad executives. His name was in the papers, either in the society
listings or the news pages, nearly every day.

In early February 1908, he made bigger than usual headlines by speaking to the Economic Club in the grand
banquet room of the Hotel Astor on America’s banking system. William Jennings Bryan also spoke, though it was
Carnegie who got the most notice when he declared that the American banking system was “the worst in the
civilized world,” because American currency was not fully protected by and convertible to gold. The response
to the speech was so positive that he forwarded a copy of it to Theodore Roosevelt, had it published in The
Outlook, paid for 70,500 reprints, and sent one to every congressman and as many bankers and industrialists as
he could locate. Three days after his banking speech, he was the keynote speaker at the tenth annual dinner of
the Society of the Genesee in the Waldorf-Astoria ballroom. By late March, after yet another speech, this one
to Pratt University students, he had exhausted himself. “I am in demand as Speaker,” he boasted to Morley,
“but tired out just now. Have declined all invitations. Never was better however.” He had, in truth, declined
all but two or three. His final speaking engagement of the season was at the weekly Monday luncheon of the
Vagabonds’ Club, for writers, composers, poets, and artists, in the grillroom of the National Arts Club, where
he “humorously deplored the fact that he was not a vagabond” and had never been able to lead “a bohemian
life.”¹

He spent almost as much time in Washington in early 1908 as he did in New York. It was the final spring of the
Roosevelt administration and Carnegie intended to savor every moment of it. “I spent two days last week in
Washington; lunched with President, Root etc.,” he wrote Morley in late March. “The more I see and confer with
[Roosevelt], the nobler he becomes.”²

Carnegie, who had never been shy about expressing his opinions, was only too happy to put his appraisal of
Roosevelt into print. His introduction to The Roosevelt Policy, a compilation of Roosevelt’s speeches,
remarks, and public papers, was so sycophantic it would have embarrassed author and subject had they not both
been men of overweening ego. “These volumes,” Carnegie wrote, “are devoted not to the man but to the Roosevelt
policy. The man already stands revealed to all his countrymen to a degree unequalled by any of modern times
except Lincoln himself.” Carnegie acknowledged that, like Lincoln before him, Roosevelt had his “captious
critics.” Geniuses, not bound by society’s expectations, went their own way and, in so doing, invited
criticism from lesser men. (Is there any doubt that Carnegie included himself, with Lincoln and Roosevelt, in
this latter category?) “And so we accept Roosevelt for what he is and would not have him different—an able,
courageous, honest, democratic man of the people acting himself out just as the spirit leads him without one
particle of pretence…. The man of destiny comes to nations…just when he is most needed.”³

Roosevelt was pleased with Carnegie’s introduction—how could he not have been?—and wrote Carnegie to tell him
so. The two men were already scheduled to dine after the governors’ conference on conservation, to which
Roosevelt had invited Carnegie, but Roosevelt now inquired if it wasn’t “possible for you to take lunch with
me the day we dedicate the building of the Bureau of American Republics [which housed representatives of the
Pan-American League and which Carnegie had funded]. If you care to, I will have Root, too, and you and he and
I will drive to the ceremonies together.”⁴

On receiving Roosevelt’s congratulatory note, Carnegie forwarded it to the kaiser with a copy of the book
introduction that had elicited it. He had maintained communications with Wilhelm II, as only he could, by
contributing to the Koch Institute in Berlin and by arranging to have a full-sized replica of Diplodocus
carnegii sent to Germany. In his letter to the kaiser in May, he claimed that he was sharing the president’s
note because it was “so highly characteristic” of the man. “It never strikes him that a humble citizen like
myself might be somewhat abashed driving by his side through the cheering masses to the ceremony, but perhaps
he remembers that I’ve been hobnobbing recently with Your Majesty and King Edward.” Unable to restrain
himself, Carnegie proceeded to tell the German kaiser how he would, if invited to do so, conclude a similar
tribute to him. “Here then we have the evident Man of Destiny. Never has God entrusted to man, since the World
began, his chosen prophets not excepted, the power for good or evil that this keen, able, pure, God-fearing
Emperor of Germany wields today.”⁵

Carnegie put off the family’s departure for Britain in 1908 to bask in the president’s reflected glory.
Roosevelt had invited him not only to speak on “The Conservation of Ores and Related Minerals” at the
governors’ conference on conservation, but to attend as his guest the formal dinners to welcome the governors
and the luncheon to open the conference. As if that were not enough to swell a man’s head, the president had
been “saying very flattering things” about him. “An article on our disgraceful banking system & and one upon
proposed Commission Inter-State Commerce have attracted notice,” he wrote Morley. “Notwithstanding all this we
sail 14th May per Baltic. [Roosevelt] has agreed I can leave Washington Wednesday P.M.—sail Thursday.”⁶

 

WITH BABA recovering from whatever had ailed her, the Carnegies entered into full entertainment mode in 1908.
That August, as one of their guests, President Woodrow Wilson of Princeton, reported to his wife, the
Carnegies welcomed “a perfect stream of visitors at Skibo: I should think that a season of it would utterly
wear poor Mrs. Carnegie out. The Castle is like a luxurious hotel. Some twenty or twenty-five persons sit down
to every meal. Guests are received, for the most part (if—say—of less than Cabinet rank) by the servants;
shown to their rooms; and received by the host and hostess when all assemble for the next meal.” The guests
during Wilson’s stay included John Morley; Whitelaw Reid, now ambassador to England, and his wife and son; a
fat (unnamed) Austrian lady, who was introduced as having won the Nobel Prize for a book on peace; Lord Shaw
of Dunfermline and his daughter; and Tom Miller. “There was everything to do that you can think of,” Wilson
wrote in awe,

hunting, fishing, golfing, sailing, swimming (in the most beautiful swimming pool I ever saw,—the water
tempered to about 70 degrees), driving, motoring, billiards, tennis croquet; and there was perfect freedom to
do as you pleased. Wednesday afternoon I managed the boat for Mr. Miller and Mr. Carnegie while they fished;
Thursday morning and afternoon I was with a party on a small steam yacht; Friday morning I followed the
players over the golf course; Friday afternoon I went with a big party in a motor carrying all to inspect the
Kitchen gardens of the tenants on the estate who had been competing for a prize…. The estate is some twenty
miles long and, on an average, about six miles broad, and includes a whole town in its sweep,—or, rather, a
large village. The evenings were spent in dining, talking, playing whist or billiards (I naturally chose the
latter), or reading,—by those who had nerves steady enough for it.⁷

In addition to entertaining a full complement of guests that summer, Carnegie embarked on a new writing
project, a book of essays for Frank Doubleday entitled PROBLEMS of TO-DAY, Wealth, Labor, Socialism. The
impetus for the project had come three years earlier, Carnegie explained in his preface, dropping a few names
along the way. “When President Roosevelt sent his notable message to Congress…calling attention to the unequal
distribution of wealth, and recommending high, progressive taxes upon estates at the death of the owners, the
writer sent him copy of ‘The Gospel of Wealth.’ The President wrote in reply, that he was ‘greatly struck with
the fact that seventeen years ago you had it all.’ This led the writer to proceed a step further and add
another chapter.” He was not, he assured his readers, “a recent convert to some of the doctrines which are now
promulgated so freely.” He had, even before becoming a multimillionaire, “expressed advanced views upon
‘Labor’ and ‘Land,’” views which he intended to enlarge upon in his new essays. That “the unequal distribution
of wealth lies at the root of the present Socialistic activity [was of] no surprise to the writer. It was
bound to force itself to the front, because, exhibiting extremes unknown before, it was become one of the
crying evils of our day.”⁸

Carnegie’s goal was to critique Socialist doctrine from the inside, as a former workingman and industrial
employer who had spent a lifetime among the laboring classes. With a nod to Marx and the so-called
revolutionary socialists whom he gave no evidence of ever having read, he focused his attention on the British
Labour Party and the Fabian Socialists. There was surprisingly little urgency to his critique, in large part
because he did not consider the Socialists much of a danger in Britain and no danger at all in the United
States. “Don’t trouble yourself about Socialism,” he had written Sir John St. Loe Strachey in the summer of
1907. “It cannot do any harm…. Here is a story which I am using.—A negro in the South became a Socialist. The
following conversation took place one day with a visitor. ‘If you had two horses, would you give one to your
poor neighbor?’ ‘Sure’s you’re born, that’s what I would do.’ ‘And if you had two cows, would you give one to
your poor neighbor?’ ‘Sure’s you’re living,’ that’s what I’d do, and mighty glad to do it.’ ‘And if you had
two pigs, would you give one to your poor neighbor?’ ‘No sir, dere’s where I draws de line; I’se got two
pigs.’”⁹

Although he did not tell this story in his book, he made much the same point—over and over again. Socialism
was a silly utopian theory, espoused by those who had never worked with their hands and knew no one who had.
The true reformers were realists like himself, Theodore Roosevelt, and labor leaders Samuel Gompers and John
Mitchell, who recognized that social equality was neither attainable nor beneficial, that men prized the
differences between them, and that progress was inevitable, but not instantaneous. “We believe that the surest
and best way is by continued evolution as in the past, instead of by revolutionary Socialism, which spends its
time preaching such changes as are not within measurable distance of attainment, even if they were desirable
in themselves.” Carnegie did not begrudge the socialists their critique of present-day society; he welcomed
it. “Divine discontent is the root of progress, and even our Socialistic friends, with their revolutionary
ideas, stir the waters for our good.” He feared only that by espousing their utopian solutions, the
revolutionary socialists were making it more difficult for bread-and-butter reformers to hasten the pace of
evolutionary change. “The extreme Socialists themselves are one of the obstacles to substantial progress
today.”¹⁰

Although his Dunfermline relatives had been skilled artisans, not factory workers, and he himself had spent
less than a year in the Allegheny City cotton mills, Carnegie continued to present himself as an expert on
“workingmen” because, he contended, he was one of them. In early 1904, he had quietly put himself forward to
succeed Marcus Hanna as president of the National Civic Federation (NCF), an association of business and labor
leaders founded five years earlier by Ralph Easley, a Chicago Republican and journalist, with the support of a
number of influential midwestern industrialists. The NCF members—industrialists, union leaders, college
presidents, clergymen, and politicians—were united in thinking that the greatest threat to domestic peace and
prosperity was labor discontent, and that the only way to curtail strikes and prevent the Socialists from
establishing an American beachhead was to bring labor and capital together to peaceably arbitrate their
differences. The industrialists who signed on to the NCF pledged to recognize and work with responsible trades
unions; the union leaders to do all they could to avoid strikes.

Carnegie was not elected NCF president in 1904, but was instead put on the executive committee, with the
support of the labor leaders. This he viewed as proof that he had at long last cleansed his reputation of the
stain of Homestead. “I was relieved from the feeling that I was considered responsible by labor generally, for
the Homestead riot and the killing of workmen.” As the papers reported the morning after Carnegie attended his
first NCF meeting, he had been “especially interested in meeting Mr. [William] Weihe, who was one of the
leading spirits in the Homestead strike of several years ago. Mr. Carnegie said that if he had been in America
at the time the strike would never have taken the course it did.”¹¹

When, in 1907, Ralph Easley asked him to host a meeting of NCF labor leaders at his home, Carnegie, professing
to know what workingmen wanted, agreed to do so, but only if it was arranged not as a “meeting” but as a
“reception…with a supper after. No wine, but salads, coffee, ices etc. Madam and I receive the guests. I might
say a few words of welcome later when supper came, but all should be informal. I see no use in holding a
speechifying affair in our home. We wish to receive the labor leaders, only men of position among their
fellows, and treat them as we should a party of our intimates whom we were glad to see & welcome to our home.
That means a great deal, my friend…I like the working man, so does my dear wife, and wish to welcome them to
our home, not to talk them to death, but in a friendly way shake hands with them…. They could see the gallery,
my library, etc. etc. and make themselves at home.”¹²

Easley was reluctant to disagree with Carnegie, but warned nonetheless that if the event were billed as a
“reception,” the labor leaders who attended would be open to criticism by the rank-and-file of their unions
for attending a “social function” at a millionaire’s mansion. Carnegie accepted Easley’s recommendation that
the meeting be arranged so that those guests who chose to come early might “spend from 8:15 to 9 o’clock in
‘sight seeing’ and social converse; then devote from 9 to 10 to a program of short speeches; from 10 to 10:30,
or later, supper.” August Belmont, the president of the NCF, had been asked by “some of the labor men,” Easley
wrote Carnegie, “how their wives should dress…. We told the ladies to wear high neck dresses and no hats, a
room being arranged for checking their wraps.”¹³

Easley had ulterior motives in asking Carnegie to host the spring meeting. He hoped that by drawing Carnegie
more tightly into the inner circles of the NCF he might be able to elicit more funds. This was fine with
Carnegie, who was only too happy to use the National Civic Federation and its labor leaders to validate his
credentials as an enlightened expert and to apply the leverage he gained from his contributions to pressure
its members into doing his bidding. When, in 1908, Easley requested funds to support the American Federation
of Labor’s appeal to the Supreme Court of a lower court decision outlawing boycotts, Carnegie agreed to
contribute, but only on the condition that the labor leaders pledged in advance not to contest or protest a
negative decision. “There is one member of the Civic Federation who will very promptly resign if it gives the
slightest countenance to attacks upon the Supreme Court. I am as strong a friend of Labor and I think a wiser
one than Mr. Gompers, but if we are to fail to preach and practice implicit obedience to the law as defined by
the final tribunals, you can count me out and I mean to watch this point very carefully.”¹⁴

 

THE CARNEGIES, as was their habit, returned to New York City at the end of October 1908 to vote for the
Republican candidates for president of the United States and governor of New York: William Howard Taft and
Charles Evans Hughes. Two weeks later, after both of his candidates had won election, Carnegie was on the
front pages again. The New York Times reported on November 20—with other papers picking up the story
immediately—that, in a forthcoming article, the former steelmaker was going to come out against the protective
tariff on steel. “If the report is borne out…it will undoubtedly create a tremendous stir among the
standpatters…. Democrats who heard the rumor tonight were in high glee over it.” Carnegie was usually evasive
when asked by a reporter as he left his mansion if the rumors were true. “‘I had a fine game of golf to-day,’
he said, ‘and I am feeling mighty well as a result. Isn’t this motor a smooth one. It’s my favorite.’”

Carnegie’s article calling for the elimination of the tariff was so politically incendiary that he had asked
the Century editors to send advance copies to Roosevelt and Taft. When Taft requested that he withhold it for
publication until after the election, he agreed to do so.

There should have been no great surprise over Carnegie’s break with Republican orthodoxy. He insisted—and
rightly—that he had advocated reductions in the tariff in the past and was now taking the next logical step in
calling for its elimination. “The writer has cooperated in making several reductions as steel manufacturers
became able to bear reductions. Today they need no protection, unless perhaps in some new specialties unknown
to the writer, because steel is now produced cheaper here than anywhere else…. The republic has become the
home of steel, and this is the age of steel.”¹⁵

Democratic papers like the New York World applauded his conversion; Republicans assailed his apostasy; a New
York Times editorial declared that “the only thing to do with MR. ANDREW CARNEGIE is to refute him absolutely,
to show that if he ever did know anything about the conditions of the steel business he has now forgotten it.”
The pro-tariff Republican chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, hoping to discredit the old Scotsman
by showing that he was, as the Times had asserted, out of touch with business and perhaps a bit daft besides,
invited Carnegie to testify at the tariff hearings. When Carnegie demurred, he was issued a subpoena.

He was now right where he wanted to be, in the center of the storm, playing the role he played best: a
righteous truth-telling man on a political ship of fools. And yet as much as he enjoyed his reputation as a
man who spoke his mind regardless of the consequences, Carnegie knew that he was taking no great chances in
questioning the need for a protective tariff on iron and steel. The nation was moving, albeit in rather slow
motion, toward free trade, and so was he. Even President-Elect Taft had endorsed tariff reform.

[image]

“lynch him!”

On November 25, Carnegie celebrated his seventy-third birthday. The Times put the birthday story on its front
page, though it remained as confused as ever about his age. While the headline read, “SEVENTY-THREE!
CARNEGIE,” the text declared that “Andrew Carnegie is 71 years old to-day.”

“Tomorrow Madam & I go to Washington dine with President,” Carnegie wrote John Morley on December 6. “Attend
several meetings for three days. You know President appointed me member Conservation National Resources—Also
on Waterway Commission…. Never had so many duties to perform & as for urgent appeals to visit cities and speak
I could be busy every day; I am not going to take one other duty,—Must save myself…. I ate a bad oyster or two
& had to disappoint the people of Baltimore hence report of illness. Doctor kept me in for a day & all was
well—Am in excellent health.”¹⁶

Two weeks later, he was back in Washington to testify before the Ways and Means Committee hearing on tariffs.
From the moment he entered the committee room in the morning until he left later that afternoon, he commanded
the full attention of the committee, the press, and the spectators. With wit, a ready smile, disarming candor,
and a total lack of decorum, he took over the proceedings, answered the questions he wanted to answer,
deflected those he felt intrusive, lectured committee members on the steel business, corrected their errors,
rephrased their queries, and, as the New York Times reported on December 22, “kept the room in a roar of
laughter all through the day.”

Minutes after the session had been gaveled to order, Carnegie set the tone for the day by interrupting
Chairman Sereno Payne, the New York Republican, who had leaned over to whisper something to Congressman John
Dalzell, the pro-tariff, pro-steel representative from Pittsburgh.

 

MR. CARNEGIE. Mr. Chairman, I would like to hear that remark that you just made to my friend Mr. Dalzell.
[Great laughter.] That is not fair. Now, just tell us what you told him.

THE CHAIRMAN. I did not make a remark. I said, “We are getting a little more fun than information.”

MR. CARNEGIE. I am sorry. I will step out if I am not giving information…. Mr. Chairman, I can quite
understand how you have fun, because the chairman is as full of information as I am; but I am here to tell the
truth, I am bound to do it, I have sworn to tell the whole truth, and come what may I am going to do it.

THE CHAIRMAN. Of course I did not mean that as a reflection on you.

MR. CARNEGIE. I have no suspicion that you did. On the contrary, I think you whispered to Dalzell: “The jig is
up.” [Great laughter.]¹⁷

 

Carnegie proceeded from this point on to alternately mystify, baffle, bamboozle, and infuriate committee
members by ridiculing their attempts to understand the steel industry, disputing the figures they had
gathered, and assuring them they were in over their heads when it came to business. “There you are again,
gentlemen,” he interrupted Dalzell, who was trying to introduce figures to demonstrate that production costs
were rising faster than profits. “If you are going to assume that you gentlemen, who know nothing about steel,
can in a cursory examination of the case get at the facts of the case, you are deluding yourselves.”¹⁸

When Bourke Cockran, the Democrat from New York who had made a career of criticizing Carnegie and other
high-tariff advocates, remarked that Carnegie’s smile signaled that he agreed with something Cockran had said,
the old man interrupted him: “Mr. Cockran, please do not interpret my smile. I am a born laugher, and I have
laughed all through my life, and confronted all the troubles of life with laughter. I have escaped a great
many troubles by laughing, and I would not lose that little faculty for anything.”¹⁹

Carnegie’s recall of past events was excellent when he wanted to answer a question. When he preferred not to,
he claimed loss of memory. “You put a man here who has not been in business for seven years, and naturally,
his memory is not so good. Do you imagine that his memory can go back and fix dates? Dates are obliterated in
my mind…. Because you really must remember I have retired for seven years, and to call upon me unexpectedly to
go back thirty or forty years, I am unable to do that.”²⁰

He showed little respect for anyone on the committee, including Representative Dalzell, to whose campaign
coffers he had contributed thousands of dollars and with whom he had consulted in years past in writing the
tariff schedules for iron and steel. Brazenly—albeit with good humor—he suggested that the congressmen give up
trying to understand the steel business and take the advice of businessmen like himself. The capitalist system
was not perfect, but it was, for the most part, self-correcting. It had to be left alone to operate under its
own natural laws, not those imposed by politicians. When asked what would happen to steel companies smaller
and weaker than U.S. Steel if the tariff were removed, Carnegie professed that he didn’t much care. Companies
that could not compete deserved to go under. “Do you want the Government to be supporting all these broken
concerns that are suffering either from present mismanagement or past mistakes?”²¹

Much like President Theodore Roosevelt, he did not think “bigness” per se was bad; on the contrary, it was
good for the economy, as it resulted in lower costs for consumers. The small manufacturer was a relic of the
past. “The time has gone past when in this great country the things that are used by the hundreds of thousands
of tons, of steel, can be economically produced on a small scale.” When Chairman Payne protested that he was
“very reluctant indeed to believe that the day of opportunity for the man of fairly modest means and the man
who is not even a great genius has gone by, and that he must simply operate under the shadow of the protective
wing and care of the big man,” Carnegie interrupted him, as one would a naive schoolboy.

 

MR. CARNEGIE. My dear sir, the enterprising man under the shadow of what you call the big man, the big
establishment, has far more opportunity of rising to fortune than he ever had of conducting a small business.

 

As proof, he cited the example of his forty-two former partners in the steel business—one of whom was Charles
Schwab—who had begun their careers as employees of Carnegie Steel and climbed the ranks to become partners.
The age of the bootstrap entrepreneur, the self-made, rags-to-riches small businessman, had come to an end. It
was high time the politicians understood this and stopped trying to write legislation or set tariff schedules
to protect small businesses that were destined for failure. “Those who want to start on their own account
without capital betray a lack of judgment that will prevent them from ever being successful men.” The
millionaires of the future would follow the route taken by Charlie Schwab and hitch their stars to rising
corporations.²²

In the end, neither Carnegie’s testimony nor President-elect Taft’s commitment to reform were enough to push
Congress to effect significant changes in the tariff system. This only confirmed Carnegie in his belief that
the politicians would do best to abandon their attempts at regulating the economy. Two months after his
appearance before the Ways and Means Committee, Carnegie again suggested in an interview published in the
February 13, 1909, New York Times that congressmen did not know enough about business to set tariff schedules.
He recommended, instead, that some sort of “permanent non-partisan commission of experts” be empowered to set
rates. The “industrial world” was, he declared, “about to undergo the most momentous change known in its
history, even more far-reaching than was the change from the individual domestic manufacturer, manufacturing
at home, to the factory system, and the huge establishments of to-day.” Once upon a time, competition had
assured “reasonable prices for the consumer,” but that was no longer the case. “Some of our most important
industries to-day are only nominally competitive and in reality are monopolies so far as an understanding
exists as to prices that will prevail. These virtual monopolies must be controlled in some way or another.”
Carnegie’s rather daring solution was to establish what he called a “supreme industrial court” to regulate
prices. That, in interfering with the corporations’ right to set their own prices, he was treading on sacred
ground did not much concern him. The age of monopoly capitalism was dawning and required bold new solutions to
protect the consumer from runaway corporate collusion. His industrial court would, at the very least, protect
manufacturers from further interference by elected politicians.

The Times responded in a February 14 editorial by ridiculing his “supreme industrial court.” Would the court
have the power to “mandamus consumers to buy?” Would it be able to “fix wages as well as prices?”

Carnegie gave as good as he got in his response. “This is a serious problem,” he wrote the New York Times
editors on February 16, “and it is to be hoped you will some day, after studying the question, give us some
light…if any be revealed to you.” The courts, he asserted, had in the recent New York Gas Company case
directed the company “to refund many millions of dollars because its price was too high. A monopoly could not
be permitted [the court had ruled] to make its own price…. There is nothing alarming in this: capital is
perfectly safe in the gas company, although it is under court control. So will all capital be, although under
Government control.”

There was no chance that newspaper editors, the president-elect, or Congress was going to take Carnegie’s
proposals seriously. And he knew this. But he had accomplished what he wanted: to put before the public the
notion that the competitive capitalist economy of the nineteenth century, the one in which he had built his
fortune, was no more, and no amount of hand-wringing or legislative tinkering was going to bring it back to
life.

That he had both criticized Congress for its meddling and called for government control betrayed no
contradiction in his thinking. He had, on the contrary, become an advocate of “government control,” because he
feared congressional meddling. Carnegie’s proposal, if effected, would remove the politically volatile
questions of trusts, tariffs, prices, and profits from congressional oversight to an appointed “industrial
commission of experts.”

 

AS THE DAYS of the Roosevelt presidency wound down, Carnegie positioned himself front and center among the
president’s closest intimates. He peppered Roosevelt with letters and gifts; they lunched together, motored
together, and attended formal dinners with their wives at their sides. Like the president’s other admirers,
Carnegie had his own ideas as to what Roosevelt should do once he left the White House. Two years earlier, in
response to a letter from Carnegie exhorting him to take on “great problems” like world peace, Roosevelt had
mentioned that he “sometimes” wished there was no custom forbidding sitting presidents from leaving the
country and meeting overseas with European heads of state.²³

Carnegie remembered this and prepared to set in motion a series of meetings on world peace between the
ex-president and the “responsible authorities” of France, England, and Germany. With no need to stand for
reelection and no official responsibilities in Washington, Roosevelt would be able to apply his skills as a
diplomat, his unquestioned popularity, and his remarkable personal charm to entice them into joining with him
to create a “League of Peace.” Carnegie was willing to grant Roosevelt his wish to go big-game hunting and
would, in fact, supply much of the funding to pay for it, but “after Africa, then the real ‘big game.’ Meet
the men who rule European nations, then you have a source of power otherwise unobtainable—You promise to
become the ‘Man of destiny.’” Carnegie’s agenda for Roosevelt began with a face-to-face meeting with Kaiser
Wilhelm II. Of all the world’s leaders, the kaiser appeared, at least in the context of The Hague conferences,
to be the least willing to talk peace, but this didn’t faze Carnegie. Despite every sign to the contrary,
Carnegie was convinced that Wilhelm II was committed to peace. When, in October 1908, the kaiser again put his
imperial foot in his mouth by publishing an article in the Daily Telegraph criticizing the British press and
politicians and insisting that the enlarged German fleet posed no danger to Britain, Carnegie leaped to his
defense. “Our impulsive friend the Emperor has made a slip,” he admitted in a handwritten note to Roosevelt in
mid-November. “He is so deeply hurt at being held up as the enemy of his Mother’s country [Wilhelm’s mother
was the daughter of Queen Victoria]—He is really a fine character. It will all blow over.”²⁴

By refusing to rule out Carnegie’s plans for him, Roosevelt only encouraged him to keep up the pressure. The
day before Taft’s inaugural, Carnegie sent Roosevelt his and Mrs. Carnegie’s greetings “upon your return to
your own sweet home, where you will find some respite from public cares—at last. ‘Well done’ is the verdict.
You are to take rank with the foremost who have held the highest office upon Earth.” He could not help but
remind Roosevelt that he had not yet fulfilled his Carnegie-predicted destiny as peacemaker. “The past is
secure; as far as the future, ‘The sibyl still remains silent.’” Carnegie hoped that that future would bring
the Carnegie and Roosevelt families closer together. “I have known six Presidents more or less intimately but
never one to whom I have been so strongly attached. Goodbye to the President and Presidentess [the term “First
Lady” had yet to be coined], but Mrs. Carnegie and I earnestly hope that to the man and woman there is to be
no good bye while life exists. Maybe you could come & spend a night or two with us some time when visiting New
York. We should so like you to do so. We can never get to know people until we visit them at their homes. If
you could only come to us at Skibo & spend a week or two?” To sweeten his invitation to Scotland, Carnegie
promised to arrange for an honorary degree to be offered by St. Andrews, “the university that gave Franklin
his first degree.”²⁵

There was no response from Roosevelt, who was preparing to leave the country for a yearlong safari in Africa.

 

CARNEGIE made every effort now to establish a role for himself in the Taft White House. “Have spoken twice at
ceremonies following President-Elect & had some talk,” he wrote Morley in early January 1909. “A splendid
president sure—No mistake.” In February, he wrote again, on his way to “stop over in Washington to see the new
President. Can hardly expect ever to get upon quite such intimate terms as with our Mutual friend, but we
shall see. Mr. Taft is going to secure what Roosevelt rendered securable. He’ll prove a good binder of the
sheaves.”²⁶

Like his predecessor, William Howard Taft resented the little Scotsman’s meddling in government affairs, but
he recognized Carnegie’s value—as a campaign contributor and cheerleader for “progressive” economic
policies—and tolerated his excesses: his unremitting flattery when he wanted something, his knack for putting
himself in the center of a controversy, his oversized ego. As irritating as Carnegie could be, there was
something irresistibly amusing about the “Star-spangled Scotchman.”

The year after his election, Taft was honored at “an oyster roast” and invited Carnegie to ride with him to
Cape Henry, Virginia, on his “special train.” Archie Butt, the army officer assigned as Taft’s personal
assistant, wrote his sister that Carnegie had entertained them both on the ride to the event. He was “more
shriveled up than ever, but he is very humorous and at time witty. The President says like all wily Scotchmen
[Carnegie] is funniest when he does not mean to be. He loves to talk about giving his money away, and amused
and interested the President…by giving him some of the plans he had for making himself poor.”²⁷

## THIRTY-EIGHT

## “So Be It,” 1908–1910

TRY AS HE MIGHT to give it all away, Andrew Carnegie in his seventh year of retirement was still burdened with
hundreds of millions of dollars of gold bonds. He had no choice now but to redouble his energies and enlist
his friends in his last great task: to wisely give away his fortune.

In January of 1908, six weeks after his seventy-second birthday, he sent out letters to the people he most
respected. “Dear Friend,” he wrote. “If you have any spare time at your command, will you kindly give me an
answer to this question:—If you had say five or ten millions of dollars to put to the best use possible, what
would you do with it? Prize given for the best answer.” Theodore Roosevelt got such a letter; so did Samuel
Church, the secretary of the Carnegie Institute board in Pittsburgh; Secretary of State Elihu Root;
ex-President Grover Cleveland; and President Nicholas Murray Butler of Columbia. Butler proposed that $10
million be donated to Columbia University; Grover Cleveland, that funds be given to Princeton; Root, that a
sort of “Rhodes fellowships” program be established to bring Latin American students to the United States.
When there was no response from President Roosevelt, Carnegie sent him a second letter assuring him that there
was “no hurry” in making a proposal. “The fact is that after spending about $50 million on Libraries, the
great cities are generally supplied and I am groping for the next field to cultivate…. I shall wait for some
time and get all the advice I can before taking up the new line.” He closed by comparing his responsibilities
as a philanthropist to those of the ex-president. “You have a hard task at present but the distribution of
money judiciously is not without its difficulties also and involves harder work than ever acquisition of
wealth did. I could play with that and laugh.”¹

Bertram and the officers of his various trusts took care of most requests for funds, but Carnegie had to
respond himself to petitions from friends, politicians, and assorted notables. The college presidents, of whom
he knew dozens, were the most insistent. While his Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching funded faculty
pensions, it did not give money for other purposes. Requests for fellowships, buildings, faculty chairs, or
endowments were sent directly to Carnegie in New York. Petitions from well-endowed universities, even those
run by the men he respected most in the world, like Nicholas Murray Butler of Columbia, Andrew White of
Cornell, and David Starr Jordan of Stanford, were invariably denied. “The case of Stanford University fails to
arouse the desire on my part to help,” he wrote Jordan sometime in 1906. “You tell me it has $16 millions in
endowments. The colleges I have been helping for two years, already about two hundred in number, do not
average more than $200,000 to $250,000 in endowments, and after deep consideration I decided that it was
better to help the small colleges than the large ones.”²

Instead of supporting the big schools, he had, he explained to Roosevelt in January 1908, been busy “for
several years giving aid to small colleges…. Mr. Bertram tells me we have assisted about three hundred and
fifty colleges and have about fifty under advisement…. Contributions to these small colleges aggregate between
$19 and $20 million, and the amount is growing.”³

Many of these small colleges were, in fact, not colleges at all, but technical schools like the one he had
established in Pittsburgh. When in the spring of 1909, William McConway, who was charged with overseeing the
Carnegie Technical Schools in Pittsburgh, wrote to ask Carnegie for funds to raise the salaries of “certain
staff” to the level paid by other institutions, Carnegie reminded him that the technical schools were not like
other institutions.

It seems a shame that certain staff should not be paid by us what others are paying…. But Yale University,
Boston Tech., Colgate University and Hamilton College, might all be considered institutions of higher
learning. We are not of that grade and have no intention entering it, being technical schools, in which class,
however, we should hope to be at the top. Our field seems to me to be entirely different from that of the
Scientific Schools and Universities. We aim to reach the children of poor people, especially those who have to
work thru the day and acquire knowledge at night. The richest ore is oftenest found deep down and it is in the
low stratum of human life we will find the jewels that will glisten for ages. I was a working boy myself….
Naturally I sympathize with this class and I wish my aid to go to this class.⁴

Carnegie was committed to funding schools for the children of the working people, black and white. He
explained to Frederick Lynch, who had asked why he didn’t fund Atlanta and Fisk universities, that he was not
“opposed to the higher education of the Negro,” but agreed with Booker T. Washington that black students
required specific technical training for the jobs available for them. Washington, who had contacted Carnegie
in 1890 to solicit funds for Tuskegee, received his first grant of $20,000 for a library in 1900. In 1906,
Washington arranged a special railroad trip to Tuskegee for his most favored donors. “Mr. Carnegie was very
happy,” Lynch, who accompanied him on the trip, reported in his recollections. “He saw the library which he
had given, every brick of which had been made by the students and laid in place by them. He visited all the
shops and saw the boys learning trades by making things to be used on the grounds and by building shops and
houses, and saw the girls learning dressmaking by making their own clothes…. He was greatly impressed and said
one day that Mr. Washington was one of the geniuses of the century.” Carnegie backed up his praise for
Washington’s educational practice with dollars: $620,000 for Tuskegee and $441,045 for Hampton.⁵

Carnegie, given to hero worship spoke of Booker T. Washington with the same reverence he used when referring
to William Gladstone, Matthew Arnold, Abraham Lincoln, and Herbert Spencer. A 1903 get-well note from
Washington was saved among his papers with a penciled notation in Carnegie’s handwriting, “Keep for
Auto[biography].” Washington was not only “the combined Moses and Joshua of his people,” he was, Carnegie
thought, an educational genius (perhaps because his commitment to technical training most resembled Carnegie’s
own). Carnegie invited him often to Ninety-first Street, introduced him to his friends, included him among the
select few who were privileged to meet John Morley on his tour, and hosted him at Skibo in the summer of 1910.
“My friend, Booker Washington, perhaps the most remarkable man living today, taking into account his birth as
a slave and his position now as the acknowledged leader of his people, is coming to England,” Carnegie wrote a
William Archer just before Washington’s arrival. “He could be induced to give a lecture in London and one in
Edinburgh. I should think he would be a drawing card. He has recently made a triumphal tour through the
Southwestern States, being received by white and black,—no hall big enough to hold his audiences. It occurs to
me that you might be able to recommend this matter to the proper authorities, whom you know and I do not.”⁶

Carnegie believed the cause of Negro education and uplift so vitally important to the future of the nation
that when invited to give a lecture to the Edinburgh Philosophical Institution in 1907, he chose as his topic
“The Negro in America.” Slavery might once have been a blot on the “Triumphant Democracy,” he argued, but no
more. In its place had arisen a new people who, with the beneficent support of northern whites like himself,
would in the course of time prosper and multiply. The Negro population in the South, Carnegie reported, had
risen steadily, a sure sign of their “fitness.” The portrait Carnegie painted of the position of the
African-American in the early twentieth-century South was unrecognizably positive. There was no mention of
lynching, sharecropping, peonage, Jim Crow, or disenfranchisement. Instead, Carnegie pointed to the progress
the southern Negro had made in literacy, land and home ownership, gainful employment, and the literary arts.
“All signs are encouraging, never so much so as today…. What is to be the final result of the white and black
races living together in centuries to come need not concern us. They may remain separate and apart as now or
may intermingle. That lies upon the ‘lap of the gods.’” While acknowledging that because the black race was
younger it was less developed than the white, Carnegie was emphatic that it would become more civilized, more
capable, more prosperous in time. His faith in Negro progress enraged southern racists like Tom Watson who,
the New York Times reported in a front-page article on February 4, 1910, “denounced the iron master as a
‘despicable creature,’ ‘an ass,’ and a defamer of the Scotch” for claiming that the “lowest negro of the South
is more advanced than were his (Carnegie’s) ancestors in Scotland two hundred years ago.”⁷

 

CARNEGIE ran his philanthropic empire much as he had his businesses. He kept in touch with the officers in
charge of each, received and studied their reports, and monitored their spending. Having hand-picked them all,
he had faith in their judgment and, with a few exceptions, let them run their organizations as they saw fit.
Those that did their job well and made a case for more funding got it. In 1909, he increased the $10 million
endowment of his Washington-based Carnegie Institution by $2 million, then added another $10 million in 1911.
From 1911 to 1915, he added $6.25 million to the $10 million endowment for the Carnegie Foundation for the
Advancement of Teaching. The Dunfermline Trust got an additional $1.25 million in 1911. His library and organ
programs and the Carnegie Institute and Technical School in Pittsburgh continued to receive regular increases
in funding.

The only cause he had yet to generously fund with an endowment was the one that mattered most to him:
international peace. He supported a large number of peace and arbitration societies on both sides of the
Atlantic, but he did not give any of them more than a few thousand dollars annually.⁸

The peace activists were, as far as he could see, utopian dreamers with no understanding of business or
politics. When in April 1905, Edwin Mead, a former editor of New England Magazine, solicited funds for an
international peace society, Carnegie promised to donate $125,000 if Mead could raise an equal sum elsewhere.
He suggested that the word “peace” be excised from its name in favor of “arbitration” and that further thought
be given to how the new society would be administered. “If we could only get the effective organization the
funds would be forthcoming. So far the path does not seem clear to me but it may be revealed [in] this, the
greatest of all causes.”⁹

Mead interpreted Carnegie’s response as an invitation to continue discussion of his new peace “organization.”
He badly misjudged the old man’s intentions. “One objection that arises to me” in endowing a new organization,
Carnegie brusquely informed Mead, “is the copious correspondence that must follow a gift, especially in your
case, for you are a most prolific writer.” Carnegie already supported several peace societies. He saw no need
to fund another. “I never like scattering my shot…I wish to feel that I am contributing towards an aboslute
necessity.”¹⁰

In January 1909, Nicholas Murray Butler forwarded to Carnegie yet another proposal for an international peace
trust, accompanied by letters of support from the men Carnegie most trusted, including among them Andrew
White, former Secretary of State John Forster, and Elihu Root.

Carnegie dismissed Butler’s proposal, though not without a note of encouragement. “At present I feel that it
is too much in the air,” he wrote, “much talk about bringing people together, and all of this sort of thing,
and nothing of a definite character. The avenues of expenditure should be distinctly stated.”¹¹

 

IF EVER A MAN had a gift for savoring life’s pleasures, it was Andrew Carnegie. His major source of worry for
the past three years, his daughter’s health, was quickly receding into the past. In March 1908, as the family
prepared to sail for England, Baba’s brace was finally removed, and for the first time in two years, she was
able to stand upright and walk on two legs. Many years later, when Margaret Carnegie was asked by her
granddaughter and namesake, Margaret Thomson, whether Grandpa Naigie believed in God, she told the story of
how when she walked into his room for the first time without her splints, “he went down on his knees…Grandma
felt that he was giving thanks to God for her recovery…. Why else would he have gone down on his knees?”¹²

With Baba improved, the Carnegies were no longer obliged to winter on Cumberland Island and were able to spend
more of the season in New York City. Carnegie had become so smitten with golf that he couldn’t bear the
thought of giving up the game during the winter. Fortunately, the St. Andrew’s Golf Club in Hastings-on-Hudson
was but an hour or so from Manhattan. The club had been founded in 1888 by two Scotsmen from Dunfermline.
Carnegie was elected to membership in 1896, though he did not pay his dues and officially become a member
until the following year. In the early 1900s, after personally endorsing the club’s new mortgage, Carnegie
built himself a weekend cottage on club property, just north of the clubhouse. It was here—“in our Golf
Cottage, a pretty little gem, cottage furniture throughout, no finery”—that the family spent many quiet days
and nights, including New Year’s Day 1908. The cottage was indeed a gem: wood paneled, rustic-looking, with
open beams on the ceiling, and a large fireplace in the main room. It provided Carnegie with everything he
needed. A photograph taken in the early 1910s shows him with his feet up, a newspaper in his hand, sitting in
front of the fire. Another shows him formally dressed, with a white handkerchief in his pocket, sitting down
to a meal at the dining-room table.¹³

According to Burton Hendrick, Carnegie had a long list of potential golf partners, including Nicholas Murray
Butler, who could be called upon at a moment’s notice. “His secretary would call up the favored devotee
suggesting his presence at Ninety-first Street at a particular hour. On cold days butlers and friends would
bundle the little figure in a heavy coat, with mufflers, huge turned-up collar, and hat drawn well over the
ears, until nothing protruded except nose and goggled eyes; the car would emit a honk and off the gay party
would whirl to the beautiful Westchester hills.” “Weather superb so far,” he wrote Morley on December 31,
1907, “& I’ll play golf & Motor with Lou & Baba.—Never was better.”¹⁴

By the turn of the century, Carnegie had become so notorious a golfer that he was proposed for the presidency
of the United States Golf Association. The charms of golf were many, as he would write in 1911 at age
seventy-five. The first was that it was played “under the sky…. Every breath seems to drive away weakness and
disease, securing for us longer terms of happy days here on hear…. No doctor like Doctor Golf.” Next in
importance was golf ’s “power to affect the temper and especially the tongue. We have only to remain silent to
produce unusual results.” Unlike other sports, where the competitors drew farther apart as the game proceeded,
in golf “men become dearer friends than ever; the oftener they meet on the green, the fonder they become of
each other.”¹⁵

Carnegie was not a particularly good golfer, but this did not detract from his love of the game. He enjoyed
the competition, wanted to win, and was said to sulk when he did not. He taught Louise and Baba and played
with them whenever they would consent to join him. As proud as he was of Baba’s ability to memorize lines of
poetry or ask probing questions about theology, he was proudest of all of her golf game. In 1903, he boasted
to his cousin Dod that his daughter had finished her nine holes in 91. In July 1906, just before she injured
her leg, he wrote Samuel Church in Pittsburgh, that she finished the nine-hole course at Skibo “in 81—her
record—pretty good for 6¹/4 years.” That Baba was, in fact, three years older at the time, did not diminish
her achievement. (Was Carnegie exaggerating her age to make her score more spectacular or had he forgotten how
old she was?) One of the sad byproducts of Baba’s years in braces was that Carnegie was deprived of the joy of
playing nine holes of golf with his daughter.¹⁶

Margaret Carnegie emerged whole from her ordeal an attractive young girl with a slight, almost undetectable
limp. Her illness was relegated to the distant past, never mentioned, barely remembered in family stories.
Andrew could now concentrate his attention on her intellectual growth, her capacity to memorize the passages
he gave her from Burns and Shakespeare, her incredulity when it came to Bible stories, and her curiosity about
all the things young girls are curious about.

[image]

A GALLERY OF GOLF ENTHUSIASTS

Carnegie prepared a list of poems which he gave Nana to help Baba “learn by heart.” She learned other poems
from hearing her father recite them. “I must tell you,” he wrote Morley in March 1909, the month of her
twelfth birthday, “Margaret astonished me the other night by repeating the Seven Ages of Man [and several
other poems]…All perfect & in fine style—She is developing fast—puzzles her Mother about certain things in
Holy Writ; now & then that give Madam some anxiety…. She has grown very fast in stature recently.” A month
later, in another of his Sunday letters, he repeated himself, with evident glee: “She has become absorbed in
Shakespeare, as I always told her she would be…. She seems to inherit her Father’s Knack of absorbing
Shakespeare—I repeated pages when not much older & can do it yet, but she grows troublesome on Bible stories,
very, her Mother stalled & sometimes appalled at her temerity—but she has past the Fairytale period.” In
December of that same year, he confided to Morley, in the few sentences he seemed to reserve in every letter
for a report on his daughter, that Margaret continued “to grow & is really the Young Lady, troubling her
Mother with questions which you & I would be but poorly prepared to answer. She cannot be put off.”¹⁷

Margaret had never been to school. That fall, at age twelve and a half, she had begun taking formal lessons
with a tutor recommended by Miss Clara B. Spence, preparatory to entering Miss Spence’s school the next
autumn. When the Carnegies asked whether they might interrupt Margaret’s schooling and take her with them to
the west coast, Miss Spence agreed—it would have been difficult to say no to a Carnegie—but suggested that
Margaret’s tutor, Anne Brinkerhoff, accompany the party.

The six-week journey, of which Margaret kept a travel diary, began at 7:20 on the morning of February 14,
1910, when the Carnegie party, Miss Brinkerhoff, and Baba’s nanny took the Twenty-third Street ferry to New
Jersey, where they boarded their private car, “Olivette,” for the trip south to Philadelphia, and west across
the Alleghenies to Pittsburgh. At Pittsburgh, while the Olivette was parked in the Pennsylvania Railroad shed
awaiting the train that would haul it to Chicago, Carnegie invited officials from his institute to meet with
him in his railway car. No sooner had they sat down to talk than “Train No. 15,” waiting to be taken into
Union Station, crashed into the Olivette, shattering vases and hurling ice pitchers, dishes of food, and the
diminutive Mr. Carnegie to the floor. The doctor was called for and having pronounced Carnegie fit, though
rather pale, the Olivette was coupled to a westbound train.¹⁸

From the private platform at the back of their car, the Carnegies watched the country recede behind them.
Margaret remembered getting off the train and going for walks in the Kansas prairies, in Dodge City, and again
in Arizona. Their final destination was Santa Barbara, where they were met at the station by local officials
and by the chauffeur driving the Pierce-Arrow Carnegie had leased. “Such a welcome…the Scotch society gave
Daddy! They had the bagpipes and a band there who played Scotch aires, and then a little girl in a kilt gave
Daddy a lovely bunch of roses tied with a tartan ribbon.”

Margaret spent most of her time during the six-week vacation in the company of Nana and her tutor. She saw her
father in the afternoon when, after her lessons were finished, the family went for a drive in the
Pierce-Arrow. On their second day in Santa Barbara, they visited the Potter Golf Club. “Daddy was delighted
with the golf course. Poor Daddy! It was hard for him to see it when he cannot play. I can sympathize with
him.” Carnegie, now seventy-five, was “not quite well.” There was something, we don’t know what, the matter
with his leg, which left him unable to join his daughter and wife on their walks.

After two weeks in Santa Barbara, the family traveled in their private railway car north to Monterey, where
they stayed at the Hotel del Monte and visited “the library Daddy gave at Pacific Grove. We all were delighted
with it.” At Monterey, they switched to an even more “comfortable” railroad car, and visited, in succession,
Santa Cruz, San Francisco, and Pasadena. Wherever they traveled, the Carnegies were saluted with Scottish
flags, foods, fauna, and music. Carnegie was not just a visiting hero, but a foreign exotic as well.

After their final library visit at Pasadena, the Carnegies were packed into motorcars for an excursion to the
Mount Wilson Observatory, which was funded by the Carnegie Institution in Washington, D.C.

Margaret thought the observatory, with its “wonderful instruments for making observations and pictures” was
interesting, though she was sorry she “could not see something” through the telescopes. Carnegie toured the
facilities, peered through the telescopes, chatted with the astronomers, and had several photographs taken
with George Ellery Hale, the founding director. Walter Adams, who would succeed Hale, recalled later that
Carnegie made sure before each photo was taken that he was standing on “the higher position on a slope since
he was somewhat sensitive about his height.”¹⁹

They headed east again and spent three days at the Grand Canyon, where Margaret, with her mother, tutor, and
nanny, went on walks, drives, and picnics. There is no mention of Carnegie, who must have been giving more
speeches. On March 30, Margaret turned thirteen: “After breakfast I opened my presents of which I had a great
many. In fact all the things I most wanted. Daddy gave me a beautiful purple vase made of cloysinnay
[cloisonné] which I fell in love with at ‘Sing Fat’s’ in San Francisco…. The car was all decorated with paper
wisteria, also from ‘Sing Fat’s.’” With this entry, Margaret’s travel book comes to an end. In the front
flyleaf she had written that, if lost, “the finder will be awarded $5 in America, £1 in Britain.”²⁰

“Had stirring times in the West,” Carnegie reported to Morley on his return to New York in mid-April,
“speechifying almost daily, more or less. Never suspected I was so great a personage out there. Madam and I
going to Washington Monday next to Dedicate beautiful building—Temple of peace.” A week later, back from
Washington, he informed Morley in his Sunday letter that he and Louise had been “feted” there: “2500
handshakes, awful…but the President stood it & we were in for it along side.”²¹

Carnegie refused to let age slow him down. The only reminder of time passing was the now steady procession of
death notices and funerals of friends and loved ones. In the spring of 1909, he got word that Henry Rogers,
Sam Clemens’s friend—and benefactor—had died. “Gone & only sixty-eight & here you & I are left & both in good
health though older men,” he wrote Clemens at once. “Pity he did not retire years ago. I tell you my Friend no
man is fit to meet business conditions in old age. I have seen too many fail. Fortunately you are clear of
troubles & have only to moralize upon life as a looker on, so with me,—never to make another dollar was my
resolve & I’ve kept it…. We are en route for Paris & London, Madam& Daughter & myself—the three all very
well.” The letter was signed: “Good night Saint Mark, Ever your devoted, Andrew Carnegie.”²²

In November, Richard Watson Gilder died. “My greatest loss, a pure white soul,” he wrote Morley. “No one of my
Circle here can leave such a void.”²³

And then Clemens took sick. Carnegie tried to make light of his friend’s illness. “I am just waiting for Saint
Mark’s return,” he wrote Albert Bigelow Paine, Clemens’s friend and biographer, who had taken him to Bermuda
to recuperate. “It is very hard for me when my confessor is absent so long. I need him. I am in sore straits.
He must give me an opportunity to get absolution.”²⁴

Clemens returned to Connecticut just before Christmas. Carnegie welcomed him back with a postcard, mailed on
Christmas Eve: “Hail Saint Mark. Back again to your nest. Merry Christmas and many of them.” He signed it:
“Ever your devoted discipline and fellow saint in the flesh.” It is doubtful that Clemens got the card. On the
day it was mailed, his youngest daughter Jean died in the bathtub, after an epileptic seizure. Alone now, with
two of his three adult children and his wife dead, Clemens sailed back to Bermuda for the winter. When he
returned to Connecticut in April 1910, there was a letter waiting for him from Carnegie: “Dear Saint, So glad
you are reported better this morning. Gives one hopes you are to weather this storm and be spared to us a
while longer—so be it…. When you get real chatty again if you can [and] are not coming down [to New York City]
I’d like to make a pilgrimage to your shrine just to get a few sniffs of a real genuine work a day Saint.” He
added as a postscript: “I have sent you a few bottles of Saintly fluid.”²⁵

We don’t know if Clemens had a chance to read Carnegie’s last letter, written on April 16. He died five days
later. “A blank in my life is caused by his departure,” Carnegie wrote Paine, before departing for Britain and
his own last great adventure.²⁶

## THIRTY-NINE

## The Best Laid Schemes, 1909–1911

SINCE 1848, when his family arrived in New York Harbor from Dunfermline, Andrew Carnegie had been a child of
two worlds. He had put down roots in America without having to uproot himself from Scotland. If his early
allegiance to “the English-speaking race,” manifested in his calls for Anglo-American federation, had been
narrowly based on cultural and family ties, by the mid-1900s, after a lifetime of travel back and forth
between Britain, Europe, and America, he had become a dyed-in-the-wool internationalist. Although as a young
man he had indulged in sentimental musings about the “brotherhood of man,” his latter-day internationalism was
materially based. The nations and peoples of the world were, he now argued, tied together by indissoluble
threads of traded goods. “We are coming to understand,” he wrote in the New York Times Sunday Magazine on
April 7, 1907, “that the human race is one…. The interest of thousands who depend on the manufacture of
agricultural implements or machinery of other sorts is at stake when the farms of Russia are lying untilled or
the factories of Germany are closed because men are off to the wars.” Every war in the future would be a world
war, with consequences felt beyond the battlements and the home fronts. “We may be disinterested in the issues
over which the conflict is joined, but we are vitally interested in the conflict…. The world is getting to be
like a workshop in which it is an impertinence and an outrage for two men to drop their tools and engage in a
fisticuff and a scuffle to the destruction of the whole shop and the destruction of machines and of products
upon them.”

Given these ties, from which there was no escape, it was imperative, Carnegie argued, that the nations of the
world establish organizations and define processes to defuse crises and arbitrate disputes before they
escalated into armed conflicts. At various moments, as the situation suited, he advocated bilateral treaties
of arbitration, international disarmament conferences, a permanent world court, and the organization of a
league of peace with an active police force. The specific shape of such proposals mattered less to him than
that something be put in place before it was too late.

[image]

“ALL IS PEACE AND GOOD WILL. THE WORLD MOVES.”
—ANDREW CARNEGIE

His immediate concern early in the new century was the escalating naval arms race between the British and the
Germans. The Liberal government in Britain had, on taking office in late 1905, pledged to slow down its
production of new battleships, hoping that the German government would follow suit. It did not. Responding to
the British construction of the world’s first Dreadnought, a battleship that was larger, faster, and equipped
with ten guns instead of the standard four, the Germans set out to build their own monster battleships. The
British then stepped up their production. In 1908, the first lord of the Admiralty asked for funding for two
Dreadnoughts; in 1909, he requested funds to build six a year for the next three years; a month later, he
increased his request to eight new Dreadnoughts. After a fierce debate in the cabinet, Prime Minister Herbert
Asquith agreed to fund four monster battleships in 1909, with an additional four to be added in 1910 “if
careful monitoring of the German construction program proved them necessary.”¹

Carnegie’s solution to the crisis was ingenious—and unworkable. In a series of letters to the editor and
public remarks, he suggested a naval alliance between the Americans and the British. With U.S. battleships
protecting the North Atlantic and the Royal Navy the Pacific, neither nation would need new battleships. Such
an alliance would preserve the peace by discouraging the Germans from attacking the possessions of either
nation, knowing that an attack on one would bring retaliation by the other. Unfortunately, the idea that the
British and American governments would ever contemplate coordinating their navies—or entering a formal
alliance to do so—was preposterous. It was never going to happen.²

In major addresses before a peace rally at Carnegie Hall and at the annual meeting of the New York Peace
Society at the Hotel Astor, Carnegie argued that armies and navies did not ensure peace, but rather provoked
war. “It is true that every nation regards and proclaims its own armaments as instruments of Peace only…but
just as naturally every nation regards every other nation’s armaments as clearly instruments of war…. Thus
each nation suspects all the others, and only a spark is needed to set fire to the mass of inflammable
material.” Men with pistols in their hands were more likely to shoot one another; nations with armies and
navies more likely to engage in war. It did not require much imagination to envisage a scenario where a minor
incident might lead to world war, perhaps a drunken altercation between British and German marines. “Under the
influence of alcohol…one is wounded, blood is shed, and the pent up passions of the people of both countries
sweep all to the winds.”³

Carnegie’s prescience was remarkable. Only five years hence, an Austrian archduke would be assassinated by a
Serbian student terrorist. The European nations would mobilize their armies, each claiming it was doing so for
defensive purposes. With no mechanism in place to arbitrate the dispute, the armies remained in place, the
dispute unresolved peaceably. Then blood was shed and “the pent up passions of the people [swept] all to the
winds,” as Carnegie had feared. The result was the Great War, a continent ravaged, and tens of millions of
soldiers and civilians left dead, maimed, stateless, destitute.

Carnegie did not in 1909 regard such an outcome as inevitable, but only because he believed that the European
leaders would come to understand, as he had, the dangers inherent in spending more and more of their national
incomes on armies and navies. “To save the nations from themselves there must sooner or later emerge from the
present unparalleled increase of armaments a league of peace embracing the most advanced nations.” In his
address to the New York Peace Society in late April, which the New York Times reported under the headline:
“CARNEGIE FEARS WAR; PLEADS FOR PEACE. ONLY A SPARK NEEDED, HE DECLARES, TO PLUNGE ENGLAND AND GERMANY INTO
BATTLE,” Carnegie suggested that the United States, “at heart friendly toward all the world and lying beyond
the vortex of the militarism which engulfs Europe,” should take the lead in organizing a League of Peace.⁴

Carnegie had no doubt that his proposals—for a naval alliance and a League of Peace—once effectuated, would
bring about world peace. The question was how best to get that notion across to those world leaders whose
active involvement was needed. He admitted to Morley in his Sunday letter of April 25 that there was no one in
the new Taft administration capable of taking the lead in the peace process. He suggested, rather deviously,
that the British government propose holding an international disarmament conference, which Taft would be
obliged to agree to. With the Americans and British in favor of such a conference, the pressure on the Germans
would be too much to withstand. There was no response from Morley.⁵

His League of Peace proposals having found no champion, Carnegie took it upon himself to organize an
international naval disarmament conference. Instead of sailing directly to England from New York in the spring
of 1909, he set off with the family on a quasi-diplomatic tour of the Continent to introduce his new peace
proposal. The first stop was Naples, where he was met by an Italian senator with a message from King Victor
Emmanuel “expressing his desire [to] receive me [at a] private audience.” From Naples, Carnegie took his wife
and daughter to Florence. Lou and Baba wanted more time for sightseeing, but Carnegie was in a hurry to get to
Rome. There, he whisked the family off to the Forum where, with his daughter at his side, he recited “Mark
Antony’s famous words in Julius Caesar beginning, ‘Friends, Romans, Countrymen.’”⁶

Though Baba thought her father had hurriedly left Florence because he wanted to take her to the Forum, his
more immediate concern was his audience with Victor Emmanuel in the king’s residence. The king listened, while
Carnegie praised Rome, Italians, the king as a family man, and talked of his plans for peace. Then it was off
to Stresa with Baba and Louise for a week on the Italian Lakes, before Carnegie hurled himself back into the
diplomatic whirlwind.⁷

In Paris, he sat for an extended interview with Premier Georges Clemenceau, then attended a dinner at the U.S.
Embassy, a breakfast at the Sorbonne, a private audience with President Armand Fallières, and a farewell
dinner hosted by peace activist Baron d’Estournelles de Constant. He also announced a gift of $1 million for a
French Hero Fund. An admiring journalist who had been accompanying Carnegie on his diplomatic tour wrote by
“special cable” to the New York Times on May 30 that although the donation to the French Hero Fund was
receiving a great deal of publicity, it was of secondary importance to Carnegie, who had in mind a “project
vaster and more immediate in effect. He proposes an international conference for the purpose of limiting
armaments…. Mr. Carnegie is now engaged…in sounding the rulers of Europe as to what reception such a call
would receive…. ‘I find Europe in a ferment,’ he said. ‘The nations have gone Dreadnought mad…. Our country
necessarily is about to be drawn into the vortex.’” Carnegie urged President Taft to issue a call for an
international conference. “Here, I say, is probably the way out of the dangers which threaten civilization
itself…. Never was a holier mission entrusted to a nation than that which devolves on our Republic. Even to
fail in the effort to preserve the world’s peace would be more glorious than to succeed in smaller issues. May
President Taft…rise to the occasion and let the world know that there is one nation which stands forth willing
even to fail as the champion of peace. Thus shall he, at least, have done his duty and placed our country in
its proper position as the leader of the nations for peace on earth and among men good will.”

Carnegie’s self-imposed diplomatic mission came to a rather abrupt end in Paris. He had hoped to receive an
invitation to meet with the kaiser or German government officials to discuss his proposals, but none came.
Still he remained upbeat. “Had a very kind note in reply from the Emperor to whom I sent Roosevelt books,” he
wrote Morley in June 1909. (Either the kaiser had taken more than a year to respond to Carnegie, who had sent
him the books in May 1908, or Carnegie was only now bringing up his “note” to remind Morley of his close
relations with Wilhelm II.) “He was much impressed by the Introduction—so he tells me,—Glad to see me at Kiel
this summer, but I’m not going unless he specially asks me to unfold my ideas or rather Man of destiny idea.”⁸

From Paris, Carnegie crossed the Channel and set up shop in London in the hope, unfulfilled, that Morley would
be able to arrange an interview for him with the prime minister. He publicized his proposals for an
international conference in letters to the editors of The Times of London and the Westminster Gazette. “I’m
having a revised copy printed,” he wrote Morley in late June, “& shall send to my August friends, Emperors,
Kings, President, Prime Ministers & to every Member Legislatures of Europe & America. Am going to scatter it
broadcast. Also get Peace Society here to scatter it in Britain. D’Estournelles is getting it in various
languages for Europe…. If you talk to Asquith or [Foreign Secretary] Grey wish I knew what they have to say
anent Peace on the Seas.”⁹

His efforts to bring Germany and Britain to the conference table having failed, Carnegie was more than ever
determined to enlist Roosevelt as his surrogate. The ex-president had reestablished contact with Carnegie from
Mombasa, off the coast of Kenya, on June 1 after a few months’ silence. In duplicate letters sent to Skibo and
New York, Roosevelt complained that his expedition was costing much more than he had foreseen. He was prepared
to pay his own and his son Kermit’s expenses, but required additional funds for the three naturalists and the
“immense amount of scientific impedimenta with them. As one item I may mention that there are four tons of
salt—which we carried on the backs of porters…. We need special skinning tents, special tents for storing the
skins, and of course the skins of the big animals have to be carried along by numbers of additional porters.
All this will serve simply to show by example why the expedition is necessarily far more expensive than an
ordinary hunting trip of the same size.” Roosevelt asked Carnegie for $30,000 in the name of scientific
research. Suggesting the possibility of a sort of quid pro quo, he inquired “if there [were] any chance of
your being in London when I am there next May? Or in Berlin, where I shall be shortly before?”¹⁰

Carnegie wrote Charles Walcott, the secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, who had organized the safari
funding, to suggest that contributors to the project double their original donations. “Tell them I am, Morgan
will—they all will if they know T. R. wishes it…. We must not fail…. We must not let our greatest man suffer,
remember.” In the end, Carnegie was almost alone in his willingness to pour more money into the expedition. He
pledged another $5,000 in addition to the $2,750 he had already given, and then, when it became apparent no
one else was going to make up the difference, he sent Walcott $20,000 more.¹¹

The day after he contacted Walcott, Carnegie, sensing that he had Roosevelt in his snares, wrote the big game
hunter in Africa to tell him that he was prepared to support his expedition, but expected something in return.
“You are supposed to be after big game, my friend. All very well for a holiday, but, of course, unworthy as a
pursuit of one who has played and, in my hope and belief, is yet to play a great game in the world…. Shall be
so glad when you have started upon your return, and hope you will make it a point of meeting the big men of
the world. These are the big game, although your present holiday was well-earned.”¹²

Roosevelt thanked Carnegie for his contribution. He was, he wrote, looking “forward eagerly to seeing Mrs.
Carnegie and you in London next May. There is very much I shall have to talk over with you, and especially
what you say of navies and peace…. Of course if we could get the principal powers to form a court of arbitral
justice with some power of enforcement of its decrees, an immense step in advance would have been taken. You
and I & Root must talk the matter over when we get home.” In response to Carnegie’s suggestion that he should
give a lecture at Edinburgh, he admitted that it was “a most attractive invitation,” but one he was at the
moment unable to accept. “My dear fellow, don’t ask me to make a definite engagement at this moment. I shall
be a very short time in Europe as I shall be anxious to get back to America. Nevertheless what you wish me to
do I shall certainly strive hard to do.”¹³

This was precisely what Carnegie had been hoping to hear. Did he recognize that Roosevelt’s cooperation in his
peace plan had been less than voluntary, that he had bought his assistance by paying for his safari? Perhaps,
but it did not matter. Roosevelt was a man of honor. If it took a few thousand dollars to get him moving in
the right direction, that was an acceptable price to pay. Sensing that Roosevelt’s reluctance to take on the
peace mission had much to do with his fear that it might fail, Carnegie tried to reassure him: “If any man can
get the [German] Emperor in accord for peace, you are that man. He will go far to act in unison with you, of
this I am certain. You are sympathetic souls.”¹⁴

By early fall, Carnegie was planning the details of Roosevelt’s peace pilgrimage. After meeting with the
kaiser in Berlin, Roosevelt would sit down with the leaders of the British Liberal government—and the
opposition Tories—at Ambassador Whitelaw Reid’s residence at Wrest Park in Bedforshire. “Am to meet Roosevelt
London sure early in May,” he wrote Morley on October 7, 1909, “& then that meeting of the right few and none
others you are to arrange. I’ll write you from New York about it when Roosevelt gives me his dates. I may go
to Berlin to meet him & have a meeting there before the London visit. I am hopeful something important may
result from Roosevelt’s efforts.”¹⁵

Roosevelt and Carnegie remained in communication through the fall, engaged in a round robin of flattery, each
convinced he had gotten the best of the other but disguising it. Roosevelt’s letters had turned
uncharacteristically fawning, almost obsequious. “I have read your two pamphlets[*][1] with real interest and
with entire agreement as to the general policy—of course could not speak of details. The increase of naval
armaments is becoming a well-night intolerable burden…. When I see the Kaiser I will go over the matter at
length with him, telling him I wish to repeat our whole conversation to you; then I’ll tell it all to you when
I am in London. I shall be in London about May 1st. I regard the proposed quiet conference [with the British
leaders at Wrest Park] as most important. I leave absolutely with you the arrangements to be made through
Morley, as you suggest…. I only fear, my dear Mr. Carnegie, that you do not realize how unimportant a man I
now am, and how little weight I shall have in the matter.”¹⁶

Everything appeared to be going according to plan. In late October, Carnegie wrote Morley from Liverpool on
his way back to New York. He was consumed by excitement at the prospect of the next spring’s meetings. “Do
take care of yourself for believe me you are going to be in position to do great work in May when Roosevelt is
with us or I am mistaken. I saw Mr. Balfour [former prime minister and head of the Conservative Party] in
Manchester & told him we wanted a meeting & explained—He is responsive to a degree as I expected. He &
Lansdowne [the former Tory foreign secretary], Asquith & Grey and You. Maybe Haldane [the secretary for
war]—No more. I told you Roosevelt had written me—It is time for Statesmen (not politicians) to understand
each other & act in unison rewar. Either Britain or America will bring the subject before the powers unless
the Emperor decides to play the part open to him [and calls for a conference]. I’ll be in London in good time
in May to consult with you. Meanwhile Madam & I accompany Taft and Mrs. President to Hampton [College], & I’ll
have a free talk.”¹⁷

Through the autumn months, Carnegie continued to funnel money to Roosevelt in Africa. Afraid that the funds he
had given through the Smithsonian might not reach Nairobi in time, he instructed Robert Franks to honor any
“drafts” Roosevelt presented. Roosevelt, on learning of the arrangement, wrote to thank Carnegie and assure
him that he planned to follow through on his post-safari peace mission. He asked only that Carnegie contact
former secretary of state and now senator from New York Elihu Root, and ask him to prepare a position paper
which Roosevelt could use in approaching the kaiser. “Root’s gift of phrasing things is unequaled…and his name
carries great weight. It would give me just the clear-cut proposition I desire.”¹⁸

Carnegie forwarded Roosevelt’s request to Root. Still worried that the ex-president was less than enthusiastic
about his peace mission, he indulged in yet more cheerleading for the cause. “I cannot but feel that if you
are disposed to cooperate and take the leader’s part in conferring with German rulers,” he wrote on Christmas
Eve 1909, “and especially if you press for a League of Peace, that you would triumph…. The only question is
whether the idea of promoting World Peace stirs you. It if does, you will not fail, but even failure in such a
cause would be noble…I am willing to throw aside everything, and I know Root and Butler share this feeling,
because we see success with you as the Great Peace Maker.”¹⁹

Understanding full well that it was President Taft, not Roosevelt, who would have to broker any potential
international agreement through the U.S. Senate, Carnegie visited Taft in Washington, attended a “Cabinet
dinner,” and then spent the night of December 16 in the White House. “The President,” he wrote Morley, “is
advised of our aims & approves…. I’ll write Mr. Reid & you & he can fix date Meeting at Wrest. Roosevelt says
during Second week in May he will be ready.” Fearing that Morley, like Roosevelt, might not be sufficiently
enthusiastic, he assured him that if Roosevelt thought Britain “favorable” to the idea of a League of Peace,
he would “find means to bring the Emperor and his advisers seriously to consider [it].” Even if no League of
Peace were immediately forthcoming, the meeting Carnegie had planned at Wrest Park would bring the British
leaders and Roosevelt closer together, and that was no small matter. “Remember Roosevelt’s career is not yet
over. In all probability he will be President again, and it will count for much that he knows your colleagues
as he knows you.”²⁰

In mid-January 1910, responding to an earlier letter in which Roosevelt stressed how anxious he was to get
home, Carnegie begged him not to short-change his peace mission. “Please do not hurry away from Berlin until
you have made friends with half a dozen men there, because, as sure as you live, that friendship will stand
you in good stead some day by enabling you to accomplish a great work. The day must come soon when nations
stop this rivalry in armaments.”²¹

On February 18, the letter that Carnegie had been expecting—and fearing—was dispatched from Gondokoro on the
east bank of the Nile, about 750 miles south of Khartoum. With his year-long adventure coming to its
conclusion, Roosevelt had finally taken the time to give Carnegie’s plan the consideration it required. He was
ready to move forward—and so informed Carnegie—but he wanted his friend and benefactor to fully understand his
“reservations.”

Well. Here, I find all your letters, and I guess I shall have to surrender…. Now, however for some
reservations. First, and least important personal. I want to go home! I am homesick for my own land and my own
people! Of course it is Mrs. Roosevelt I most want to see; but I want to see my two youngest boys; I want to
see my own house, my own books and trees, the sunset over the Sound from the window in the north room, the
people with whom I have worked, who think my thoughts and speak my speech….

Second: as to the policy itself. With your policy, as you outline it (of course accepting it generally and not
binding myself as to details), I am in hearty sympathy…. But you have on your paper certain names Stead and
[Benjamin] Trueblood [secretary of the American Peace Society] which inspire me with a most lively distrust.
Stead and Trueblood for instance belong to the type that makes a good cause ridiculous. Their proposals are
rarely better than silly; and the only reason that the men themselves are not exceedingly mischievous is that
they are well-nigh impotent for either good or evil…. I cannot conscientiously support, nor could I persuade
any sane and honest ruler or great public servant to support, the fantastic and noxious theories of such
extremists as those to whom I have alluded.

Roosevelt, the realist, was laying down the law to Carnegie, the visionary, much as he had done three years
earlier on the eve of the New York peace congress. Rather than accuse Carnegie of silliness, mischievousness,
or impotence, Roosevelt took aim at his associates in the peace movement. It was one thing to paint pretty
pictures in the air, another to formulate a policy that had a reasonable chance of success on earth. On
numerous occasions, presidents, to the applause of the peace activists, had sent forward ambitious proposals,
only to have them dismissed or amended beyond recognition in the Senate. Fully aware of how seriously the
Senate took its responsibilities, Roosevelt tried his best to impress on Carnegie the futility of asking for
too much:

I will do all I can to bring about such a league of, or understanding among, the great powers as will forbid
one of them, or any small power, to engage in unrighteous, foolish or needless war; to secure an effective
arbitral tribunal, with power to enforce at least certain of its decrees; to secure an agreement to check the
waste of money on growing and excessive armaments. If as is probable, so much cannot be secured at once, I
will do all I can to help in the movement, rapid or slow, towards the desired end. But I will not be, and you
would not wish me to be, put in the attitude of advocating the impossible, or, above all, of seeming to be
insincere…. I cannot be, or seem to be, an accredited envoy; I cannot work for a policy which I think our
country might repudiate; I cannot work for anything that does not represent some real progress; and it is
useless to expect to accomplish everything at once. But I will do all in my power, all that is feasible, to
help in the effort to secure some substantial advance towards the goal.²²

Carnegie, dependent on Roosevelt to carry his scheme forward, accepted every caveat attached. He agreed that
the organization of world peace would take time and patience. All he wanted now was for the curtain to rise on
the drama he had scripted. The key players were in the wings. Taft had signed off on the plan in Washington;
American Ambassadors David Hill in Berlin and Whitelaw Reid in London were, with John Morley, awaiting their
cues, scripts in hand; Roosevelt was preparing his entrance from off stage (very far off stage). Everything
was proceeding according to schedule—or almost.

The tragedy of Carnegie’s last years was that no one took him as seriously as he took himself. He was not
blameless in this, having long ago abandoned every pretense of moderation in pursuit of his goals. He was an
extremist—and proud of it, an optimist who saw only the silver linings, never the storm clouds. It was his
task to ask for the impossible and hope that someday it would be granted him. That others might consider him a
dotty old fool did not register with him. He was eccentric, that was for sure, but his past achievements
demanded that attention be paid.

If Carnegie had a fatal weakness, it was the misplaced faith he put in those he counted as his colleagues in
the fight for peace. Roosevelt had written Carnegie that he was in “hearty sympathy” with his general
“policy,” knowing full well that the crux of any diplomatic agreement was in the details. He had assured him
that he “entirely [agreed] with the views you and Root hold,” knowing that the two men’s views were quite
different. In almost every communication he sent, the ex-president tried to dampen the old man’s ardor and
rein in his expectations. He would accomplish what he could, but it might not be very much.²³

Carnegie should have read more clearly what the ex-president had to say; he should have remembered how
Roosevelt had undercut him in 1907, before The Hague Conference. He preferred not to. The past was not a
predictor of the present or the future. No matter how grim today, tomorrow would be brighter. Carnegie’s
optimism was an essential ingredient of his personality, one that had been confirmed and strengthened by his
acceptance of Spencer’s evolutionary philosophy. Roosevelt might for the moment appear less than interested in
his peace mission, but once swept up in the process, once convinced that he was, with Carnegie, a man of
destiny, he would take up the challenge that history—and Andrew Carnegie—had set for him.

 

THEODORE ROOSEVELT began his victory tour of Europe in early April 1910. Days after he had landed in Italy,
the German press was already expressing concern that he might, on his visit to Berlin, take advantage of the
kaiser’s hospitality to raise subjects that his royal highness wished not to discuss, like naval disarmament.
Roosevelt blamed the government-inspired press onslaught on “some inadvertence on Mr. Carnegie’s part.” Rather
than being annoyed, however, he was perversely pleased by the bad publicity as it dampened expectations of
future success. “I was really grateful to the Berlin government for taking such public action,” he wrote the
British historian and politician George Otto Trevelyan a year later. “Not only Mr. Carnegie, but a multitude
of well-meaning and ignorant people, had wrought themselves into the belief that if I chose I could do
something with the Emperor for peace; and I was glad to be able to point out to them this announcement from
the German foreign office in advance of my visit, which saved me the necessity of trying to explain why I
could accomplish nothing.”²⁴

From Paris, Roosevelt wrote Carnegie to tell him of the obstacles that had been placed in his way. “I
anticipated, as you of course saw from my letters, that I should have difficulties in accomplishing anything
[in Berlin] even along the cautious lines of conduct which Root very properly suggested…but if, as I suppose
to be the case, you have seen the Berlin papers, you probably already know that even my anticipations of the
difficulties came far short of the actual facts.” He begged Carnegie to keep quiet in future about the peace
mission. Elihu Root “has felt all along, and of course I entirely agree with him, that the correspondence
between you, myself and him, on peace matters, should be kept entirely secret, for the very reason that we do
not want to arouse the feeling which the Berlin newspapers have shown.”²⁵

While he anticipated a chilly reception in Berlin, Roosevelt was greeted like a conquering hero in Paris. His
ostensible reason for stopping there was to deliver a lecture at the Sorbonne on the duties of republican
citizenship. In an almost two-hour speech, he voiced his approval of “righteous wars.” Carnegie wrote at once
to reprimand him. Perhaps because he was older than Roosevelt or simply because he was Andrew Carnegie, he
felt no compunction about treating the ex-president as he might a silly schoolboy. When would Roosevelt, he
wanted to know, accept the fact that every nation on earth claimed that its wars were righteous; and every
nation that did so was wrong. Just as citizens were obliged to submit their disputes to “the law for redress,”
so should governments be obligated to do the same. Just as citizens could not take up arms against one another
because they believed their cause was righteous, so should governments be prevented from doing so. “Ponder
over this. You have a conscience…. The whole matter is so simple, my dear Mr. Roosevelt—Germany, Britain and
America coming together and agreeing to form a joint police force to maintain peace is all that is needed.”
There was no response from Roosevelt, who was too busy receiving the European public’s accolades to answer
Carnegie.²⁶

After a non-stop roundelay of speeches, receptions, and dinners in Paris, the Roosevelt entourage—his wife and
daughter Ethel had joined the party—moved on to Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark, and Norway for more of the
same. On May 5, Roosevelt belatedly accepted the 1906 Nobel Prize awarded to him for settling the
Russo-Japanese War.

The next day, Carnegie’s carefully laid plans nearly fell to pieces with the announcement that Edward VII of
Britain, Kaiser Wilhelm II’s uncle, had died. Until his uncle was officially buried, it was going to be
awkward, if not impossible, for the kaiser to entertain a foreign dignitary at his home. Roosevelt, unwilling
to cancel the Berlin visit, suggested that he and his family stay at the U.S. Embassy instead of the kaiser’s
palace. The kaiser agreed and Roosevelt’s state visit proceeded, almost as planned.

He remained in Berlin for the full five days that had originally been scheduled and spent a great deal of time
alone with the kaiser. “The first day we went out to take lunch…. Afterwards he drove us to Potsdam, and
showed us over Sans Souci. He also held army maneuvers at which I was present. On this occasion I rode with
him for about five hours, and he talked steadily; and on another afternoon we spent three hours together.”
Roosevelt and the kaiser discussed many topics, including the “relations of Germany and England.” The
ex-president had every opportunity to present Carnegie’s proposals for a League of Peace had he wished to do
so. But he did not. As he made clear to Trevelyan, he had no intention—and had never had any—of doing
Carnegie’s bidding in Berlin.²⁷

“Carnegie, personally and through Root…had been asking me to try to get the Emperor committed to universal
arbitration and disarmament…. Root was under obligations to Carnegie for the way that Carnegie had helped him
in connection with the Pan-American movement [Carnegie had donated the funds to build a Pan-American
headquarters in Washington and the Central American Court of Justice in Costa Rica], and he had also helped
the Smithsonian in fitting out the scientific people who went with me on my African trip; and Carnegie’s
purposes as regards international peace are good, although his methods are often a little absurd; and so I
told him that I would see whether I could speak to the Emperor or not, but that I did not believe any good
would come of it.”²⁸

Roosevelt was, in the end, unwilling to present the kaiser with Carnegie’s “absurd” methods of achieving
international peace. He indirectly raised the question of the naval arms race, but only after assuring Wilhelm
II that he was “a practical man and in no sense a peace-at-any-price man.” The kaiser replied courteously
“that he really had no control over the matter, that it was something which affected the German people, and
that the German people, or at least that section of the German people upon whom he relied and in whom he
believed, would never consent to Germany’s failing to keep herself able to enforce her rights either on land
or at sea.” Even had he wished to play the role of “man of destiny” Carnegie had scripted for him, Kaiser
Wilhelm II had public opinion, the Reichstag, and the military establishment to contend with—and they were, in
the aggregate, far stronger than he was.²⁹

The ex-president and the kaiser found that they had much in common. Both believed that “war between England
and Germany would be an unspeakable calamity.” Both were desirous “to see England, Germany and the United
States act together in all matters of world policy.” And both “agreed in a cordial dislike of shams and of
pretense, and therefore in a cordial dislike of the kind of washy movement for international peace with which
Carnegie’s name has become so closely associated.”³⁰

Carnegie, of course, was not privy to Roosevelt’s private letters and had no idea that his “men of destiny”
had bonded together in mutual dislike of and opposition to his peace campaign. He believed, on the contrary,
that Roosevelt had acted in good faith in Berlin and had had some success. On May 13, from Torquay where he
had stationed himself to await Roosevelt’s triumphant return, he welcomed “the Colonel” to London, and warned
him to “take care of your throat [the papers had several times mentioned that Roosevelt was hoarse from
lecturing too much], dangerous climate this in May and many are the attacks yearly upon those from the South
[Africa?; Italy?]—We need you, your work isn’t half done yet.”³¹

Although it was clear by now that Roosevelt’s meeting with the British leaders would have to be postponed
until a reasonable period after Edward VII’s funeral, Carnegie said nothing about this in his letter. Instead,
he interjected—out of nowhere—the thought that he might now try to “see your crony, The Emperor. Shall
certainly make the effort. If you and he don’t make a team that can drag the cart behind I’m a disappointed
man.” The next day, Carnegie wrote Roosevelt again, now acknowledging that the meeting at Ambassador Reid’s
residence at Wrest Park would have to be postponed, but making light of it. Whether or not Roosevelt got a
chance to sit down with the British government leaders was, Carnegie hinted, of less importance than the fact
that he and Wilhelm II had gotten to know and trust one another. “I…doubt not all has passed off well and that
you & the Emperor now being friends may some day count for much—The Wrest Park meeting is only to give you a
chance to become known to the leaders here and they to know you. It may make all the difference some day that
you are friends. Your future is, accidents excepted, likely to excel even your past since you are a born
leader of men with the sublime audacity to perform wonders. Pray don’t fail to know the Leaders of other
lands, no big game equals to this.”³²

Carnegie remained oblivious not only to the failure of Roosevelt’s mission to Berlin but to the growing
impossibility that a meeting between the ex-president and the British government leaders might ever take
place. Roosevelt, believing he had paid his debt to Carnegie by meeting with the kaiser, had no intention of
doing anything more. He planned to represent the United States at King Edward’s funeral, as President Taft had
requested he do, give a speech or two, spend a day bird-watching with Sir Edward Grey, and then sail home, his
Carnegie-assigned tasks not only incomplete but forgotten.³³

Carnegie’s British friends, Morley included, had also abandoned him and any plans to hold a naval disarmament
congress. Edward VII’s death had plunged the nation deeper into the constitutional crisis that had been
precipitated when the House of Lords refused to pass the Liberal government’s 1909 budget. The assumption was
that Edward VII, had he lived, would have created enough new Liberal lords to block the Tories from vetoing
another budget. But such assumptions were thrown to the wind with the accession of George V, whom no one quite
knew. Preoccupied with a looming constitutional crisis, neither Morley nor his colleagues in the Liberal
government had any inclination to focus their attentions on Mr. Carnegie’s proposals for international
conferences.

Anyone else might have abandoned the chase, but not Andrew Carnegie. He simply shifted gears and moved
forward. There would be no meeting at Wrest Park, no international summit, no Roosevelt diplomatic miracles.
But that was all right. Carnegie, always watchful for signs of progress, had found a new one. He had become
almost obsessively fixated on a speech President Taft had made in March 1910 to the American Peace and
Arbitration League of New York. Taft had rather innocently remarked that, unlike his predecessor, he saw no
reason why arbitration treaties should exclude disputes that touched on “questions of national honor…. I know
that is going further than most men are willing to go…. But I do not see why questions of honor may not be
submitted to a tribunal supposed to be composed of men of honor.”³⁴

Upon reading the speech, Carnegie wrote Taft at once, lavishing on him the same outlandish praise he had
earlier devoted to Roosevelt: “If you only prove true to your great promise and propose to Germany and Great
Britain…that they confer confidentially with our country…I believe you will succeed…and when peace is
established, as it finally must be, you would be as clearly the father of Peace on Earth as Washington is
father of his country or Lincoln its preserver.”³⁵

In June 1910, as Roosevelt left Britain, his mission incomplete, Carnegie publicly switched partners for
peace. In a speech to the British Peace Society in London’s Guildhall, he publicly praised President William
Howard Taft’s March 22 remarks on arbitration, which, he declared, had “in a flash of inspiration…revealed the
true path to the realization of peace on earth.” Taft’s “few words” had elevated him to a “rank among the
immortals as one of the foremost benefactors of his race.” Using almost the same language he had used to
praise Roosevelt in December 1902 for referring the Venezuela dispute to The Hague tribunal, Carnegie now
proclaimed that President Taft was “among rulers the leader of the holy crusade against man killing man in
war, as Lincoln became the leader in the crusade against the selling of man by man.” Gleefully putting behind
him the year he had spent prepping Roosevelt for his now-failed peace mission, Carnegie’s mood was almost
manically upbeat. “Be of good cheer, Brothers,” he declared to the Peace Society delegates meeting in London,
“the good work goes steadily forward; nothing can prevent its triumph. We are apparently on the eve of a
decided step forward, soon the International Judicial Court is to appear and the step from that to a League of
Peace follows.”³⁶

Carnegie was courting the ultimate danger for a public figure: he was very close to becoming a parody of
himself—a smiling, wizened, white-bearded fool for peace. Every year, he appeared to come up with a new
surefire, guaranteed solution to the world’s problems. In the spring of 1909, he had publicly pushed for a
three-party naval disarmament conference. Now, in the summer of 1910, he was presenting bilateral arbitration
treaties as the path to world peace and substituting Taft for Roosevelt as the agent of progress.

Carnegie was not the only peace activist to have been won over by Taft’s conversion. That June, both houses of
Congress passed a resolution calling on the president to appoint a five-man commission to explore the
possibilities of “utilizing existing international agencies for the purpose of limiting the armaments of the
nations of the world” and organizing an international naval police force to preserve “universal peace.”
Carnegie was delighted. He wrote Taft at once, enthusiastically supporting the new commission. Taft was not
nearly as enthusiastic. “I am very hopeful that peace matters may make substantial progress during the coming
year. Just what I can make out of the Peace Commission, I am not quite certain as yet.”³⁷

Carnegie suggested to Roosevelt that he sign on as chairman of the new peace commission. “There never was such
a chance for a mortal man to immortalize himself, as is now extended to you.” Using the commission
chairmanship as his vehicle, Roosevelt could now legitimately “approach Britain with the League of Peace
idea…. What pleases me is that our country is now leader in the movement to abolish war as a means of settling
disputes…. When I hear that you have accepted the Chairmanship of that Commission, I shall rejoice.”³⁸

Roosevelt had no intention of serving on any committee appointed by his successor. Visiting the Tafts at their
summer home in Beverly, Massachusetts, he formally declined the chairmanship and then, according to
presidential aide Archie Butt, who was present, mischievously volunteered “with a laugh: ‘Why not name
Carnegie? He would certainly finance the commission, and if you could seal his mouth so that he would not be
talking about what we think and so on, he might do fairly well.’”

“‘I don’t think Mr. Carnegie would do at all,’ said Mrs. Taft. It was the first time she had said anything.”
Senator Lodge, who was also one of the party, agreed. “He would simply get us into world trouble with his
officiousness.” The president “nodded his approval.” As Taft later wrote Philander Knox, who he had appointed
as secretary of state, Carnegie “might be a hard man to be responsible for because he talked so much.”³⁹

Carnegie, of course, had no idea of the contempt Taft and Knox had for him. On the contrary, he was convinced
that he had found the perfect junior partner in William Howard Taft, a president who, he expected, would serve
as his Frick or Schwab in the pursuit of peace. Carnegie would lay down the guidelines, establish the basic
principles, and advise on strategy. Taft, with Knox’s assistance, would execute the plan. To cement their new
partnership, Carnegie decided to create his own peace trust to provide the president with whatever assistance
he might require to write his new treaties and get the Senate to approve them.

Awash in enthusiasm, Carnegie, on returning to New York in October, contacted President Taft with his plans
for collaboration. Taft wrote back to invite Carnegie and Louise to Washington for dinner and to stay
overnight at the White House. “That will give you and me the opportunity to discuss the matter you mention in
your note. If you can come and will name the date by telegram, so much the better.”⁴⁰

After several meetings with Taft, Knox, and Root, Carnegie forwarded to the president a copy of the “trust
deed” he was going to deliver to the trustees of what would be known as the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace. “You will note that your noble note of leadership among rulers prompted me to create the
fund. It is based upon your words. I saw clearly that peace was within our grasp because the other branch of
our race (English speaking) was ready to follow you. You have only to push out your hand to secure this & this
secured other nations will soon follow.”⁴¹

On December 14, 1910, he signed the final deed of gift, with his wife and daughter as witnesses, formally
transferring to the trustees of his as yet unnamed “peace trust,” $10 million ($3.5 billion today) of 5
percent U.S. Steel first-mortgage gold bonds. As the New York Times reported on December 15, with this grant,
Carnegie’s bequests had exceeded $200 million, far in excess of Mr. Rockefeller’s gifts, which were estimated
to be about $120 million.

The “deed” could have been written by no one else. Certainly no one else would have dared to sprinkle through
a legal document words like “hav,” “giv,” “dauter,” and other “simplified spellings.” Carnegie made the
purpose of his new trust eminently accessible to anyone who cared to read his letter: “Although we no longer
eat our fellow men nor torture prisoners, nor sack cities killing their inhabitants, we still kill each other
in war like barbarians. Only wild beasts are excusable for doing that in this, the twentieth century of the
Christian era, for the crime of war is inherent, since it decides not in favor of the right, but always of the
strong. The nation is criminal which refuses arbitration.”⁴²

[image]

THE CHECKER PLAYERS

Carnegie attended the first meeting of his trustees in Washington on December 14. He wanted them all to know
why he had now decided to establish a peace trust. His address, which was taken down verbatim, is
quintessential Carnegie, boastful, brash, rambling, and verbose but charming nonetheless. He explained that he
had read about Taft’s speech on arbitration while visiting

the Grand Canyon of the Colorado…the grandest spectacle in the world, so far as I know…. I then said to
myself: “President Taft, foremost among rulers of men, has really bridged the chasm between peace and war.” I
wrote him an enthusiastic letter which afterwards developed into an article which perhaps some of you may have
read in the Century Magazine, and every day convinced me more and more, and especially all that I have heard
in Britain, for I have the honor of knowing the Cabinet pretty well, of the possibility and practicability of
carrying out this object…I owe you some explanation because I have advised you, please notice, that you are
not required to do anything, that I only hope that you will proceed in that line. There may be reasons that it
is not proper just now, that it would be better to wait, but there the truth remains that we have it in our
hands, the responsibility is upon this Republic…. That is my explanation and my apology for putting in this
deed of trust the hope that you will at least try to see whether this is not the easiest way to peace.⁴³

When Carnegie had finished, Oscar Straus, one of his trustees, suggested that Carnegie be named a trustee. He
declined the honor. “Gentlemen, I think such a suggestion as my friend has made is altogether unnecessary. It
is not well in my opinion that the giver of a gift should be continuously a member of a Board that administers
it. It places him in a very awkward position. I never want to say anything to influence action, because I
would never feel that what I was saying was rated at its proper value, but that there was danger that it would
have an improper value. You would be under embarrassment.”

Senator Root, who chaired the meeting, then spoke and, as he had been given permission to do, suggested an
entirely different path for the endowment than the one Carnegie had laid out:

My feeling about this trust is that if it is to be of value, as I hope and believe it is, it must be something
different from many enterprises in behalf of peace which we have known, in one respect. That is, that it must
be thorough, practical; and it must base its action upon a careful, scientific and thorough study of the
causes of war and the remedies which can be applied to the causes, rather than merely the treatment of
symptoms. I think the field of general observation upon the subject of war and peace, general exposition of
the wrongfulness of war, and the desirableness of peace, is already pretty well covered. I think this
foundation will be of little use unless it does something further than that, and to do that, to do something
further than that, we must do what the scientific men do, we must strive to reach some deeper insight into the
cause of the diseases, of which war is a symptom, than can be obtained by casual and occasional consideration.
That deeper insight can be attained only by long and faithful and continuous study and investigation.⁴⁴

Root was intent on establishing a scientific research institution, much like the Carnegie Institution in
Washington, one that engaged in funding research and educational activities and abstained from taking a
position on political issues. Carnegie’s objective, on the contrary, had been to set up an activist
organization dedicated to pushing forward his and Taft’s agenda.

For the peace activists who had, for decades now, looked forward to getting their hands on the great
philanthropist’s money, the establishment of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace was a decidedly
mixed blessing. In establishing his new peace trust, Carnegie had taken to heart Roosevelt’s and no doubt
Root’s disdain for the potentially “mischievous” and permanently impotent men who led the nation’s peace
societies. Only the Quaker Albert Smiley, who had started the Mohonk conferences, and one other of the
twenty-eight trustees had been members of peace societies prior to 1905. The majority of trustees were
international and/or Wall Street lawyers, college presidents, retired financiers, and businessmen; almost all
were Republicans; twelve were already trustees of a Carnegie organization.⁴⁵

On December 15, Carnegie met with President Taft and Secretary of State Knox to discuss his new “peace trust”
and the role it might play in the campaign for arbitration treaties. He wrote Taft to suggest that he ask Knox
to open discussions with the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on a treaty of arbitration with Britain.⁴⁶

From Cumberland Island, where he had gone in January to visit his ailing sister-in-law Lucy, he bombarded both
Taft and Knox with almost weekly letters and telegrams, filled with suggestions, congratulations, and
flattery. “Jay’s treaty [ending the Revolutionary War] will keep his name in history,” he wrote Knox, “but
it’s a trifle compared to your treaty…. What I fear is that if we don’t strike while the iron is hot we may
fail. We shall deserve to do so, but that only aggravates the offense…. There is a tide in the affairs of men,
etc. Yours has come—now or never.”⁴⁷

Carnegie’s strong suit had never been patience—and, at age seventy-five, with the British and the Germans
engaged in a headlong race to produce new, faster, stronger, deadlier Dreadnoughts, there was no time to
waste. Knowing that it took two sides to negotiate a treaty, he opened his own diplomatic backchannel to his
friend James Bryce, who was now the British ambassador to Washington. The question might well have been
asked—and surely was by the secretary of state whose prerogatives he was trampling on—what Mr. Carnegie
thought he was doing.

“I have a note from President telling me ‘Treaty will be pushed just as fast as possible,’” Carnegie wrote
Ambassador Bryce on February 15, 1911. A month later—with still no progress—Carnegie explained to Bryce that
the delay in drafting the treaty had been caused by Knox’s absence from Washington. “Kind soul the President
didn’t want to shorten Knox’s vacation. He assures me he is anxiously awaiting Knox on return to get him and
you started—He asks me to Lunch and I’ll be down soon—probably next week although I am so busy cannot tell.”⁴⁸

Carnegie had no doubt but that treaties of arbitration would be approved by the Senate, then by the French and
British governments. “At present I am in the clouds,” he wrote fellow peace activist Edwin Ginn, “singing
hosannahs, believing that the President’s policy will succeed and that we shall have treaties with Britain and
France before long, eliminating the possibility of war throughout the boundaries of the English-speaking race
and France also. That holy leaven will influence the whole world in the same direction. I am beginning to
think that very little of our peace fund will be needed in this country; most of it will be confined to
missionary work abroad.” He made the same prediction in a letter to James Brown Scott, who had been appointed
secretary of his new peace trust. “Assuming the passage of the treaty with Britain and the position our
country will thereby occupy as one which is ready and anxious to enter into such treaties with other nations,
I cannot but feel that our peace work in our country, so far as propaganda is concerned, will practically
cease. We shall not need to preach to the converted. Therefore, a large portion of the fund will necessarily
have to be spent in countries less advanced. Germany, Italy, Austria, Russia and others will be the fields
left for missionary work.”⁴⁹

Assuming that the treaty was on the path to approval in Washington, Carnegie began lobbying his British
friends to support it. “It really seems to me treaty is to slide through Senate welcomed by all,” he wrote
James Bryce in March. “I am uplifted in deed—a new chance comes to me in life here on earth if my native and
adopted lands Motherland and wifeland clasp hands and lead the world, Knox and you,—your names to such a
treaty ensure immediately a sure passport to every region of bliss even the highest that may be. We must not
fail…. Everything is subordinated to the one essential that treaty. I know you will do your best.”⁵⁰

Unaware of the effect his constant meddling might have had on his relationship with the president, Carnegie
kept up the pressure, alternately congratulating Taft on what he had accomplished and pushing him to do more,
precisely as he had with his junior partners in the steel business. Worried that Taft might, in the end, not
have the good sense or the expertise to do the job himself, he forwarded the precise treaty language he
believed was required to satisfy British fears that too broad an agreement would threaten its sovereignty.⁵¹

It was finally too much for the president. Like Roosevelt before him, Taft had come to dislike the
“Star-spangled Scotchman” rather intensely. He could not abide his interference, his constant stream of
letters and telegrams, his speeches, interviews, and letters to the editor, all designed to push Taft in
directions he was not at all sure he wanted to go. In mid-April, the president confided to Archie Butt that he
found it particularly “strange” that the major focus of his presidency had become his arbitration treaties, in
large part, he implied, because of Carnegie. He had never intended anything like this. “When I made that
speech in New York [in March 1910] advocating the arbitration of questions, even those affecting the honor of
a nation, I had no definite policy in view. I was inclined, if I remember rightly, merely to offset the
antagonism to the four battleships for which I was then fighting, and I threw that suggestion out merely to
draw the sting of old Carnegie and other peace cranks, and now the suggestion threatens to become the main
fact of my four years as president.”⁵²

Taft was particularly irritated by Carnegie’s lobbying British government officials to support a treaty that
had yet to be approved by the Senate. The president asked Knox to write to Carnegie, which Knox did,
suggesting in rather stern terms that “any premature or exaggerated public discussion” of the treaties might
be harmful, at this delicate moment in the negotiations.⁵³

As much as he disliked Carnegie, Taft, again like his predecessor, dared not alienate an influential
Republican contributor and campaigner. In early May, he accompanied Carnegie to the Pan-American Union
building in Washington for yet another ceremony honoring him for his contributions to hemispheric peace. “The
President groaned and grunted all the way over,” Archie Butt recalled, “that he should be called upon so often
to attend meetings either called by Carnegie or else in behalf of the canny old Scotchman.”⁵⁴

[image]

OUR ANGEL OF PEACE

Carnegie remained oblivious to it all, his attention fixed fast on the treaties of arbitration, first with
Britain and France, then Germany and the rest of the world. At long last his dreams were to be realized. “What
a hit…I imagine you,” he wrote Knox on May 11, “pen in hand, signing the greatest document [the first
arbitration treaty] in its influence upon the world ever signed. Your piloting superb. I am rejoicing that I
live in these days.” That same day, he wrote the president a similar fawning letter of congratulations.
“Consummate statesmanship, Mr. President—France, our Sister Republic, and Britain our fellow of the English
speaking race on equal terms with the door wide open for other powers.”⁵⁵

The smooth sailing came to a rather abrupt end in the spring of 1911 when Theodore Roosevelt published an
article in Outlook in which he argued that the nation that pledged to arbitrate its differences would end up
dishonored and impotent, like the man who, when his wife was assaulted by a ruffian, took the ruffian to court
instead of attacking him on the spot. Roosevelt had never been in favor of open-ended arbitration treaties—as
he had made clear to Carnegie on a number of occasions—and he was certainly not predisposed to look kindly on
anything that came out of the Taft White House. In private letters, he insisted that he had no problem with a
treaty of arbitration with Britain, but that he would do all he could to make sure that such a treaty was not
used as a model for similar arrangements with less honorable and pacific nations, like Germany, Russia, and
Japan.⁵⁶

Carnegie was aghast at Roosevelt’s intemperate attack on the very principle of arbitration. “Mr. President
called yesterday & we both mourned over your article,” he wrote Roosevelt, “surprised that you could go so far
as to instance a man slapping your wife before your face, her husband. No man ever did so, or could fall so
low—the husband would involuntarily attempt to protect his wife, but this done & reason returning he would
scorn to touch the brute & let the law direct…punishment and condemn the monster to infamy…. Forgive me for I
esteem you too highly not to tell you how grieved your friends are for a third friend has called this morning
& tells me he & his friends are all mourning at this hasty slip, but this is what genuine friendship dares.”⁵⁷

Roosevelt was fawning and duplicitous in his reply. Not ready to rule out another run for the presidency, in
1916, if not in 1912, he wanted Carnegie on his side. “You know that one reason why I hesitated long before
writing that article was just because I hated to do anything that might seem distasteful to you. I finally
came to the conclusion that it would be weakness on my part not to write it.”⁵⁸

Carnegie was temporarily mollified. He too was not ready to break off relations with a past and perhaps future
president. “So glad to get your note,” he wrote on May 24. “Regretted I had ‘broken out’ upon you…. Dined with
President last night. He’s good humored as ever & said ‘Theodore’ hadn’t quite grasped what we are after.
‘He’ll come out all right.’” Having apologized, Carnegie returned to the fray, attacking Roosevelt’s
contention that matters of “honor” might not always be amenable to peaceful arbitration. Correcting Roosevelt
as if he were a naughty child, he informed him that “all honor wounds are self-inflicted, my dear friend,
that’s where you are ‘off ’ sure.”⁵⁹

If anything were bound to stiffen Roosevelt’s resolve against the treaty, it was Carnegie’s condescension. In
a letter to the British diplomat Cecil Arthur Spring-Rice, Roosevelt let his anger and contempt burn brightly:
“The whole business is tainted by that noxious form of silliness which always accompanies the sentimental
refusal to look facts in the face. The sentimentalist, by the way, is by no means always a decent creature to
deal with; if Andrew Carnegie had employed his fortune and his time in doing justice to the steelworkers who
gave him his fortune, he would have accomplished a thousand times what he has accomplished or ever can
accomplish in connection with international peace.”⁶⁰

To his comrade in armaments Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, Roosevelt was no less damning of peace activists, in
particular the man who had two years before paid for his African safari. “At this moment,” he wrote in
September 1911, “there is a very grave crisis in Europe [between Germany, France, and England over Morocco],
and before the war clouds now gathering, all the peace and arbitration treaties, and all the peace and
arbitration societies, and all the male shrieking sisterhood of Carnegies and the like, are utterly
powerless.”⁶¹

Carnegie, of course, knew nothing of these letters and would continue his friendly correspondence with the
ex-president, who would reply promptly and with courtesy to his “dear Mr. Carnegie.” Meanwhile, the damage had
been done, though neither Carnegie nor Taft quite realized it yet. Both still basked in the enthusiasm with
which the public and the press had initially greeted the idea of treaties of arbitration between the world’s
great powers.

Carnegie took it on himself to supply Taft with the logistical support he needed to lobby senators on behalf
of the treaties. Working directly with Charles Hilles, Taft’s secretary and chief political adviser, he set
aside $10,000 to pay for clergymen to travel to Washington and lobby their senators. “If any other way of
advancing the cause arises,” he wrote Hilles in mid-June 1911 from Skibo, “please understand that you have
only to apply to Mr. Franks [Carnegie’s treasurer] and he has orders to honor your drafts.”⁶²

That June, as Secretary of State Knox began direct negotiations with Ambassador Bryce on the final form of a
treaty of arbitration, Carnegie was almost apoplectic with excitement. “Shake friend Morley, Shake. I am the
happiest mortal alive. Couldn’t call snakes snake this morning if naming created things.” Morley had no idea
what his friend was ranting about. “I think my heavy labours must be turning my brain, for I cannot for the
life of me satisfactorily interpret the enclosed wire. It was brought to me when I was hailed to the bench of
the House of Lords and I’ve been puzzling ever since to read the words of the oracle. Do tell me…. Has it a
bearing on some good news from U.S.A.? Anyhow, you would not have sent it if you had not been in tearing good
spirits, and thereat I rejoice and will rejoice.” Carnegie apologized by return mail. “Sorry my telegram not
understood—thought you knew the celebrated American who being elected declared he felt so happy that he
couldn’t libel snakes by calling them by their real name. I had just heard that the Race—our race had agreed
to banish war—the greatest step upward ever taken by any race since history began…. Other nations will soon
follow.”⁶³

Carnegie, dismissing Ambassador Bryce’s warning that there might be trouble getting the treaty through the
U.S. Senate, focused his attention instead on the British cabinet. To Bryce, Alexander Murray, the chief
Liberal whip, Morley, and no doubt many others, he spread the rumor that the Germans were prepared to sign an
arbitration treaty with the Americans and might do so before the British did. “Impatient for cabinet action re
Treaty,” he wrote Murray. “Found note on arrival from White House. Germany in earnest, truly it seems we are
on the eve of unprecedented advance. German ambassador came over from Washington to attend presentation to me
of a book containing signatures of officers of 2600 German societies in America, thanks for Hero Fund of
Germany. He dined with us at our own home and told me he was in favor of the treaty. Since then he heard from
Berlin. YES, now my fear is that Germany may be first to execute, imagine our race despoiled of its just
leadership in abolishing war and yet this is what Cabinet delay endangers.”⁶⁴

His message to Sir John St. Loe Strachey of the Spectator was even more agitated: “A note from the White House
received here upon my arrival yesterday informs me that it is quite true that Germany has applied. A few days
before leaving New York the German Ambassador dined with us and I know he was personally in favor of and had
no doubt recommended the Treaty to his Government. The greatest step forward ever taken in the history of man
is to be taken in our day. I have been optimistic for a year, but never so much as today. You are way behind,
my friend, in your forecast in this matter. Wake Up! ‘Doubting Thomas’ Wake up!”⁶⁵

Carnegie’s information was faulty in the extreme. The German government was much appreciative of his Hero
Fund—that much was true—but there is no indication that the Foreign Office had any intention of entering into
negotiations with the Americans on an arbitration treaty.

On August 3, 1911, President Taft finally signed the first two treaties of arbitration, with Britain and with
France. “Treaty pen should be preserved,”

Carnegie cabled the White House. The next day, he cabled Taft again with his congratulations: “You have
reached the summit of human glory. Countless ages are to honor and bless your name.”⁶⁶

The treaties were now formally submitted to the Senate for ratification. Roosevelt’s early assault had left
its scars and Taft and Knox had not helped matters by attempting to elude Senate objections with a bit of
wordplay. Struggling to find a way to bind the nation to arbitration without antagonizing the Senate, which
believed it alone had the constitutional responsibility to determine whether or not an issue should be
arbitrated, Knox had used the word “justiciable” to identify those types of disputes that were to be submitted
to arbitration. If questions arose as to whether an issue was “justiciable” or not (as they were bound to as
the term was undefined in the treaty), a bilateral commission composed of three nationals from each side was
empowered to serve as an appeals court. If five of the six commissioners agreed that an issue was
“justiciable,” it would be submitted to arbitration. One of the problems the Senate faced was attempting to
figure out precisely what “justiciable” meant. The word had no standing in international law or diplomacy.

On August 11, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee issued its majority report on the treaties. Only the
Senate, it declared, not a bilateral commission, could decide if and when an issue was “justiciable.” The
majority’s decision not to approve the treaty as written hit Carnegie like a thunderbolt. He had convinced
himself that the nation was behind the treaties, as evidenced by the positive press coverage, and that the
senators, sensing this, would quickly ratify them. His first reaction was to blame Taft and Knox for not
appropriately consulting with—and educating—the senators before submitting the treaties. “The result has been
a surprise to me,” he wrote Bryce, who had anticipated the committee’s action. “I had always been assured the
Senate Committee would be consulted as the various points touching its prerogatives were formed, and its
counsels duly considered…. The disappointment is too great to cause annoyance or wrath. It falls like a heavy
dull load of disaster which we must slowly surmount. It is a serious struggle to get two thirds majority from
a body that changes so slowly. I hope some compromise can be reached…. There is so much at stake that we
should not stand on forms.”⁶⁷

Carnegie was proposing compromise because he could not bear defeat. Taft, recognizing that his treaties were
in trouble, asked that Senate action be postponed until December. He planned to take his case to the people in
a two-month speaking tour across 15,000 miles and twenty-eight states. “I am going to see,” he wrote his son
in August, “if I cannot arouse the country…. Carnegie and all the peace cranks are interested in this, as well
as the church, and I am hopeful that we may set a fire under the senators which may change their views.”⁶⁸

Carnegie had from the very beginning expected that his Endowment for International Peace would do all it could
to support Taft’s treaties. Nicholas Murray Butler, the head of the endowment’s division of intercourse and
education, had prepared a publicity and educational campaign on behalf of ratification, but was overruled by
Elihu Root, who was dead set against the endowment pursuing any program that involved it in partisan advocacy.
Admiral A. T. Mahan, with Roosevelt the most outspoken foe of the treaties, had already assailed “subsidized
agitation” on behalf of ratification, a pointed reference to Carnegie and the peace societies’ campaign.
Fearing that the endowment, which was still without a formal congressional charter of incorporation, might
lose much of its potential influence if it was perceived as an agency of the Taft administration, Root
argued—and Butler and Carnegie reluctantly agreed—that it should not participate in the campaign for treaty
ratification.⁶⁹

Carnegie was no doubt disappointed that the “peace trust” he had created to assist Taft would now have to sit
out the battle for treaty ratification. But he had long ago decided not to overrule the men he had chosen to
run his trusts. Root was the ablest “president” he had—a man committed to peace who understood national
politics better than anyone alive. He would not contest his decision that the endowment remain neutral in the
upcoming battle. Fortunately, Carnegie had enough money to fund pro-treaty campaigns through other
organizations like Nicholas Murray Butler’s Citizens’ National Committee.

Early in November, Carnegie wrote Charles Hilles, Taft’s secretary, to offer his personal assistance in
pushing the treaties through the ratification process. In a subtle swipe at Taft’s lack of political skills,
he confessed that he had “long felt that the President is ‘too good for human nature’s daily food.’ He should
be much more careful than he has been.” Carnegie knew better how to move a treaty through the Senate. “I
should like to have a talk with him and our friends generally over the situation. My feeling is that we should
make the best terms possible with the Senate and pass that treaty.” He then offered, unbidden, the language
for a new amendment which, he believed, would “meet the objections raised against the present one.”⁷⁰

All through November, Carnegie besieged Taft and Hilles with letters, telegrams, copies of newspaper
editorials, resolutions he had submitted to the New York Peace Society, and articles he had published in
pamphlet form. On November 22, he took the train to Washington and personally counseled Taft to swallow his
pride and agree to any compromise with the Senate that might lead to ratification of the treaties. “May I
venture to suggest that perhaps the surest way to secure favorable action upon Peace Treaty will be for you
to…invite the Foreign Relations Committee to dinner and after dinner ask their cooperation in the great work.
That they were not invited while Treaty was being formed, as I understood they were to be, is something I
cannot understand, but no doubt there were good reasons therefore.”⁷¹

By late November, Carnegie was confident that the treaties would gain ratification, his confidence spiked by
the belief that Taft would follow his advice. On November 25, 1911, his seventy-sixth birthday, he invited
reporters to Ninety-first Street, as he did every year. “Andrew Carnegie felt so good today,” the Washington
Post reported the next day in a front-page story, “that he trotted reporters around his home library and
pointed out the trophies on its walls.” The old man was even more voluble than usual: he gave forth “countless
axioms,” predicted that Taft would be easily reelected, offered his solutions to the trust problem, and
advised “his interviewers to marry young,” give up drinking and smoking, and “obey all the rules,” whatever
that meant.

“Everywhere I hear most encouraging news about the attitude of the people toward the arbitration treaties,” he
declared to a New York Times reporter on December 4. “The public sentiment in their favor has grown stronger
day by day. New York City is to show itself in harmony with the rest of the country by holding a mass meeting
in Carnegie Hall on December 12th to endorse them.”

Carnegie’s optimism would be sorely tried. The Carnegie Hall rally that he had hoped would demonstrate New
York City’s support for the arbitration treaties backfired, as the New York Times reported in a front-page
article on December 13. The meeting had barely gotten under way before it was broken up by German-American
hecklers, who insisted that the proposed arbitration treaties with France and Britain were anti-German.
“Andrew Carnegie, world leader of the peace movement, under whose immediate direction last night’s meeting was
attempted, was a sad-faced witness of it all. He was to have been one of the chief speakers. His time never
came. When the disturbance began he feebly tried to wave it down, but saw himself powerless. He sank back into
his seat, murmuring to himself, and gave the meeting into other hands.”

All of Carnegie’s efforts had come to naught. He had tried to enlist Democratic senators in favor of his
treaty, but as the melee at Carnegie Hall demonstrated only too graphically, the opposition of German-and
Irish-Americans to strengthened ties with Britain was impossible to overcome. Another sizable bloc of
senators, these mostly Republicans, was siphoned off as it became clear that Roosevelt was running for the
presidency and was going to use his opposition to the arbitration treaties as a campaign issue.

Finally, in late December, Taft, who had said nothing to Carnegie about his plans, wrote to tell him that
instead of agreeing to any compromise with the Senate, he thought it “wise for us to go for the full treaties
as they are…. Don’t let us give up in advance!”⁷²

Senator Lodge, worried that the longer the battle over ratification went on the more serious the split between
the anti-treaty Roosevelt and pro-treaty Taft factions would become, proposed an amendment in late January
1912 that gave the Senate the right to cancel any proposed arbitration. Although both sides recognized that
the amendment would, in effect, render the treaties toothless, Carnegie pressed Taft to approve it, rather
than make arbitration an issue in his fight for the renomination. Taft declined.

The issue of the treaties was now fatally intertwined with the issue of the Republican nomination for
president in 1912. The only way to push the treaty—and the arbitration process—forward was to guarantee that
Taft was renominated and reelected to a second term.

 

IN THE MIDST of his campaign on behalf of Taft’s arbitration treaties, Carnegie was visited at his home office
by Dr. Maria Stopes, an academic paleontologist, whom he had invited to tea. Dr. Stopes hoped to interest
Carnegie in funding research on the “scientific paleontological study of coal,” which she claimed had
practical applications. Carnegie listened to what she had to say, but “nothing,” Stopes recalled, “could make
him see paleobotany as a matter of importance. ‘Hotts lassie’ he said, ‘we dug coal before you were born, and
none of you scientists make any difference to them digging it, or ever will.’” When she asked for a quarter of
a million dollars to pursue her research, Carnegie wasted no time in giving his response. “‘Not a penny for
it! But if ye’d come to me with anything that would help keep the peace of the world I’d give, not a quarter
of a million, but a whole million, for you are a bright lassie. World peace is the greatest thing for us all
now. I’ll give almost anything to ye if ye bring me anything to help with that…. After some talk about the
aridness of science he said to me with a sigh ‘I have often wasted my money’ and I replied with the candour of
youth, ‘Yes, you have, Mr. Carnegie, but you won’t waste it if you give it to me.’ He said ‘You wait and come
to me again when you can help the world.’”⁷³

[1]: footnote35.html

## FORTY

## “Be of Good Cheer,” 1912–1913

THE CHAIRMAN. Mr. Carnegie, you were engaged in the steel business in Pennsylvania and all over this country
for a great many years?

MR. CARNEGIE. Yes sir; from early youth, you might say.

 

So opened the proceedings of the Committee of Investigation of the United States Steel Corporation on
Wednesday, January 10, 1912. Augustus O. Stanley, Democrat from Kentucky, chaired the committee. Andrew
Carnegie sat at a small desk across from him. Between them was a stenographer.

In October 1911, the Taft administration had filed suit against U.S. Steel, charging that it was in violation
of the Sherman Antitrust Act. The House of Representatives organized a special investigating committee, which
called Andrew Carnegie as its first witness.

Carnegie had aged a great deal in the four years since he had last been before a congressional committee. He
looked almost shrunken, with very little flesh in his cheeks, his eyes sunk deep, his face dominated by the
white beard.

The proceedings began with the congressmen and Carnegie in a rather jocular mood. When Chairman Stanley
apologized for having issued Carnegie a subpoena, the witness joked that he was “delighted to get that
official document, to hand down to my heirs. [Laughter.] The signature of Chairman Stanley will count for
something. [Laughter].”

 

THE CHAIRMAN. You honor me overmuch, Mr. Carnegie. There are so many people who have received that signature
and did not like to see it, that it is very gratifying to know that you treasure it.

[image]

“STOP YER TICKLIN’, JOCK!”

MR. CARNEGIE. Does that mean, Mr. Chairman, you have bills payable out to an amount of a million or two?
[Laughter.] I might offer to help you out. [Laughter.]

THE CHAIRMAN…It is unfortunately true that I am a very poor man, and am head over heels in debt. [Laughter.]

MR. CARNEGIE. Well, you are not a poor chairman, and that is the main thing. Would you take a library?
[Laughter.]¹

 

As the hours wore on, the laughter dissipated. Pressed on some point or other which he was unable or unwilling
to answer, Carnegie took to repeating again and again that, as an absentee partner who lived in New York City
and spent up to six months a year in Europe, he had “paid very little attention to the details in our
business.” He refused to answer dozens of questions, claiming that he did not remember or had never been
apprised of the financial details of transactions conducted by his younger partners. When asked about the
capitalization of his business concerns in the 1860s, he dismissed the question with a shrug, “Oh, my dear Mr.
Chairman, I have no more idea of that than you have.” Asked if he would take a guess, he refused to do so. “I
do not like to guess. My memory, I am sorry to say, is not perfect. I have not been thinking about these
things for 40 years, and the last 11 years of my life have been busier than any other 11 years, and so much
has faded from my memory in regard to these old matters that I do not like to depend upon my memory.”²

Though the subject of the hearing was U.S. Steel, with which Carnegie had no connection and no stock, he was
asked repeatedly about the company’s finances, policies, and personnel. He declined to answer any questions
about the corporation that had absorbed Carnegie Steel or the men who ran it. When asked about steel rail
prices by congressman Augustus Gardner of Massachusetts, Carnegie turned to his attorney for assistance.
Congressman Gardner interrupted him,

 

MR. GARDNER (interposing). You have answered the question. Judge [J. H.] Reed [Carnegie’s attorney] could not
answer that question for you….

MR. CARNEGIE. Aren’t you rather unreasonable about that, Mr. Gardner?

MR. GARDNER. In view of the examination for the last two days, I do not think I am, and I will say that
frankly…. When I ask you a direct question as to your opinion, you turn around to your counsel and ask him to
tell you what your opinion is?

 

Carnegie, realizing he was running out of wiggle room, confronted the senator directly. “I was in business to
make money. I was not a philanthropist at all. When rails were high we got the highest prices we could get.”

Asked again if he thought that the rates he had been reported as charging were “unfair,” Carnegie responded
that he did “not think any profits are unfair. If a man wants my steel rails at $50 a ton, and he is satisfied
to buy them and I to sell them, I see nothing unfair in that. Do you?”

When Gardner hemmed and hawed instead of answering Carnegie directly, the witness adroitly called attention to
it.

 

MR. CARNEGIE. I answered you the same way, so we are square. I think, sir, if you were in my position—

MR. GARDNER. I am not in your position. I am examining you, and you are on the stand.

MR. CARNEGIE. That is right, sir. I wish we had the places reversed. Have mercy.³

And this was how most of the sixteen hours proceeded, with the congressmen thrusting and Carnegie parrying.
The line that brought the most attention—and certainly the biggest headlines—came when he described how he had
bested John D. Rockefeller on his deal to lease iron ore mines in the Mesabi.⁴

One of the unintended—and certainly unwanted—consequences of Carnegie’s return to the witness stand was the
reappearance of James Bridge. In February of 1912, Bridge wrote Horace Harding, a Frick associate, that
Carnegie had approached him at the hearings seeking reconciliation. “He has aged greatly and at times his
mentality shows such a falling off as to be pathetic…. He said to me that he did not bear a grudge against a
soul; and his desire to die at peace with his old associates was really pathetic.” Carnegie and Bridge later
met at one of Carnegie’s clubs where, again according to Bridge, Carnegie identified the errors in Inside
History of the Carnegie Steel Company and offered to treat Bridge “very liberally” and pay the costs for a new
edition should Bridge “correct” those errors. Bridge contacted his publishers, as well as Phipps and Schwab,
to inform them that, at Carnegie’s request, he was going to bring out a new edition.⁵

Carnegie, who despite Bridge’s remarks, was as sharp-witted as he had ever been, was furious when the news got
back to him. He directed James Bertram to contact Bridge at once. “Mr. Carnegie understood your position
is—when you learned the truth you felt impelled to rewrite parts of your book; Mr. Carnegie did not suggest
you should do what was manifestly your duty to do, viz., correct mistakes.”⁶

Bridge apologized and promised he would no longer claim that Carnegie had anything to do with his new edition,
but asked if Carnegie or Bertram would read his page proofs. Carnegie directed Bertram to write Bridge again,
this time in a way that could not be misunderstood. “Mr. Carnegie says that he can have nothing whatever to do
with the revised edition of your book. He thinks the truth should be told, which, as he understood you, is
that you are satisfied you were misled. It is an easy matter for you to tell your readers so frankly without
reference to Mr. Carnegie…. Mr. Carnegie says he is just home from Hot Springs and finds he will be fully
occupied until the date of his sailing, and must beg of you to refrain from introducing the subject of your
book.”⁷

Bridge did not comply with the request. A month later he wrote Bertram and Carnegie again, this time asking
for a new photograph. Bertram replied that neither he nor Carnegie saw anything wrong with the old one.⁸

 

CARNEGIE had celebrated his seventy-sixth birthday in November 1911. He was in good health, though he
complained of a “troublesome cold,” the result, he thought, of “too many evening engagements.” Louise, who had
turned fifty-five in the spring, was herself suffering from “a touch of rheumatism.” The Carnegies spent their
winter vacation in 1912 at Lucy’s estate on Cumberland Island and then motored to Hot Springs, Arkansas, so
that Louise could take the baths. Their time in Arkansas was, as Louise wrote a friend, “anything but restful
for me.” As her husband ascended into his eighth decade, she had become more and more preoccupied with his
health. “Everyone laughs when we say we are here for my benefit, on account of my high color, but what with
callers for Mr. C’s registered letters, Doctor’s instructions in regard to the care he needs, etc., it is
hopeless for me to try and rest. Home is a perfect haven of rest in comparison.”⁹

Though the arbitration treaties had been defeated and the Taft/Roosevelt imbroglio was growing uglier by the
moment, Carnegie tried to remain upbeat. Rather than allowing the current state of affairs in the United
States to discomfort him, he focused his attention on propping up his friend Morley’s spirits. He had often
reassured Morley that no matter how sorry the state of the world at the moment, he could take comfort in the
fact that tomorrow would be brighter than today.

In the spring of 1912, Morley needed more reassurance than usual. For more than a year, a series of escalating
strikes had been ripping through Britain. In March 1912, some 850,000 coal miners had put down their tools,
idling over a million workers in industries dependent on coal.

“Sorry to see your troubles are serious but it looks better this morning,” Carnegie began his letter of March
23.

We live in stirring times but all moving in the right direction, progress upward and onward…. Madam greatly
benefited, so am I, although there isn’t much room for betterment in my case except 77 years which cannot be
lessened. Roosevelt grieves me deeply but a Niagara will swell and overflow its banks. President Taft behaves
as a gentleman should and is rapidly gaining. I wrote both and have their replies. Roosevelt friendly, very,
but wild. Roosevelt’s position upon Peace Treaty responsible for failure, so it is said. Until he became a
candidate agreement to pass treaty was satisfactory to all—but two thirds majority is always uncertain…. Am
deluged with telegrams asking me to visit places and deliver my speech, but none of that for me, although in
New York I shall do my part. Cheer up. No use looking upon the dark side of things. Time enough to bid the
Devil “Good morning” when you must—All’s right with the world, or will be later. She’s on the upward path—by
the law of things can’t go backward though it may have a jot or two now and then. The good things of this life
should be and will be more evenly divided, all these troubles bound to evolve a higher civilization. Of this I
am certain, and so good morning, My Lord and My Lady Morley.¹⁰

Carnegie and Louise returned to New York in early April for a month’s hiatus before leaving for Scotland.
Awaiting him at Ninety-first Street was a proposal from John D. Rockefeller, Jr., for a cooperative
philanthropic venture. (We regrettably don’t know any of the details.) Carnegie turned it down, with
consummate grace and good humor. “We find as a rule that we cannot contribute even in a quiet way to a new
cause without becoming involved in its operation, more or less. Were we to become equal partners and therefore
responsible for the management of a new scheme, we should have to neglect other duties.” He then launched into
a paragraph in which he described proudly, almost as a new father would, how busy he was kept, night and day,
by his “several new movements. The Hero Funds scattered throughout Europe now are bringing us new duties….
Library buildings in 2300 communities bring considerable citizens calling here, not a few of them having
further suggestions to make. Twenty-one more Library Buildings and fifty-eight church organs given yesterday,
accumulated during our short holiday at Hot Springs. Every one of these cases requires preliminary
correspondence and believe me, very careful scrutiny. Of course this is done by Mr. Bertram, but many cases
have to be discussed by us. The Peace Fund disturbs our peace, etc. etc., and so with the others. Please
excuse us and do give us credit for being hardworking, honest people trying to justify a living. If at any
time we could trade ages with you and your dear wife, do not fail to apprize us.”¹¹

 

THE SINKING of the Titanic in April 1912 had a deep effect on ordinary folk on both sides of the Atlantic, but
an especially horrific one on a veteran oceanic traveler like Carnegie. “Can’t get the Titanic out of mind,”
he wrote his cousin Dod on April 19. He donated $5,000 to the relief fund set up by Mayor William Gaynor and
delivered it with a letter, which was published in the New York World on April 19 under the headline
“IRONMASTER’S PITHY QUESTION EVOKES PRAISE FROM MAYOR GAYNOR.”¹²

“What,” Carnegie had asked, “was the Titanic doing up among the ice when she had the whole Atlantic Ocean
south open and free? This is the root of the matter. Passenger steamships should be compelled to keep far
south below the range of icebergs at all seasons. Lifeboats are secondary to this vital requirement.” Gaynor
thanked Carnegie for his contribution and praised him for “as usual [hitting] the nail exactly on the head.”

 

THOUGH THE arbitration treaties were, by this time, dead in the water, Carnegie refused to give up hope. He
had urged Taft to try to get the best compromise he could and then sign whatever the Senate passed. Better a
weakened treaty than nothing at all. In late March, President Taft, by personal letter, informed Carnegie that
he was not taking his advice, but was going to veto the heavily amended treaties. He preferred to take the
issue to the people in the upcoming presidential election. Carnegie thought this unwise. “There is no escape
from the general impression that we have not managed the treaties well…. The less said in the coming campaign
upon this, the better.”¹³

The political situation was rapidly deteriorating for the Republicans. The split in the party between those
loyal to Roosevelt and those who believed Taft should be given a second term could not be papered over, but
grew wider and deeper. Carnegie did his best to save his party from disaster. With blind self-confidence and
no understanding of the contempt with which each candidate referred to him behind his back, he attempted to
use what he thought were cordial relationships with both to get them to bury their hatchets. The leading
culprit in the drama was, in his estimation, Theodore Roosevelt. “Cannot get over Roosevelt’s candidacy,” he
had written Morley in late February. “It isn’t fair. Taft should have his second term.”¹⁴

“To see you and your protégé, each struggling for the nomination overwhelms me,” he wrote Roosevelt on March
1, “both men to whom I have become deeply attached for their virtues…. I am saddened as I have never had cause
to be for you as for your successor, both are to be pitied, being the noble men you are the situation for both
must be deplorable, I should think unendurable. What a service would that man render who could induce you and
the president to meet face to face and just let your hearts speak. It is not too late. You are both big enough
to discard mean petty trifles and renew your idyllic relations before history records you as fools, or
worse.”¹⁵

Roosevelt’s response was suffused with barely repressed anger at the man in the White House and the
white-bearded fool who defended him. “You oblige me to speak frankly by what you say about Mr. Taft—I would
not say this for publication. I have never been so bitterly disappointed in any man. I care not one whit as to
his attitude toward me. But I care immensely as to his attitude toward the people. He has completely reversed
the position he held when he was my lieutenant.”¹⁶

Carnegie retreated, momentarily. “Thanks for your kind letter,” he replied. “Had I known your quarrel was
Political I should not have written you such a note.” He had, he explained, assumed that Roosevelt and Taft
were friends as well as “patron and pupil” and had tried to call upon that friendship to settle their dispute.
He stood corrected now, but disturbed nonetheless at Roosevelt’s intransigence. Sensing that he could do no
more, he washed his hands of the matter, though not before informing Roosevelt that he had yesterday denied “a
report…that I was one of your financial supporters [in the presidential primary campaign against Taft for the
Republican nomination].” His letter closed on a rather desperate note of strained optimism: “No more of this,
it will work out somehow. The Republic is invulnerable.”¹⁷

“I am mourning over the pitiable disagreement of Roosevelt and Taft,” Carnegie wrote Morley in mid-May. “Have
declared they both should be spanked. Roosevelt wrong in not agreeing second term for President who has done
so well. Roosevelt and Niagara quite true—both uncontrollable.”¹⁸

While increasingly angry at Taft’s mismanagement of the arbitration treaty in the Senate, Carnegie supported
him nonetheless with unsolicited campaign advice and money. “Some time ago I suggested to the President,” he
wrote Taft’s campaign director in mid-May, “that a statement of his triumphs and those of his cabinet could
not but impress the thoughtful voter. He agreed, and being asked if he knew the best man to prepare it, he
suggested Mr. Leupp [Francis E. Leupp, a political journalist], whose work I send. Now if the President be
nominated, perhaps it may be deemed advisable to print and circulate this paper and send it freely through the
doubtful states. I have told Franks to send $25,000 to the Treasurer as my contribution to the campaign,
provided my candidate is nominated, and you can use part of this to pay for distribution of leaflet. I shall
mourn and rage [“and rage” had been penciled into the typewritten letter], indeed, if the President be
defrauded of the second term he so richly deserves.”¹⁹

Five days later, on May 22, before sailing for Europe, Carnegie wrote Taft a final letter. “Glad to get
away—our country is humiliated by the present canvas [the contest between Taft and Roosevelt supporters]…I
shall still hope that you control the Convention…I am convinced the tide is running strongly in your favor.”
And indeed, it was. Taft easily won renomination in Chicago. Carnegie, delighted with the outcome, contributed
another $75,000 (several million dollars today) for the national campaign.²⁰

The Carnegies returned from Skibo in late October so that Carnegie might, as he told the press, “cast a ballot
for Mr. Taft.” He denied the rumors that he had decided to become a “British subject and retire to the rugged
fastness of Skibo castle…‘I wouldn’t exchange my American citizenship for a pass to paradise, even if the pass
was marked “Good for a return trip.”’”²¹

Two weeks later, Woodrow Wilson was elected president. Carnegie was neither surprised nor particularly
aggrieved. “Having done my best to elect President Taft to the second term I now find myself impelled to
congratulate you,” he wrote Wilson, wasting no time in trying to enlist him to succeed Roosevelt and Taft as a
partner for peace. “My friends for International Peace have not forgotten your reply to my circular letter
[during the campaign for Senate approval of Taft’s arbitration treaties] addressed to seven leading democrats,
yourself among the number all of whom rose above partisanship to statesmanship when a great cause presented
itself. Britain, France, Germany stood ready to sign the treaty, but alas it miscarried. Some day I hope to be
permitted to tell you why it miscarried. What the fates have in store for you is unknown; perhaps you are
destined to succeed in banishing war between the most enlightened nations where President Taft failed. I think
I know why.” Carnegie’s cryptic messages about the inside story of Taft’s failure were designed to let the new
president know how valuable the white-bearded Scotsman might be as an adviser. He closed his letter, as usual,
with some flattery of the man who was now to occupy the White House. “I am sincerely your admirer and cannot
help it.”²²

“The election has not surprised many,” he wrote Morley on November 7. “Roosevelt’s power for mischief
unlimited—Taft is as jolly as ever, breakfasted with him last week. Have written Wilson of course, a nice
letter. You know he is on board University Professors [Carnegie’s Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching]
Trust, and has been at Skibo with his wife. He is for Peace and will I think manage better than Taft, who
really failed in Treaty thru poor management.” He closed his usual chatty, disjointed name-dropping letter by
announcing that he was going that morning “to arrange transfer of Bonds to my Executors New York Carnegie
Assn—keeping a few to myself for extra calls—shall die poor, according to the Gospel of Wealth.”²³

It had dawned on Carnegie the year before that, try as he might, he was not going to be able to personally
dispose of his fortune in his lifetime. He had been defeated in the end by the inexorable logic of compound
interest. In the spring of 1911, he had drafted a new will and made provision to put the remainder of his
estate in trust. When he showed the document to Elihu Root, Root warned him against trying to be his own
lawyer and suggested that instead of establishing a trust to take effect after his death, he create and endow
one during his lifetime. This was the genesis of the Carnegie Corporation of New York, the largest Carnegie
trust and indeed, the largest philanthropic trust in history, to that point.

The corporation was officially organized in November 10, 1911, with an endowment of $25 million (close to $8
billion today) and considerable fanfare. The New York Times and papers across the country hailed the latest
Carnegie gift on their front pages. John D. Rockefeller cabled his congratulations. “May your life be spared
for many years with health and happiness.” Carnegie graciously replied that Rockefeller’s “telegram gave me
unusual pleasure…. You and I are in the same boat, finding that it is harder to administer, than to make,
dollars. But I think I have really found the best possible solution for the future usefulness of what I shall
leave behind me.”²⁴

The new corporation was the only trust he intended to run by himself. “When Mr. Carnegie formed the Carnegie
Corporation,” Henry Pritchett, an original trustee and later acting president, explained, “he simply
incorporated himself.” Carnegie named himself the corporation’s first president, arranged for all trustee
meetings and business to be transacted from Ninety-first Street, and appointed his bookkeeper, Robert Franks,
as treasurer, and James Bertram as secretary. Elihu Root, the corporation’s first vice president and the only
officer not employed by Carnegie, was also named to the eight-member board of trustees; the other trustees
were the presidents of Carnegie’s U.S. trusts.²⁵

Carnegie intended to keep transferring gold bonds from his vault at the Home Trust Company to the corporation,
until there were none left. Louise was not going to be left a pauper—she had well over $1 million in assets
and would inherit Carnegie’s real estate—but neither was she going to inherit the size of fortune that other
robber barons bequeathed to their wives. In accepting the gift, the trustees graciously acknowledged that fact
by thanking “Mrs. Carnegie and Miss Margaret Carnegie who, with cheerful and active sympathy, have approved
and promoted the diversion of a vast fortune from the ordinary channels of family distribution to the benefit
of mankind.”²⁶

Carnegie would live his final years in disappointment that he had not met his lifelong goal of giving away all
his money personally. But he had, in leaving it to the corporation, come close. For the first few years, while
the corporation was still under the control of Carnegie, Bertram, and Franks, and housed at Ninety-first
Street, Carnegie used it to make the kinds of grants that he and Bertram had been handling by themselves,
mostly gifts for libraries, church organs, and colleges. Only after Elihu Root became president on Carnegie’s
death in 1919 did the corporation move into other areas. Carnegie had already anticipated this and given the
trustees the broadest possible charter to spend his money “to promote the advancement and diffusion of
knowledge and understanding” as they saw fit.

The initial bequest of $25 million made hardly a dent in Carnegie’s holdings. On January 14, 1912, the New
York Times, in a Sunday Magazine article entitled “What is Andrew Carnegie Really Worth?”, estimated that his
fortune was nearly what it had been on his retirement, “over $200,000,000, and probably nearer $250,000,000.”
The newspaper was not far off. There remained in the vault of the Home Trust Company in Hoboken some $150
million (almost $50 billion today) in U.S. Steel gold bonds. While Carnegie had been giving away between $10
and $20 million a year, he had been earning back between $13 and $20 million in interest.

Two days after the New York Times article, Carnegie transferred an additional $75 million in gold bonds from
his personal account to the corporation. In October, he gave away another $25 million. Early in 1913, having
decided that he needed to set up a comparable organization for the United Kingdom, he asked Root to transfer
$10 million from the New York–chartered Carnegie Corporation for this purpose. When Root replied that such a
transfer would violate the corporation’s charter, Carnegie took $10 million from his private holdings to endow
the United Kingdom Trust.²⁷

 

ON NOVEMBER 25, 1912, Andrew Carnegie celebrated his seventy-seventh birthday with a stroll in his garden,
after which he repaired to his library to read the hundreds of letters of congratulation that had arrived that
day. In the afternoon, he invited the reporters, as had become customary on his birthday, to join him for a
conversation.

“‘I’m feeling young, indeed,’ was his response to their congratulations when he entered his library. ‘Why
shouldn’t I, when I see so much good all about me? The earth becomes more of a Heaven to me every year. Every
year I get a higher opinion of the human race, because I know so many more men and women who have attained
almost angelic heights.’” In a wide-ranging interview, Carnegie explained that the Hero Fund was his favorite
philanthropy because he had thought of it on his own and it had been so successful that he had expanded it to
Canada, Great Britain, Germany, Belgium, Holland, Norway, Sweden, and Italy. “The reports that I get from all
these countries are the best medicine that can be administered to any man. It keeps me young.”²⁸

Carnegie’s protestations of unalloyed joy—at being alive and having finally succeeded in disposing of his
fortune—were his way of whistling away his anxieties. His age was finally beginning to catch up with him. He
was noticeably frail, having trouble with his knees, catching colds more often, and no longer nimble on his
feet.

His friends and political contacts had aged along with him and no longer occupied important government posts.
Campbell-Bannerman had died in 1908. Carnegie had established a correspondence with Herbert Asquith, his
successor, but Asquith, born in 1852, had no intention of forging as close a relationship to Carnegie as the
previous generation of Liberals had.²⁹

The same process was at work in Washington. Woodrow Wilson and his secretary of state, William Jennings Bryan,
replied courteously to Carnegie’s letters, but they did not invite him to luncheon or dinner or to one-on-one
conversations as their predecessors had. He would never again exercise the influence he had enjoyed—or thought
he had enjoyed—in Washington and London.

He understood now that with the defeat of Taft’s arbitration treaties, the exit of the Republicans from the
State Department and the diplomatic corps, and James Bryce’s resignation as ambassador to the United States,
an opportunity had passed that might not soon return. “I hoped your crowning glory was to be the Treaty,” he
wrote Bryce in November 1912. “It will come some day. I, like you, have my greatest of all disappointments of
my life. What we have lost! When will the Gods give us such a chance again. Well, well, let us hope. Never
give up. It will come some day.”³⁰

He tried his best not to hold Taft responsible for the failure of the treaty, but could not, in the end, help
himself. What he refused to recognize was that no matter how carefully the arbitration treaties might have
been drafted and no matter how scrupulously the administration might have prepared the groundwork for
ratification, the treaties were not going to get the two-thirds vote required in the Senate. As Roosevelt and
Hay had discovered a decade earlier, and Woodrow Wilson would learn a few years hence, the U.S. Senate in the
first quarter of the twentieth century was not inclined to cede its prerogatives to make treaties and declare
war.

This truth was too terrible for Carnegie to look in the face. As usual, he preferred to search for
scapegoats—and found them in the persons of Taft and his secretary of state, Philander Knox. On December 12,
he and Louise joined the Tafts and the cabinet for a special farewell dinner. Three days later, back in New
York on a Sunday, the day he devoted to letter writing, he unburdened himself.

“Why did you fail?” he wrote Taft accusatorily. Then he answered his own question, accusing Taft and Knox of
killing the treaties by not consulting in advance with the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. Lest they
bungle another diplomatic initiative, Carnegie urged the president, who would remain in office as a lame duck
until March, to begin discussions at once with the Senate over the proposed and highly contentious Panama
Canal treaty.³¹

Taft did not answer Carnegie’s letter directly, but sent it to Knox, with the note: “Isn’t it pleasant to be
told how it could have been done?” Knox was even more outraged than the president at Carnegie’s presumption
that he knew best how to conduct the nation’s business. “As an exhibition of ignorance, mendacity and
impudence,” Knox wrote Taft, “this communication of Mr. Carnegie’s is quite up to his well known and well
deserved international reputation for these mental and moral failings. It should be appropriately tagged and
filed and given no further attention.” Knox closed his letter with a sixteenth-century Latin verse, “Mel in
ore, verba lactis, Fel in corde, fraus in factis,” “A honeyed mouth with milky words hides a heart filled with
gall and evil deeds.”³²

 

CARNEGIE—like the voters—having lost faith in Taft, turned his attention to the president-elect. “Carnegie Now
Looks to Wilson for Peace,” the New York Times reported in a January 25, 1913, article. “Regrets Bad Record of
Past Year, but is Strong in Predicting Change.” In a speech before a joint meeting of the New York Peace
Society and the Civic Forum at Carnegie Hall, “Mr. Carnegie asserted his conviction that the end of war was in
sight and expressed the greatest confidence in the attitude which president-elect Wilson would assume on going
into office.”

He was as intently focused on the threat of war as he had ever been. In the scrapbook of cartoons and Carnegie
greeting cards assembled by Margaret Barclay Wilson and donated to the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh is a
painting of a family scene, with a young girl standing on a chair, hugging her father in uniform. The caption
reads, “Daddy, are you going to kill some other little girl’s father?” Beneath the painting, in Carnegie’s
handwriting is written, “Merrie Christmas, 1913,” and “We pause for a reply.”

[image]

“DADDY, ARE YOU GOING TO KILL SOME OTHER LITTLE GIRL’S FATHER?”

In April, Carnegie formally welcomed Woodrow Wilson to the presidency (he had been inaugurated the month
before) with unsolicited advice on how he might quell the anti-Japanese agitation in California. Like a child
seeking to impress his teacher on the first day of a new school year, Carnegie made sure the new president
knew that he had been a major adviser to President Roosevelt on this subject. He concluded his letter with a
bit of flattery, as was his practice in communicating with the White House: “I watch you progress (for
progressing you are) with deep interest, and am sanguine of your success.” He then added that he was now a
proponent of the progressive income tax. “Citizens should pay taxes in proportion to their ability to do so.
Millionaires have undoubted ability to pay. I send you copy of the ‘Gospel of Wealth.’ Roosevelt’s reply to
copy sent him when he advocated increased taxation was ‘I am much struck with the fact that seventeen years
ago you had it all.’”³³

In early May, Carnegie took the train to St. Louis to give the keynote address at the fourth annual American
Peace Congress. Again, he saluted Woodrow Wilson and Secretary of State Bryan, and again, he closed his speech
by calling on “Friends of Peace [to] be of good cheer; this savage crime of man killing man is soon to become
a crime of the past.”³⁴

It was almost as if he were stuck in a time warp, continually revisiting the past, still calling for naval
disarmament and arbitration treaties, still looking to lead the nations of the world into a League of Peace.
Greeting reporters at the pier as he and his family sailed for Europe on May 25, he announced that he planned
to make two special trips to the Continent that summer, one to visit the kaiser in Berlin and deliver a
“memorial” to him from the American Peace Society, the other to The Hague.³⁵

He was, it appeared, returning to the place he had occupied three years earlier when he proclaimed the kaiser
a “man of destiny” and dispatched Roosevelt to meet with him. On June 8, he published an article in the New
York Times Sunday Magazine, headlined, “KAISER WILHELM II, PEACEMAKER, BY ANDREW CARNEGIE.’ THE CIVILIZED
WORLD THIS DAY BOWS REVERENTLY BEFORE YOU,’ WRITES THE AMERICAN PEACE ADVOCATE, IN CONGRATULATING THE EMPEROR
ON THE OCCASION OF HIS JUBILEE CELEBRATION.” Much of the article recapitulated Carnegie’s prior dealings with
the kaiser and explained how impressed the kaiser had been with Carnegie’s speeches and articles on peace.
While tooting his own horn—as he could never refrain from doing on such occasions—Carnegie also reminded his
readers that “for twenty-five years [Wilhelm II] has reigned in unbroken peace over the most powerful military
nation of the world, surrounded by neighboring less powerful nations. Never has he drawn sword or threatened
to draw it; on the contrary, he has labored always to preserve the peace and has triumphed.”

The Carnegies arrived in Berlin on June 14. “Everyone wants to see Carnegie,” the Los Angeles Times reported
on June 16; “everyone wants to talk to this Kaiser der Industrie…Carnegie, his wife and daughter, occupy the
royal suite at the Adlon. They were invited to become the personal guests of the Kaiser…but the great American
likes to be independent and as he says himself he wants to see everything that is going to happen with the
freedom of an American visitor.” Two days later, Carnegie attended the official state dinner marking the
kaiser’s twenty-five-year Jubilee. It was, he remarked the following morning, “the most glittering function of
my life.” The New York Times, reporting on the event on June 19, noted that Carnegie had been the only man in
“plain evening clothes.” Placed with his back to the tables where the kaiser and his “bejeweled
fellow-sovereigns” were seated, “the white-haired little man in somber black was the cynosure of all eyes.
Everybody wanted him pointed out. He was taken in tow after the dinner by the Kaiser’s chief aide de camp
[who] led him to the balcony where the Kaiser’s own party was assembled…. The Kaiserin as well as the Crown
Prince asked to have Mr. Carnegie presented to them, and engaged with him in conversation for several minutes.
The Kaiser, too, found time to say several pleasant things to him.”

The morning after the state dinner, the Carnegies left for a trip through the Alps along the route Louise
Whitfield had traveled with her parents when she was sixteen, Margaret’s age in 1913. They stopped in Paris,
where, once again, Mr. Carnegie quickly occupied the center of attention. “Andrew Carnegie has been the
conspicuous figure in the life of Paris this week,” the New York Times reported by cable on July 5. “For three
days the city talked of nothing but the ironmaster, who was feted by nearly a dozen different organizations,
and had receptions given him by a number of leading Frenchmen from president [Raymond] Poincaré downward.”

Though Carnegie may have been politic enough not to praise the German kaiser too loudly in Paris, he started
all over again in late August, when he visited The Hague for the opening of the Peace Palace built with his
funds and unveiled a bust of Sir Randal Cremer, a British peace activist. After reciting a paragraph from a
biography of Cremer, Carnegie soared into his stump speech on disarmament and a League of Peace, punctuating
it again by reference to the kaiser, whom he implored, as he had Roosevelt before him, to convene an
international peace conference.³⁶

Carnegie returned to the United States in October almost giddy with optimism. The day on which he had been
honored for his contribution to peace at The Hague, Louise would later recall in her diary, had been “perhaps
the greatest in Andrew’s life.” On November 25, the reporters who visited him in his library to celebrate his
birthday found him nearly bouncing with joy “at the dawn of his seventy-ninth year. ‘How on earth do you
expect a youngster like me to know anything about the so-called joys and delights of old age,’ asked Mr.
Carnegie, ‘when I am feeling as young and chipper as any one of you young men? As a matter of fact, I am just
exactly 78 years young, and that is all there is to that. But,’ added Mr. Carnegie, and he was a bit solemn,
‘I have passed another milestone and I am not keen on going ahead too fast. This earth of ours is such a
heaven to me that I want to stay here just as long as I can.’”³⁷

Carnegie’s reveries were interrupted by a question about Mexico. Back in May 1911, rebels had toppled the
government of Porfirio Díaz in a nearly bloodless revolution. The new president, Francisco Madero, had barely
begun to institute the reforms he had promised before he was assassinated by his chief lieutenant, Victoriano
Huerta. Armed resistance to the new government was organized in the south and in the north. The European
powers recognized Huerta’s government, but the United States put off doing so. As civil war intensified,
President Wilson denounced Huerta, outlawed the sale of arms to Mexico, and after an unsuccessful attempt at
mediation, pursued what the newspapers referred to as a policy of “watchful waiting.” In October 1913, the
British affirmed their recognition of the Huerta government, enraging Wilson, who stepped up his criticism of
the Mexican president.

While refusing to publicly criticize President Wilson, Carnegie told the reporters that he considered the
political turmoil in Mexico “a family affair of the Mexicans and I don’t see that we have any right to
interfere.” Asked to comment on Wilson’s increasingly bellicose anti-Huerta rhetoric, Carnegie declined.
“Mexico,” the reporter concluded, “did not fit in with the well-known peace views of Mr. Carnegie and so at
the first opportunity he switched the talk to matters nearer home.”³⁸

Though he did not comment on it in public, Carnegie had earlier that month sent Wilson a long letter of advice
on the Mexican situation. He prefaced his position paper with the same sort of quasi-apologetic statement he
had earlier employed in communicating with Presidents Harrison, Cleveland, McKinley, Roosevelt, and Taft. “My
ardent wish for your continued success must be my apology for troubling you.” After reciting his credentials
as an expert on Mexico—his attendance at the first Pan American Conference and his recent award of a gold
medal “at the last Pan American Conference by a unanimous vote of representatives of more than 160,000,000
million”—he beseached the president to set aside any thoughts of invading Mexico. “Mexicans…will not approve
the stranger invading her land, even to right her wrongs…. If I were you I’d let Mexico manage her own
destiny…. When other nations recognized Huerta I would have followed them.”³⁹

While Wilson threatened Mexico with invasion and war clouds gathered over the Balkans, Carnegie celebrated the
imminent arrival of world peace. “We send this New Year Greeting January 1, 1914, strong in the faith that
international Peace is soon to prevail.”

Be of good cheer, kind friend.

It’s coming yet for a’ That!

When man to man the world o’er

Shall brothers be and a’ that.⁴⁰

## FORTY-ONE

## 1914

IAM NOT A strict vegetarian, nor a great meat eater,” Carnegie responded in January 1914 to one of the
hundreds of letters sent him, “—just in the middle—neither too much nor too little. I am an abstainer; no
liquor except my doctor prescribes a half glass of the very best Scotch whisky, and this I take at lunch and
dinner, no wine or beer.” He had become an all-purpose expert, willing to dispense advice on just about any
topic—to anonymous correspondents, newspaper reporters, politicians, and presidents.¹

In February 1914, reconciled to the fact that his Endowment for International Peace would never be able to
take the advocacy role he had envisioned for it, Carnegie endowed a second peace society, this one dedicated
to activism as well as education.

His friend and colleague Frederick Lynch had remarked that clergymen active in the peace campaign never had
sufficient funding to pursue their work. Carnegie, intrigued, asked Lynch if he could assemble an ecumenical
group of fifty or sixty churchmen, including rabbis. Lynch did so, and Carnegie, after consulting with
Louise’s pastor, gave the group, which became known as the Church Peace Union,[*][1] a $2 million grant from
his newly established Carnegie Corporation.

The trustees of the new peace society were invited to lunch with Carnegie on February 10. They approved two
peace and disarmament resolutions, which were sent “to each Sovereign, president, Prime Minister, Minister of
Foreign relations, President of legislature, and other high official of the World Powers, and to the clergy of
Germany, Great Britain and the United States.” Lynch, who had worked with Carnegie for many years, recalled
later that he had never taken “more delight in any of his gifts than in this child of his later years. After
all the [trustees] had gone, he and I went into the library together and he put his arm about my neck and
said, ‘Hasn’t it been a great day! And what a splendid lot of men we’ve got there! They can do anything.’”
Planning began at once for an international conference to be held in Germany the following August.²

There was one cloud on the horizon. In February 1914, Carnegie wrote to thank Woodrow Wilson for a recent
letter which, he insisted, he was going to put “into my president’s drawer—Harrison Cleveland McKinley
Roosevelt Taft all there for the future none more valued than yours.” He added a P.S. as long as the letter on
“Mexico, Mexico, the only danger.” Though he fervently hoped the president would take his advice and resist
the temptation to invade, if the circumstances should warrant it and intervention became necessary, Carnegie
offered his assistance in securing the support of the Latin American republics.³

 

IN MARCH 1914, Carnegie, instead of returning to Cumberland Island and Hot Springs for Margaret’s Easter break
from Miss Spence’s School, spent extra time in Washington, then sailed along the Potomac River to Chesapeake
Bay for a few days’ visit at Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute (today Hampton University). “I’ve been
on the go, so many Resolutions presented and Meetings, I could not refuse.” Spring was finally, he wrote
Morley in his Sunday letter on March 29, poking up its head. “Weather here fine at least, snow drifts all gone
thru the city…. Our garden alive, roots shooting up everywhere and robins here—now for my morning stroll in
it. Madam and Margaret at church—latter 17 tomorrow, a young lady already and a wise one—but bossy—rather but
always the Lady like her saintly mother.” In April, he and Louise planned to go to Pittsburgh for an event at
his Carnegie Institute, “now grown, a gigantic affair, 300 students males, 250 women—and still they come and
we keep on building.”⁴

In early April, he visited with Woodrow Wilson at the White House. President Wilson, asked at an April 9 press
conference what Carnegie “wanted,” replied that he “didn’t want anything. He is quite removed from want. No;
it was entirely a friendly visit. He was passing through and he came in to pay his compliments. He didn’t ask
a thing or discuss a single public question.”⁵

That same day, seven American sailors on shore leave in Tampico, Mexico, were arrested by an officer of the
Huerta government. The Wilson government dispatched 7,000 Marines to seize the port city of Vera Cruz.
Carnegie, though aghast at Wilson’s action and frightened that the landing was but the first step in a
full-scale invasion, refrained from publicly criticizing the new president. “Numerous telegrams tell me of
proposed meetings to protest against war,” he cabled Wilson, “to which I have replied that this is not yet in
order, we must wait.” Contacted by the New York World, Carnegie both praised Wilson as a friend of peace and
cautioned him publicly against drawing the nation into a war which would make enemies of every South American
republic. “We cannot expect our sister republics to see our giant republic interfering with any one of them
without arousing all of them against us.”⁶

On April 24, having received no response from the president to his letters, Carnegie wrote Joseph Tumulty,
Wilson’s personal secretary, to plead again for an end to the military action in Mexico. “I repeat that unless
some way is found to obtain an armistice we become the distrusted neighbor of all our southern sister
nations.” His tone was one of desperation. “Today it is easy to predict that unless the President gets release
from some quarter his noble resolve to avoid war will soon pass, and history is to record his failure with
years of unexpected humiliating, barbarous and unnecessary war, staining his otherwise noble record. My
intense regard and admiration for him as a man of the highest aims is my only excuse for this intrusion, which
shall probably be the last, for the sands of time are running down fast.”⁷

That same evening, Carnegie received his reply from the White House in the form of a telegram delivered to his
first-tier Carnegie Hall box, stage right, where he was listening to the Oratorio Society’s last concert of
the season. Carnegie read the telegram, then, without a word to his wife, ran downstairs to the orchestra
level and made his way to the stage door entrance. The chorus had just completed its final piece before
intermission. As the applause died down and the conductor bowed to the audience, a tiny man with a white beard
walked onto the stage through an opening in the middle of the risers where the singers were seated. The
audience, recognizing that it was Andrew Carnegie, applauded him generously. Holding the telegram in his hand
and almost out of breath, he bowed.

“‘Behold, I bring you good tidings,’ he exclaimed excitedly…. ‘This is the happiest moment of my life!’…‘War
has been averted at the last moment…. There will be no more hostilities!’” He continued on for a full fifteen
minutes, segueing effortlessly into praise for the Oratorio Society before turning “to the chorus behind him
on the stage…. ‘This news about the Mexican situation has put me in such fine spirits that each of you ladies
in the chorus looks like an angel of peace to me.’” Then he shook hands with the conductor and left the stage.
Frederick Lynch, who was in the audience, made his way to Carnegie’s box “and arrived there just before he
did. When he came in he was as happy as a child—all radiant. ‘Isn’t it great news?’ he said at once…. The
music began and I went back to my chair leaving Mr. Carnegie with eyes closed and Mexico and everything else
forgotten.”⁸

Carnegie’s joy was premature. There would be no imminent war with Mexico, but Vera Cruz remained occupied by
American troops. All through May, Carnegie bombarded the president and his secretary with letters urging that
American forces be withdrawn from Mexico. “Please excuse me,” he wrote Tumulty on May 7, “but I feel as though
I had the closest and dearest friend on earth in jeopardy. I wish to be candid…. It takes a great man to
acknowledge his mistake, but such a man I credit the President with being.”⁹

On May 21, before embarking for Europe, he wrote Wilson one last time. “I leave for the moors Saturday morning
feeling that you are in grave danger. Your interview in Philadelphia Saturday past, if correctly reported,
commits you to the task of righting Mexico’s wrongs…. I tremble, seeing you as it were on the brink of a
precipice where one misstep brings such disaster to our country as the Civil War alone entailed. My hope is
that you will soon see that our departure from Mexico, having tried our best to promote peace by friendly
counsel but not by war—is our duty for it is true that real progress in civilization comes from the abused
masses below…not from the rulers of foreign countries…. Numerous engagements…call me abroad but my thoughts
will be in Washington hoping that the kind fates will open the path of withdrawal for you, in peace.”¹⁰

That same day, in a second letter, this one formally addressed and typewritten, Carnegie responded to Wilson’s
request that he donate funds to Berea College in the Kentucky hills. Wilson had appealed to Carnegie to do for
southern whites, “this great mass of people of our own stock and traditions,” at least as much as he had done
for the southern Negroes. “The South and the Nation would certainly appreciate such action.” Carnegie answered
that he would be glad to ask the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching to examine the problem
and report back to him. The two men had tacitly agreed that their disagreement over Mexico was not going to
interfere with possible cooperation in other areas. “You may be sure that your recommendation of the greatness
of this cause gives it high importance in my eyes, not only because it is from the President of the United
States, but because it comes from one who has an expert knowledge of education.”¹¹

 

IN LATE JULY, the three Carnegies prepared to break away from the castle at Skibo and their round of visitors
for three weeks at their cottage on the Shin River. Andrew had returned to the autobiography he had been
working on in fits and starts since 1889. Six hundred pages of “The Story of a Scotch Lad” had, as Carnegie
wrote Gladstone in 1891, been dictated to a “clever stenographer” at Cluny and then laid aside “for some
future editor—I trust a discreet one—to condense.” In the winter of 1897, Carnegie hired James Bertram in
large part to help him with his memoirs. The project was put away for another fourteen years until, prodded by
Louise, Carnegie returned to it in the summer of 1911. He hoped to be able to bring his manuscript up to the
present and finish it during the family’s monthly retreat at Auchinduich in 1914.[*][2]12

On June 28, 1914, as the Carnegies were leaving the castle for their cottage, Archduke Ferdinand of
Austria-Hungary was assassinated during a state visit to Sarajevo. There is no mention of the event in
Carnegie’s correspondence, no doubt because he, like so many others, could not possibly imagine that this
event would lead to world war.

On July 23, as Carnegie worked on the final pages of his Autobiography, the Austro-Hungarian government
delivered an ultimatum to Serbia, demanding among other things that Austrian police and state officials be
permitted to enter Serbia to apprehend the assassins and suppress anti-Austrian activities.

On July 25, the Serbian government mobilized its army and declared that it would comply with all demands in
the Austrian ultimatum that did not “impair” its independence and sovereignty. The Serbs suggested that
disputed items in the ultimatum be submitted to arbitration at The Hague.

On July 28, Austria refused arbitration and declared war on Serbia.

On July 29, the czar ordered the Russian army to mobilize against Austria, in defense of Russia’s ally,
Serbia.

On August 1, Germany, Austria’s ally, declared war on Serbia’s ally, Russia. France, an ally of Russia,
mobilized its army.

On August 3, Germany declared war on France and poured troops into neutral Belgium. At 11:00 P.M., Britain
declared war on Germany.

That day—or perhaps early on the next—the Carnegies received an unexpected visit from the Reverend Robert
Ritchie, the local minister and friend of the family. Ritchie wanted Carnegie to hear from him, not from the
newspapers, that Britain had gone to war. As Burton Hendrick tells the story, Carnegie received Ritchie’s news
“with incredulity. As always when the Laird was excited, he began pacing up and down the room. ‘It can’t be
true,’ he kept saying. ‘Are you sure it is true?’ Then he would burst out, ‘Can’t America do something to stop
it?’”¹³

The family returned at once to Skibo, where the next day Carnegie received a letter from John Morley, who was
at the time a member of the Liberal cabinet. Morley agreed wholeheartedly that the Germans had no business
invading neutral Belgium. But he also believed that this was insufficient casus belli to set off a European
war of all against all. “My Good Friend, You will tomorrow see in the papers, I expect, that I have left the
Government. You may be sure that the strain of the last five days has been severe. I have taken my best pains
to come to a right and sensible conclusion, and you will know that I do not leave Asquith, who has been my
friend for thirty years, without a mortal pang. As we shall meet on Monday next, I won’t go into details now….
But what a black panorama! To nobody will it seem blacker than to you. Hell in full blast. This is a sorrowful
night for me—probably the last of my public life—but I am in good nerve.”¹⁴

Carnegie’s immediate concern may have been his Church Peace Union, which was at the time holding its first
annual conference in Germany, with a number of British citizens—including members of Parliament—among the
participants. Fortunately for all, the German government offered British and American delegates safe passage
to the border. Lynch telegrammed Carnegie from London to ask for funds to provide for the forty Americans.¹⁵

Morley arrived at Skibo the week after his resignation and the two dear friends tried to make sense of their
world gone mad. Carnegie respected and admired Morley’s decision to resign, but he himself declined to join
the protest against the war. “Protest today useless,” he declared in an open letter published in The Times of
London on August 8. “We advocates of heavenly peace and foes of hellish war must not fail to expose and
denounce the guilty originators thereof.” The British government, he concluded, “was in honour bound to
protect Belgium” and declare war on Germany.

The Carnegies could not remain at Skibo. The British Admiralty had decided to set up a North Sea base at the
Duke of Sutherland’s residence nearby; horses and men were being requisitioned daily; the war was too close.
“We are in perilous times,” Carnegie wrote his friend and solicitor John Ross in Dunfermline on August 17.
“Our horses, traps etc commandeered—our territorials, ditto. All the household servants included steadily at
work, sewing & knitting for the Army. It is all too sad to contemplate but we can indulge the hope that out of
this eruption there is to spring the resolve to form an organization among the nations to prevent war
hereafter.” What must have been especially disheartening for Carnegie was the excitement and enthusiasm with
which the British volunteers, including the men of the Highlands, looked forward to crossing the Channel to
repel the Boches from Belgium.¹⁶

Though war had been declared and the troops mobilized, Carnegie clutched at the false hope that somehow the
Americans would ride to the rescue and bring the combatants to the bargaining table. John Morley knew better.
In late August, he wrote to thank his friend for his hospitality and sympathy. “The only days of peace and
refreshment in this Trough of Despair, for me at least, have been my fortnight at Skibo. The company was both
genial and understanding…. The host and hostess were almost kinder, more considerate, and more sympathetic
than usual…. There is evidently to be no speedy ray of light upon the European scene; nor will the Devil be
chained safely up again in your time and mine. We are seeing evil war at its worst—worst in carnage, worst in
its depravation of all moral sense, worst as a murderous gamble. For the moment, there is nothing for people
like you and me, but an iron silence. We can keep a vigilant eye upon events—Words are vain or worse than
vain.”¹⁷

Carnegie, using every bit of influence he had, arranged an early sailing for the family—on the Mauritania from
Liverpool in mid-September. Hew Morrison, who had served him faithfully in so many different ways, visited
with him for the last time at Skibo. “He was a mental and physical wreck. He had become thin and worn and
trembly—he was an aged man…. ‘All my air castles,’ he told Morrison, ‘have crashed about me like a house of
cards.’”¹⁸

“The color of the heather and ripening corn is painfully beautiful,” Louise wrote James Bryce, as they left
Skibo. “We have not had an autumn like it for years and it is one that will never be forgotten for many
reasons.”¹⁹

Morley, not knowing when he would see his old friend again, stole away from his home to Liverpool to grab
another few hours of conversation before the Mauritania sailed. The two old men visited in the hotel sitting
room. Though the thought may have entered their minds, neither expected that these would be last moments
together. “How little when we last said goodbye at the Liverpool Station, could we suppose that we were to
meet no more, and that the humane hopes that we had lived in, and lived by, were on the very eve of ruin,”
Morley would write Louise in August 1919. “Our ideas and aims were just the same, but the fire and glow of his
spirit was his own, and my debt to him from the year when [Matthew] Arnold made us acquainted, was more than I
can find words for.”²⁰

Carnegie, no doubt, tried to raise his friend’s spirits, as he always did. But Morley could not take the bait.
He had lost everything, not least the Liberal Party to which he had devoted so much of his life. “What use
could I be in the Council of War, into which unhappy circumstances have transformed the Cabinet?” Morley had
written Margot Asquith, the prime minister’s wife, days after his resignation. “I’ve run my course and kept
the faith. That’s enough.” No matter if hostilities ceased soon or not or if the death toll reached tens of
thousands or tens of millions, the tragic and inescapable truth for Morley was that the Liberal Party had
become a war party.²¹

The tragedy for Carnegie was as deeply felt, but of a different sort. It was not the failure of the Liberal
government that pained him so much as the failure of the world’s leaders and their international institutions
to rescue Europe from its suicidal madness. Still, he was not without hope; he never was.

Sometime directly before or after he boarded the Mauritania, he sat down with pencil and paper to bring his
Autobiography up to date: “As I read this [the last passage he had written on his visit to the German kaiser
in 1913], what a change! The world convulsed by war as never before! Men slaying each other like wild beasts!
I dare not relinquish all hope. In recent days I see another ruler coming forward upon the world stage, who
may prove himself the immortal one…. He had the indomitable will of genius, and true hope which we are told,
‘Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.’ Nothing is impossible to genius! Watch President Wilson! He
has Scotch blood in his veins.” So ended his manuscript. We do not know whether he intended to return to it at
a later date. If so, he never got the chance.²²

He was trying, with renewed desperation now, to envision a way in which the hostilities might be brought to a
speedy conclusion. The British and Germans having surrendered to the gods of war, it was left to President
Wilson and the Americans to restore order and good sense. Carnegie suggested, on returning to New York, that
Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan, in an effort to establish America’s credentials as a possible
arbitrator, negotiate with Germany the same sort of toothless but high-minded treaty of conciliation he had
earlier signed with the other European powers. To this end he offered to serve as private liaison with the
kaiser to ascertain if he would be willing to consider such a treaty. Bryan agreed and approved the draft of
the letter Carnegie intended to send to the kaiser. On October 16, Carnegie wrote the kaiser, who responded
favorably. But it was too late; no treaty between Germany and the United States was going to end the war in
Europe.²³

Carnegie, recovered from his initial shock, began in the fall of 1914 to speak out in public again, write
letters to the editor and articles, grant interviews, and promote a peace agenda in time of war. His first
article, “A League of Peace—Not ‘Preparation for War,’” was published in the Independent and distributed in
pamphlet form. He argued that as soon as the war was won, Britain, France, and Russia should invite Germany
and Austria to join with them in the establishment of a League of Peace, with a combined naval force to carry
out its decisions. For 2,500 years, tribes and nations had “warred with each other, inflicting such
barbarities as make the flesh creep…and all these years it had been held by many that ‘preparation for war’
prevents war, yet today we have the greatest outburst of war that this long history recounts…. The civilized
world has tried ‘preparation for war’ long enough. We now propose to render war impossible.”²⁴

Carnegie still held out hope that Wilson would accomplish the impossible and negotiate a settlement. “I shall
be disappointed if your valued offer of mediation be not accepted by the Allies,” he wrote the president in
late November. “Even the German Emperor who was overpowered by the military caste who had resolved upon war
during his absence would not be unfavourable to you personally. The present financial and industrial
situations are very distressing. I have never known such conditions.”²⁵

There were few indications that Carnegie had, like his friend John Morley, been overcome by despair at the
present and foreboding for the future. On November 25, 1914, he celebrated his seventy-ninth birthday as
always by inviting reporters to his library for an extended conversation. He repeated as he had the year
before that “the longer I live on this earth the more of a heaven it becomes to me,” but he also “admitted
that the war had shaken his proverbial optimism about the goodness of this world.”²⁶

Two weeks later, on December 6, the New York Times Sunday Magazine published a long interview with Carnegie,
in which he presciently predicted that if a League of Peace were not established at the end of this war, the
vanquished would rise up again to renew the cycle of warfare.

[1]: footnote36.html
[2]: footnote37.html

## FORTY-TWO

## Last Days, 1915–1919

CARNEGIE was and had always been an insatiable reader of newspapers and magazines. And it was from them—and
his English and Scottish friends—that he followed the war’s course through Europe. By the time the family left
Skibo in the fall of 1914, 5 million men were at arms, many of them on their way to the eastern and western
fronts. The Germans had swept through Belgium into France, but been pushed back at the Marne. At Ypres, in
Belgium, in mid-November, more than 5,000 British and 5,000 German soldiers were killed. As winter approached,
the armies in the west retreated to either side of a 600-mile line of trenches, which extended from Belgium to
Switzerland. In the east, the trench lines extended some 900 miles from East Prussia through Poland. There was
no longer any possibility that either side would inflict a knockout blow.

Still, Carnegie refused to give up hope—for the long term. The more deadly the war, the more lasting the
peace. In his 1915 New Year’s greeting, “War Abolished—Peace Enthroned,” and then again in an article
published on January 24 in the Washington Post and widely distributed, he renewed his call for a League of
Peace and a world court. “In these times, when half of our fair world is being blackened by the fire and smoke
of shot and shell, when men are at each other’s throats and civilization’s progress has suffered its most
serious setback of centuries, I am asked if I can find any possible prospect for lasting peace. To this I
answer an emphatic ‘yes.’…It is my firm belief and opinion that never at any time in the history of the world
did the future hold out such definite promise or permanent peace as it does now. The present war is so
appalling and shocking that it in itself is probably doing more to put an end to war than any peace propaganda
could have accomplished in half a century. The longer that this war continues and the more terrible its
results, the stronger the argument for permanent world peace.”

The week before, he had written John Ross that he would not be returning to Scotland for the summer of 1915,
not because of the danger posed but because he still had work to do in America. “I am here in constant touch
with our President and Secretary of State…. I have a part to play here. I know or at least I feel that…I may
be of use here.”¹

 

IN FEBRUARY 1915, Andrew Carnegie made his third appearance before a government investigating committee, this
time the newly created United States Commission on Industrial Relations, chaired by Kansas City attorney and
reformer Frank P. Walsh. The commission had been established in the closing days of the Taft administration.
Its mandate was to investigate the larger causes that lay behind industrial violence. The impetus for its
creation had been the conviction of the McNamara brothers for the dynamiting of the Los Angeles Times Building
in 1910.

On February 5, John D. Rockefeller, Sr., and Andrew Carnegie testified before the commission on the role of
philanthropic institutions created by men of wealth. “It was a glorious day for Mr. Carnegie,” the New York
Sun reported. “He chuckled his way through a carefully prepared statement of his views and then sat down to
answer questions. Every rule that Chairman Walsh had made and enforced for the proper conduct of the hearing
went by the board within two minutes after Mr. Carnegie went on the stand…. Mr. Carnegie appeared in a black
frock coat, black bow tie and white stiff bosomed shirt. As he stood to read his statement he looked for all
the world like a Scotch preacher high up in his little pulpit on the wall of the church.”²

Carnegie, older and frailer than when he had last testified and now in his eightieth year, stole the show once
again. When asked to state his business, he answered, “My business is to do as much good in the world as I
can; I have retired from all other business.” “Mr. Carnegie,” the New York Times reported on February 5, “was
the most remarkable witness that has yet appeared before the commission. Captivating the commission, as well
as the audience, by the sheer force of his infectious geniality, he was allowed to tell his story in his own
way, and had the crowd in roars of laughter, without any effort being made to restrain him. With an appealing
sweep of his arms, as if he wanted to include the whole world in his philosophy of benevolence, the Laird of
Skibo beamed as he told how his associates fondly called him ‘Andy,’ and how he wanted the poor and distressed
to share in his happiness.” When asked by Chairman Walsh about the possibility that his foundations “might
exert undue influence over the beneficiaries” of grants, he replied that he could not “imagine any injury
coming from that.” He refused to be baited, agreed with the commissioners that government should exercise some
control over the foundations, and applauded all efforts to publicize their activities. “Now, I believe in
advertising. I would like more men, more people to get interested in my foundation.”

That same week, Carnegie appeared again in public, this time at the annual dinner of the Young Men’s Bible
Class of the Fifth Avenue Baptist Church. With John D. Rockefeller, Jr., at his side—it was his Bible
Class—Carnegie told stories of his uncle and of being raised in a Presbyterian nation. “That religion was a
little hard for me when I was young, but I got over that,” Carnegie told his enthralled audience. The old man,
who occasionally leaned on Rockefeller Junior for support, grew more animated as he spoke, sweeping his arms
before him and punctuating his points with “short-arm blows with his right fist.”³

His calendar for February was marked with events and meetings—often two or three a day—but his remarks at
Rockefeller’s Bible class dinner on Monday, February 8, were the last he would make in public. He was
scheduled to preside at William Jennings Bryan’s peace lecture at Aeolian Hall on February 25, but did not
appear.⁴

On March 21, the New York Times published an interview with Carnegie in its Sunday Magazine. “It is difficult
in printed words,” the interviewer wrote, “to give an accurate idea of the feeling in the active, perfectly
white-haired, absolutely earnest, world-famous philanthropist’s voice.” There were no moments of levity, no
little jokes this time, only an exhortation to his readers—and no doubt to himself—to keep faith in the peace
process and its ultimate victory.

“‘Have you lost faith in the peace impulse which centres at The Hague?’ I asked.

“‘Certainly not,’ Carnegie answered. ‘I verily believe that in this war exists the most impressive, perhaps
the only argument which could induce humanity to abate forever the curse of military preparation and the
inevitably resultant woe of conflict…. But don’t imagine that I underestimate the horror of this conflict.
This war staggers the imagination; it goes beyond the bounds of warfare as warfare has been known. I do not
underestimate its horror, but I hope, and I believe that this very horrible, newly barbaric excess will so
revolt human nature against all things of the kind that the reaction will be great enough to carry us into the
realms of reason. And the realms of reason are the realms of peace.’”

Nowhere else did Carnegie so clearly betray his nineteenth-century faith in reason, in progress, in the
future. Nowhere else did he so misjudge the dark century of world wars that was to follow.

This was to be his last interview. In May, it was announced that the Carnegies had taken the summer home of
the late George W. Vanderbilt in Bar Harbor, Maine, already the watering ground of New York’s elites. All
summer long, items appeared in the papers about Carnegie’s health, which, it was always averred, was
satisfactory for a man of eighty. But there were telltale signs, not reported in the press, that indicated
otherwise. Carnegie was no longer attending meetings of the board of the Carnegie Corporation, which had moved
out of his home into its own offices. Beginning in August 1915, Louise entered into regular correspondence
with Robert Franks, the treasurer of the corporation and Carnegie’s personal bookkeeper, about individuals,
charities, and cultural institutions that required funding. We do not know whether she was acting on her own
or communicating her husband’s wishes.⁵

The Carnegies returned to New York in mid-October of 1915. The following month, Carnegie celebrated his
eightieth birthday, but, for the first time in years, did so without inviting reporters in for a conversation.
His new secretary, John Poynton, instead issued a statement, which was carried by the New York Times and other
dailies on November 26, reporting that Mr. Carnegie “was very much improved in health” but had been “taking
life easy.” He was, Poynton claimed, playing golf two or three times a week at St. Andrew’s and keeping
abreast of the news of the world. He had even dictated a short statement on the occasion of his birthday: “Say
to the reporters who usually call on my birthday that all goes well with me. Dr. Garmany marvels at the
splendid return to health which a Summer on the Maine Coast has wrought. The world grows better and we are
soon to see blessed peace restored and a world court established, when, in the words of Burns:

Man to man the world o’er

Shall brothers be for a-that.

For his friends, his extended silence was both baffling and frightening. Not only had he given up public
appearances, interviews, visits to Washington, after-dinner speeches, and his letters to the editor, but he
had stopped communicating with them as well. John Morley attributed the engulfing silence to the recognition
that there was nothing left to say. “It seems a long time since we exchanged letters,” he wrote on January 12,
1915. “The reason, I suppose, is the painfully simple one, that the world gives us nothing on which either of
us can say to the other a single, new, fresh, cheering instructive world—not one word.”⁶

It is impossible from our vantage point to know the cause of Carnegie’s silence. He had been, Louise
remembered years later in an unpublished interview with Burton Hendrick, “the most vital, exuberant person
imaginable—until August 4, 1914. Then he completely changed. He became an old man over night. The war
practically destroyed him. Up to that time he had golfed, fished and swam every day,—though he was 78; after
that he never did any of these things. He became thin, so that his clothes hung loosely around him; his face
became deeply indented; his zest for mere existence had gone.”⁷

We cannot diagnose Carnegie’s condition. Had he suffered some sort of involuntary breakdown or had he simply
retreated into silence because he had nothing more to say?

The answers lie somewhere in between. His campaigns for naval disarmament, treaties of arbitration, and a
League of Peace had become more important to him than anything else, more important than his business
successes, his philanthropies, maybe even his family. For the past two decades, he had expended every bit of
energy and made himself a slightly ridiculous figure in Washington, London, and Berlin in his futile attempt
to forestall the horrors of war. He realized now that he had failed. His faith that reason and good sense
would ultimately prevail, his Spencerian beliefs that the nations and peoples of the world were becoming more
civilized and less barbarous had been spectacularly misplaced.

Had there been the slightest glimmer of hope, any sign at all of sanity, goodwill, or good sense returning,
Carnegie might have been moved to comment on it. But there were no signs of peace anywhere on the horizon.

By early 1915, when Carnegie retreated into silence, the trenches had been dug, the soldiers embedded, the
supply lines strung out for hundreds of miles in the east and in the west, the blockades established. In
January, the war had been widened again as German Zeppelins crossed the North Sea on their first successful
bombing raid into Britain. There was no end in sight to the carnage in the fields or the suffering at home. In
the five months since war had been declared, the French alone suffered 300,000 military deaths and twice that
number wounded, captured, or missing.

In the absence of any word from Carnegie, John Morley began communicating directly with Louise, and she with
him. “I had heard one day last week that something was amiss with him, and have been wondering how I should
approach you…. It is indeed distressing. I cannot bear to think of that pulse of such extraordinary vitality
and force going down by a single beat…. It is no surprise to me that the strain of the war should be counted
among the causes of his illness. I don’t believe there is a man in America, or here, to whom this black cloud
of misery and horror that has swept over mankind could bring more mortification of heart and soul than to him.
This crash of the best ideals of a lifetime may well break us down. I sometimes fall into the impiety of
wishing that I had disappeared from a world that can never be the same for some of us again…. If there is
anything that I can do—in writing to him, or even by crossing the Atlantic for a ‘crack’ with him—you will
command me. He has been my best of friends for more than thirty years.”⁸

In sickness as in health, Louise saw to it that her husband remained in his favored state of perpetual motion.
No sooner had they returned from the summer in Maine than she arranged for them to winter in Florida. As Lucy
Carnegie was gravely ill—she would die in January—there was no possibility of their spending time at
Cumberland Island. Instead, knowing how much Andrew loved the sea and yachting, Louise rented two houseboats
in Florida for the season, one for the family, the second for staff. Margaret, who was completing her final
years at Spence, was left behind in New York City with her aunt Stella and a full complement of servants.

Morley wrote on Christmas Eve 1915, that he had received welcome news from a mutual friend of the Carnegies’
“movements,” though he remarked, with a rare display of humor, that he was not sure that he “should care for
life in a houseboat.” On a more somber note, he added that “life is nothing less than hideous in Europe.”⁹

Louise, as always, tried to put the best possible face on her and her husband’s travails. “We now begin to
feel more at home,” she wrote Margaret on January 14, 1916, “and I can truly say I like it…. After Daddy had
his nap, he was willing to take an excursion! I let everybody go ashore and see the town and the Captain took
just Daddy and me in the launch up the Miami river…. The Captain went ashore and brought us out a delicious
kind of drink—and I let Daddy have a little which pleased him greatly. We were gone about an hour and a
quarter and Daddy enjoyed every minute of it. He was quite ready for his massage and had a good nap
afterwards.”

Her favorite moment was in the evenings,

at sunset…on deck just finishing tea, and the beautiful soft colors appearing in the sky…. We sit there till
dark…and then Daddy goes to his massage and I usually go to my writing…. We dine at 7:30 and Daddy joins us at
the beginning of the meal; he also comes to luncheon but he is so natural there is very little restraint. We
only avoid things we know would distress him…. I am sure you will have a very happy winter and enjoy all these
things which are perfectly right for you to enjoy with a free and happy mind. It is right for you to get all
the enjoyment possible out of your life and right for me to be down here helping Daddy to get well and
incidentally resting and laying up strength for myself.¹⁰

Louise’s letters to Morley were filled with as much good news as she could gather. Morley tried to take
reassurance. “It is a bit of true sunshine,” he wrote her on February 16, “that my brave hero of a friend is
still progressing. I wonder if he is allowed to read books, or to have them read to him…. Tell A.C. that I
mean to send him a political epistle when you tell me he will like it. I do not promise that it shall be
brilliant.”¹¹

Louise managed to keep the stories of her husband’s breakdown out of the newspapers, but the news spread
rapidly through his vast network of friends and admirers. “I hear from Doctor Ross,” Lord Grey wrote to Oscar
Straus, who forwarded his letter to Louise, “that this war has broken our friend Carnegie’s health and his
heart; and you tell me that the effort he made in giving testimony before the Federal Commission [on
Industrial Relations] broke him down. When you see him tell him that many of us look to him as the great
pioneer who has blazed the way to future peace because if his policy of collective responsibility on the part
of the signatory nations to The Hague conventions had been adopted, the United States would have been obliged
to come into this war at the very beginning and the knowledge that she would come in would have kept Germany
quiet. I trust the result of the war may be to make Mr. Carnegie’s policy not only a pious aspiration but an
international fact.”¹²

In March 1916, Morley, unable to tolerate any longer the interminable silences, wrote his friend directly:
“This prolonged severance of talk between us two is by no means the least of the troubles of the day. I don’t
know whether a letter really comes into your hands…. I never felt before how much this privation amounted to.’
Tis a year and a half or more since our parting on the Liverpool railway platform. Well, I’m constantly with
you in spirit and imagining a ramble with you in the Skibo woods and gardens. We should be bound to hit on
different points of view; we have never failed in that, and are never likely to. Yet substantial agreement
below the surface of talk would always be there—even about the formidable Curse that now hangs over what
absurdly calls itself the civilized world.” There was much remorse, but also a touch of anger in Morley now.
He could not understand why Carnegie refused to speak or write when his voice was needed more than ever.
“Europe is devastated by Plague and the Black Death, but that is no reason why Pasteurs and Listers should not
persevere in search of healings.” He concluded his letter with a plaintive plea to his long-lost friend: “Send
me a little message, will you?”¹³

And so there began, albeit in abbreviated form on Carnegie’s part, a renewal of their correspondence. Carnegie
managed to write back a note to his friend that March. He was, he confessed, “finding comfort for vacant hours
in ancient sages.” He proposed that the Morleys come to Miami to spend the next winter.¹⁴

In the late spring, Louise brought her husband—and their traveling entourage—back to New York City, before
moving on to a rented house in Connecticut for the summer. “We lingered in the South until about a month ago,”
she wrote James Bryce in mid-May. “Our Spring has been unusually fickle but I am thankful to say Mr. Carnegie
keeps on improving all the time. He is now allowed to see more of his friends and takes a keen interest in
affairs—almost more than is good for him at times, and then the doctor has to be more strict with him, but he
is getting along beautifully and we are all so happy. We leave in ten days for Brick House, Noroton,
Connecticut right on Long Island Sound where the yacht will be within hailing distance all the time and I
expect we shall be on the water as much as on land this summer. Mr. Carnegie and I are very glad to enclose
another donation to the fund for the relief of aliens in which you are doing such a noble work. Suffering is
so widespread it is difficult to tell where the need is greatest. But there seems to be a feeling of
hopefulness abroad in the world just now, which we hope may bear precious fruit.”¹⁵

Carnegie wrote Morley from Connecticut, apologizing for the bareness of his letter. Morley responded that the
letter had been a trifle brief, but far from bare. “When people are recovering their health, they are right to
be brief.” Morley had hoped to travel to Connecticut that fall and had even taken out a passport, but then
decided that it was best that he remain in London for the opening of Parliament early in October. He closed
with the postscript: “We have been friends for over 35 years!”¹⁶

In October, Louise, on the advice of the doctors who believed that a higher altitude might be best for her
husband, bought “Shadowbrook,” a 900-acre estate on the west side of Lake Mahkeenac, two miles west of Lenox,
Massachusetts, developed by Anson Phelps Stokes, the New York merchant, banker, and philanthropist, in 1893.
It was a property worthy of a Carnegie: a gray stone mansion with a vaguely Scottish look to it, set on a
hillside, with more than fifty rooms, two stables, two lodges, six greenhouses, tennis courts, gardens,
terraces, and a reservoir fed from mountain streams.

In November 1916, Carnegie celebrated his eighty-first birthday. Again, there was no dictated message to the
reporters, no mention in the newspapers.

In December, Margaret Carnegie made her “debut” with a dinner and dance at Ninety-first Street. Her mother
formally introduced her to their three hundred guests. It was, the New York Times reported on December 9, “a
simple entertainment, with a buffet supper at midnight.” Carnegie was present early in the evening to greet
some of the guests. He was feeling a bit better now, well enough to write President Wilson in January 1917, to
congratulate him on his “Peace without victory” address to the Senate. “Yesterday you told the whole world
that peace must reign throughout that world, and we all know that the world will have to hearken to those
words. This is the greatest service ever rendered by any President, and if your ‘Life of Washington’ and
‘history of the American People’ have not already made you immortal, your address to the Senate yesterday
cannot fail to do so.”¹⁷

In the spring of 1917, the family relocated to Shadowbrook. Carnegie had deteriorated noticeably in the months
since Margaret’s debut. He was now an invalid, under the constant care of nurses. There were occasional
visitors: some friends, the heads of the Carnegie trusts, and Charlie Schwab, who had become closer to the old
man and an honored guest at Shadowbrook, perhaps because when he visited there was little talk of war or
peace, but only of the good old, post-Homestead years in Pittsburgh. One of the visitors, who remained
anonymous, confided to a reporter for a May 27 front-page article in the New York Times that Carnegie still
suffered from disappointment that the world war had come to pass. “The war came, as we all know, as a shock to
Mr. Carnegie. The continuation of it over so many months has been even a harder blow to him and to the cause
which he had so close at heart.”

Despite his steadfast support for Wilson’s neutrality policy, Carnegie no longer believed that the German
military and government officials would ever agree voluntarily to end the war. “Some time ago, I wrote you
‘Germany is beyond reason,’” he cabled President Wilson in February. “She has ever since become more and more
so until today she shows herself complete insane…. You should proclaim war against her, however reluctantly,
and then settlement would soon come.” Three months later, when the United States declared war, Carnegie could
only applaud the decision. “You have triumphed at last. God bless you. You will give the world peace and rank
the greatest hero of all.”¹⁸

Carnegie, blessedly, would not live long enough to see Wilson’s dreams for a League of Nations turn to ashes,
as his own had done so many times before.

 

IN NOVEMBER 1917, Louise wrote Morley of her and Carnegie’s excitement at the news that Morley had finished
the two volumes of Recollections he had been working at since his resignation.

Just a line to say how eagerly we are awaiting the company of the new book!! We are returning to our New York
home today and hope soon to welcome its arrival. It will be next best to seeing you and you may be sure we
shall let you know at once and at the same time guard the fact that we are its proud possessors until the
proper moment. The five months here [at Shadowbrook] have done Andrew worlds of good and he goes back to town
ruddy of hue and with a much stronger step. At the present moment he is sitting out on the sunny verandah all
wrapped up, reading this morning papers. The air is mild today although in sheltered woods the heavy snow that
fell two days ago, still lingers. Andrew, Margaret and I are just about to plant an oak here each to mark the
founding of our new home!…Margaret is doing a lot of thinking these days but is coming out all right. There is
a lot of her Daddy in her—well dear friends a lot of loving thoughts go out to you both from all of us. We
must all keep up good courage.¹⁹

Ten days later, now safely returned to New York in Charles Schwab’s private railroad car, Louise wrote again.
They had received Recollections, and Andrew, she reported, was sitting beside her as she wrote, totally
absorbed in the book. “What rare pleasure he is having, and will have in reading it. It is difficult to get
him interested in anything but the newspapers and world events, and your book will do him worlds of good. I
expect he will want to write you shortly—He is wonderfully well since coming back to the city—He has abandoned
his wheelchair entirely now. He walks a little in the garden and plays a little clock golf with old time vigor
and interest. He also motors for an hour every afternoon and sees a few friends at tea time…. I wish I could
express to you how much your kindness in sending this early copy of your ‘Recollections’ means to us, and how
we value the friendship that prompted you to send it.”²⁰

Two months later, Morley was astounded to hear directly from Carnegie, who, it appears, had finally finished
his friend’s two volumes of Recollections. “I have read every word of it as if I were again talking these
things all over with you face to face on the terrace at Skibo. Your references to me are all too flattering,
but I am not altogether displeased, though you know my modest nature! I feel confident that with America’s
help, the great war cannot last much longer, and Madam and I are talking and thinking of the time when we will
return to Skibo and have you with us once more. We intend spending all of this winter in New York for after
all our own home is the most comfortable spot we can find at this season.”²¹

In April of 1917, Margaret had celebrated her twenty-first birthday. In a photograph taken on the occasion,
Carnegie sits stiffly, right arm resting on the side on the chair, his left on his lap. He has a somber,
resigned, almost vacant look. Leaning over him, looking directly down on the top of his head, with her hand
resting on his back, is an unsmiling almost angelic-looking Margaret. Louise, also unsmiling, sits beside her
husband, with her arm also touching his back. There is no joy and little life in any of them. It is a portrait
of quiet suffering.

Margaret had graduated from Spence and, according to the papers, had dedicated herself to “uplift work.” She
had also met a man she adored, the brother of a Spence classmate. Roswell Miller was three years older than
she and an ensign in the U.S. Navy. “On the day the First World War ended, November 11, 1918,” Margaret noted
later in her journals, Roswell “took me out in his open Stutz motor, parked it on the edge of the Palisades
with trees all around us and asked me to marry him. It was a very discreet affair. He did not even kiss me,
and I didn’t say anything except, ‘I must tell you I have a stiff right leg.’”²²

The next week, Roswell arrived at Ninety-first Street to ask Carnegie’s consent for his daughter’s hand. “He
wept,” Louise confided to her diary, “but was dear and gave it.” The engagement was announced on Carnegie’s
eighty-third birthday and the wedding planned for April 22, 1919, thirty-two years to the day he and Louise
had married.²³

 

IN NOVEMBER 1918, as it became clear that the war was drawing to a close, Carnegie appeared to come out of his
almost four-year trance. On November 10, he wrote a last letter to Woodrow Wilson. “Now that the world war
seems practically at an end I cannot refrain from sending you my heartfelt congratulations upon the great
share you have had in bringing about its successful conclusion. The Palace of Peace at the Hague would, I
think, be the fitting place for dispassionate discussion regarding the destiny of the conquered nations, and I
hope your influence may be exerted in that direction.” Wilson’s response was generous. “I know your heart must
rejoice at the dawn of peace after these terrible years of struggle, for I know how long and earnestly you
have worked for and desired such conditions as I pray God it may now be possible for us to establish.” While
he did not know where the peace talks would be held (they would end up at Versailles, not The Hague), he was
sure Carnegie would “be present in spirit.”²⁴

The next week, Carnegie received his birthday greetings from Morley. “I have no sort of philosophy ready for
one of these anniversaries. You don’t need that sort of medicine—perhaps less than any other man, past or
present known to me. The world has not gone altogether the way that either of us would have chosen. But I feel
pretty sure that this mishap has been through no fault of ours. And it may possibly turn out that though the
road may have been ill chosen, the end of the cruel stage may not prove an uncompensated mischief for mankind.
You and I shall not survive to cast up the great account, for I am four score next Christmas, and you are just
over.”²⁵

Carnegie was not yet ready to go. There was too much left to do and see: a daughter to be married,
grandchildren perhaps, and a peace treaty enshrining forever the League of Nations he had dreamed of.

He lived to see his daughter’s marriage. “Simplicity marked the wedding,” the New York Times reported on April
23, 1919. Only one hundred guests were invited to Ninety-first Street for the noon wedding, followed by a
reception. Bagpipes welcomed the guests and the pipe organ in the hall played the Wedding March. There were
flowers everywhere—“pink peach, apple, and cherry blossoms, white marguerites, and magnolia flowers hung in
hundreds of clusters throughout the lower floor.” The bridal party, with Carnegie escorting his daughter,
walked through “an aisle of flowers” to the “floral bower,” where the ceremony was held. It was a “glorious
spring day,” Louise wrote in her diary. “Our darling’s wedding day and our own 32nd anniversary…. Andrew so
well and alert. He and I gave Baba away and later we walked down the aisle together. After greeting the bride
and groom he went upstairs and rested.” The entry ended, “Andrew up in the evening. Backgammon.”²⁶

There had been talk of returning to Skibo—Morley had mentioned it in each of his letters. But Carnegie was too
frail and Skibo too forlorn after the war from which so many local men and boys would not return. Louise told
Andrew that they would summer in Lenox again. “Well, we must do the best we can, wherever we are,” had been
his stoic answer. “He had no fuss,” Louise wrote her daughter, “he fully understands that it was impossible to
go across this year…. So the disappointment I dreaded for Daddy has passed almost without a ripple, and I
don’t have to put the big ocean between you and me even for a few weeks.”²⁷

Louise and Andrew, with their huge entourage of servants, doctors, nurses, and secretaries, but without
Margaret, returned to Lenox. In years past, Carnegie had paid little attention to his flower gardens. That
task was given to Louise, while he concentrated on the big projects: the roads, the dams, the waterfalls. But
he took more pleasure from his gardens that summer than ever before, sitting for several hours in his
wheelchair admiring the flowers. He was struggling now to stay alive and growing weaker by the day, though he
refused to complain to his nurses or doctors or Louise. “He is so dear, tells me not to worry, but it is
heartrending,” Louise confided to her diary. The end was near. “He was a hollow shell—all the spark had gone,”
James Bertram recalled on his last visit to Shadowbrook. “The experience was a distressing one. A.C. would sit
for an hour at a time and not speak a word—if he did, it was nothing to any point.”²⁸

On August 5, Louise noted that he had become “so weak and weary.” A few days later, as his condition worsened,
the doctors, finding his temperature elevated, feared that he had caught pneumonia. “I was called at 6 A.M.,”
Louise wrote in her diary on August 11, her husband’s last day, “and remained with my darling husband, giving
him oxygen until he gradually fell asleep, at 7:14. I am left alone. I think he knew me but he did not speak….
Everybody so kind, but what is life to me now?”²⁹

There was no funeral or memorial in New York City. A brief service for about forty family members and friends,
including Charlie Schwab, Elihu Root, the directors of a few of the Carnegie trusts, and the wives of several
old friends who had predeceased Carnegie, was held at Shadowbrook. Then Carnegie’s coffin was placed in a
hearse, and accompanied by Louise, Margaret, Schwab, and a few friends and relatives, driven to Hillsdale, New
York, where a special funeral car was attached to a New York Central train for the trip to White Plains. The
funeral party was met at White Plains a little after 4:30 and put into limousines for the final trip to the
Sleepy Hollow cemetery. Andrew Carnegie was buried amid rolling hills, alongside the Hudson, in a graveyard
filled with Americans in a landscape reminiscent of Scotland. The inscription reads only: “Andrew Carnegie
born Dunfermline Scotland, 25 November 1835 Died Lenox Massachusetts 11 August 1919.”

 

ON AUGUST 28, Carnegie’s will, which had been written in 1912, with a brief and insignificant codicil added in
March 1919, was probated. He had left an estate of about $26 million. He bequeathed to Louise his real estate,
his books, works of art, household furniture, horses, carriage, motorcars, and the contents of their several
dwellings. No separate bequest was made for Margaret. He did not want to burden her with a fortune of her own
and the requests that would have descended upon her. “Having years ago made provision for my wife beyond her
desires and ample to enable her to provide for our beloved daughter Margaret; and being unable to judge at
present what provision for our daughter will best promote her happiness, I leave to her mother the duty of
providing for her as her mother deems best. A mother’s love will be the best guide.”

In paragraph four he listed the dozens of legatees he had provided for. Robert Franks, his secretary and
treasurer, and his cousin Mrs. L. M. Morris, were given the homes they lived in. To his butler and
housekeeper, his nurse, and Maggie Anderson, “our oldest servant,” he provided a pension for life equal to one
half their annual salaries. Special provision of cash awards from $600 to $2,000 (equal to ten times that in
today’s currency), depending on length of service, was made for every one of his household servants and for
the “head of departments at Skibo, including the gamekeeper, forester, chauffer, yacht captain, superintendent
of his golf links, his piper, gardener.” Every laborer at Skibo—and there were hundreds of them—was also left
a small sum. To the crofters who resided on his lands, he remitted two years rent.

In addition to these “legacies,” which included sizable institutional gifts to the Author’s Club, Hampton
Institute, Stevens Institute, Cooper Union, University of Pittsburgh, and the St. Andrews Society, Carnegie
set aside sufficient funds to pay semiannual annuities of thousands of dollars to his nephews and nieces, his
Dunfermline cousins, the heads of most of his foundations and trusts, and several friends from Pittsburgh, New
York, Dunfermline, and London—including John Morley and David Lloyd George, Dr. Garmany of New York, Walter
Damrosch, Mrs. Roosevelt, Mrs. Cleveland, and former president Taft. Almost all of these annuities were for
five thousand dollars except for Taft’s, David Lloyd George’s, and John Morley’s, which were set at ten
thousand dollars.

Carnegie had struggled mightily to give away his fortune during his life and come very close. According to his
treasurer, Robert Franks, at the time of his death, Carnegie had given away more than $350 million (in the
tens of billions today). There remained but $20 million of stocks and bonds in the Home Trust Company vaults.
In the seventh paragraph of his last will and testament, Carnegie directed that it be bequeathed, in its
entirety, to the Carnegie Corporation. And with this he accomplished the final, and to his mind, most
important goal he had set himself.³⁰

## NOTES

ABBREVIATIONS

I. ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS AND DEPOSITORIES

ACAC Carnegie Autograph Collection, Manuscripts and Archives Division, New York Public Library, New York, NY

ACBM Andrew Carnegie Birthplace Museum, Dunfermline, Scotland

ACCPL Andrew Carnegie Correspondence, Oliver Room, Carnegie Public Library, Pittsburgh, PA

ACLC Andrew Carnegie Papers, 1803–1935, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC

ACNYPL Andrew Carnegie, Personal Miscellaneous Papers, Manuscripts and Archives Division, New York Public
Library, New York, NY

Adams Charles Francis Adams Papers, in Adams Family Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress,
Washington, DC

Archer William Archer Papers, Manuscripts Reading Room, British Library, London

Asquith H. H. Asquith Papers, New Bodleian Library, University of Oxford, Oxford

Avebury Lord Avebury Papers, Manuscripts Reading Room, British Library, London

Bertram James Bertram Collection, Carnegie Mellon University Archives, Pittsburgh, PA

BL British Library, London

Blackwood Blackwood’s (publisher), Manuscript Department, National Library Scotland, Edinburgh

Bryce James Bryce USA Papers, New Bodleian, University of Oxford, Oxford

Butler Nicholas Murray Butler Papers, Rare Books and Manuscript Library, Butler Library, Columbia University,
New York, NY

Cameron Simon Cameron Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC

C-B Campbell-Bannerman Papers, Manuscripts Reading Room, British Library, London

CCEIA Carnegie Council on Ethics and International Affairs Papers, Rare Books and Manuscript Library, Butler
Library, Columbia University, New York, NY

CCNY Carnegie Corporation of New York Papers, Rare Books and Manuscript Library, Butler Library, Columbia
University, New York, NY

CEIP Carnegie Endowment for International Peace Papers, Rare Books and Manuscript Library, Butler Library,
Columbia University, New York, NY

Century Century Company Records, Manuscripts and Archives Division, New York Public Library, New York, NY

CFP Carnegie Family Papers, privately held

Champlin Andrew Carnegie and John Denison Champlin Letter Collection, Historical Collections and Labor
Archives, Special Collections Library, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA

CLP Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, PA

Cleveland Grover Cleveland Presidential Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC

CS Carnegie Steel Papers, Historical Society of Western Pennsylvania, Library and Archives Division,
Pittsburgh, PA

CTUS Carnegie Trust for the Universities of Scotland, National Archives of Scotland, Edinburgh

D-BLC Damrosch-Blaine Collection, Music Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC

D-VTLC Damrosch–Te Van Collection, Music Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC

Elgin Elgin Family Archives, Broomhall, Dunfermline, Scotland

Franks Correspondence between John and Emma Franks, in box marked “Volumes,” Andrew Carnegie Autograph
Collection, Manuscripts and Archives Division, New York Public Library, New York, NY

French Alice French Papers, Roger and Julie Baskes Department of Special Collections, New-berry Library,
Chicago, IL

Gladstone Papers of William Ewart Gladstone, Manuscripts Reading Room, British Library, London

Gladstone Correspondence County Record Office, Flintshire County Council, The Old Rectory, Hawarden, Wales

Hagley Hagley Museum and Library, Wilmington, DE

Haldane Richard Haldane Papers, Manuscript Department, National Library of Scotland, Edinburgh

Harcourt Richard Harcourt Papers, New Bodleian Library, University of Oxford, Oxford

Harrison William Henry Harrison Presidential Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC

Hay John Hay Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC

HCFFM Helen Clay Frick Foundation Archives, Frick Collection, New York, NY

HCFUP Carnegie–Frick Correspondence, Helen Clay Frick Foundation Archives, Archives Service Center, University
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA

HL Huntington Library, San Marino, CA

Holley Alexander Lyman Holley Correspondence, Manuscripts Collection, Connecticut Historical Society,
Hartford, CT

Holls Frederick William Holls Papers, Houghton Library, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA

JMBL Typescript copies of Morley’s correspondence with Andrew Carnegie, Papers of John Morley as Secretary of
State for India, India Office Select Materials, British Library, London

JMBL, O John Morley Papers, New Bodleian Library, University of Oxford, Oxford

Knox Philander Chase Knox Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC

Margaret Barclay Wilson Collection “The Margaret Barclay Wilson Collection of Carnegiana,” Oliver Room,
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA

Martin William Martin Papers, Darlington Memorial Library Manuscript Collection, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA

Mead Papers of Edwin D. Mead and Lucia Ames Mead, Swarthmore College Peace Collection, Swarthmore College,
Swarthmore, PA

NA National Archives, Washington, DC

NCF National Civic Federation Papers, Manuscripts and Archives Division, New York Public Library, New York, NY

O’Rielly Papers of Henry O’Rielly, Manuscript Department, New-York Historical Society, New York, NY

Paine Albert Bigelow Paine Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, CA

PRR Minute Books Hagley Museum and Library, Wilmington, DE

PSA Pennsylvania State Archives, Harrisburg, PA

Reid Whitelaw Reid Papers, Reid Family Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC

RG Record Group

Roebling Special Collections, Alexander Library, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ

Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Presidential Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC

Rosebery Archibald Primrose, Fifth Earl of Rosebery Papers, Manuscript Department, National Library of
Scotland, Edinburgh

St. Andrew’s St. Andrew’s Golf Club, Hastings-on-Hudson, NY, archives, privately held

Scott Thomas A. Scott Correspondence, Scott Family Papers, privately held

Strachey John St. Loe Strachey Papers, Parliamentary Archives, House of Lords Record Office, London

Taft William Howard Taft Presidential Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC

Tilden Samuel J. Tilden papers, Manuscripts and Archives Division, New York Public Library, New York, NY

Twain Mark Twain Papers, Bancroft Library, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA

Vandevort John W. Vandevort Papers, Huntington Library, San Marino, CA

White Andrew Dickson White Papers, Division of Rare and Manuscript Collections, Carl A. Kroch Library, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY

Whitney Henry Payne Whitney Collection of the Papers of William Collins Whitney, Manuscript Division, Library
of Congress, Washington, DC

Wilson Woodrow Wilson Presidential Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress,

Washington, DC

II. GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS

Hand-Loom Hand-Loom Inquiry Commission, Great Britain. Reports of Assistant Commissioners on hand-loom weavers
in several districts of England, Scotland, Ireland and Continental Europe, 1839–40, (1839; Shannon: Irish
University Press, 1970)

Tariff U.S. Congress, Tariff Hearings Before the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives.
60th Congress, 1908–09. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1909, vol. 2

U.S. Steel U.S. House of Representatives. Hearings Before the Committee on Investigation of United States
Steel Corporation. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1912, vol. 3

III. NEWSPAPERS

[image]

IV. CARNEGIE PUBLICATIONS

AF-I-H American Four-in-Hand in Britain. 1883. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1890

EB Empire of Business. 1902. Garden City, NY: Doublday, Page & Co., 1913

Andrew Carnegie Reader. Andrew Carnegie Reader, ed. Joseph Wall. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press,
1992

MW Miscellaneous Writings of Andrew Carnegie, ed. Burton Hendrick. 2 vols. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Doran &
Co., 1933

RTW Round the World. 1884. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Doran & Co., 1933

TD Triumphant Democracy, or Fifty Years’ March of the Republic. 1886. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1888

V. INDIVIDUALS

[image]

1. CHAPTER ONE: DUNFERMLINE, 1835–1848

1. Burton Hendrick interview with Richard Henderson, August, 1927, vol. 257, ACLC.

2. AC, Autobiography of Andrew Carnegie (1920; Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1986), 6–7.

3. Eric Simpson, The Auld Grey Toun: Dunfermline in the time of Andrew Carnegie, 1835–1919 (Dunfermline:
Carnegie Dunfermline Trust, 1987), 9–11.

4. Norman Murray, The Scottish Hand Loom Weavers, 1790–1840, A Social History (Edinburgh: John Donald, 1978),
23.

5. Peter Chalmers, Historical and Statistical Account of Dunfermline (Edinburgh, 1844), 353–63.

6. “Particular Household Expenses,” 1769, Elgin.

7. J. B. Mackie, Andrew Carnegie: His Dunfermline Ties and Benefactions (Dunfermline, 1916); Elgin; Duncan
McNaughton, “The Families of Carnegie, Morrison, and Lauder connected with Dunfermline,” 1979, unpublished
memo, ACBM.

8. Hendrick interview with Mrs. Clanachan, September 22, 1927, vol. 256, ACLC.

9. A. Jones, The revenue book: containing the new tariff of 1846, together with the tariff of 1842… (New York:
Bell & Gould, 1846), 11; E. D. Ogden, Tariff, or, Rates of duties payable on goods, wares, and
merchandise…(New York: Rich & Loutrel, 1840), 14; George Curtiss, The Industrial Development of Nations…, vol.
II (Binghamton, NY, 1912), 262

10. Chalmers, 373; AC, Autobiography, 8.

11. Hendrick interview with Ann Alexander, August 1927, vol. 256, ACLC.

12. Thomas Morrison to Lord Dalmeny, December 3, 1834, vol. 1, ACLC.

13. Hendrick interview with Lauder ladies, August 1927, vol. 257, ACLC; Dominic J. Currie, The Lauder Legacy,
The Life and Times of George Lauder and Lauder College (Dunfermline: Lauder College, 1999), 20–21.

14. Hand-Loom, 200.

15. Murray, 57; Ebenezer Henderson, Annals of Dunfermline (Glasgow, 1879), 642.

16. Alexander Wilson, The Chartist Movement in Scotland (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1970), 39.

17. I thank Andrew Campbell for supplying me with copies of these documents.

18. Murray, 7.

19. Engels, 243; E. P. Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class (New York: Vintage, 1966), 827–28.

20. AC, Autobiography, 10–11.

21. Hendrick interview with Hew Morrison, August 7–8, 1927, vol. 257, ACLC.

22. T. M. Devine, The Scottish Nation: A History (New York: Penguin, 1999), 262.

23. A. Aitkin to “My very Dear Sisters & friends,” October 7, 1840, vol. 1, ACLC.

24. Hendrick interviews, August, September, 1927, vol. 257, ACLC.

25. Hendrick interviews with Mrs. Charlotte Scott, September 5, 1927, and Macgregor, September 11, 12, 1927,
vol. 257, ACLC.

26. AC, Autobiography, 12, 14.

27. A. Aitkin to “My very Dear Sisters & friends,” April 11, 1842, vol. 1, ACLC.

28. Chalmers, 437.

29. Hendrick interview with Miss Martin, September 13, 1927, vol. 257, ACLC.

30. AC, Autobiography, 13–14; Hendrick interview with Mrs. Charlotte Scott, September 5, 1927, vol. 257, ACLC.

31. Hendrick interview with Macgregor, September 4, 11, 12, 1927, vol. 257, ACLC.

32. Thomas Morrison, Sr., Heddekashun and Handication (Dunfermline: William Liddell, 1834), 4.

33. A. Aitkin to “My Dear Sister Margaret,” May 30, 1844, vol. 1, ACLC.

34. Chalmers, 540.

35. Poor Law Inquiry Commission for Scotland. Appendix, Part One, “Minutes of Evidence” (Edinburgh, 1844),
358.

36. Ibid., 357–58.

37. Ian Levitt and Christopher Smout, The State of the Scottish Working-Class in 1843: A statistical and
spatial enquiry based on the data from the Poor Law Commission Report of 1844 (Edinburgh: Scottish Academic
Press, 1979), 114–16.

38. Daniel Thomson, The Weaver’s Craft: being a history of the Weavers’ incorporation of Dunfermline (Paisley:
A. Gardner, 1903), 336; Simpson, 31.

39. Murray, 22–23.

40. AC, Autobiography, 12–13.

41. Henderson, 657.

42. AC, “From Bobbin-Boy to Millionaire,” The Golden Penny, January 23, 1899, 87.

43. Hendrick interview with Mrs. Finlayson and Miss Anderson, August 30, 1927, vol. 257, ACLC.

44. Hendrick interview with Richard Henderson, August 26, 1927; with Mrs. Finlayson and Miss Anderson, August
30, 1927, vol. 257, ACLC.

CHAPTER TWO: TO AMERICA, 1848–1855

1. William Armstrong Fairburn, Merchant Sail V (Center Lovell, Maine: Fairburn Marine Educational Foundation,
n. d.), 3349–50.

2. Carl Cutler, Queens of the Western Ocean (Annapolis, MD: U.S. Naval Institute, 1961), 223, 259, 509.

3. “Ship Wiscasset” in Passenger list of vessels arriving at New York, Jan. 7, 1820–June 17, 1897 (microfilm),
NA, 1957.

4. AC, Autobiography, 27.

5. NYH, August 14, 1848.

6. AC, Autobiography, 28.

7. Domingo Faustino Sarmiento, Travels in the United States in 1847, ed. Michael Aaron Rockland (1847;
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1970), 219–21.

8. Ronald Shaw, Erie Water West (Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, 1966), 289; [James Lumsden],
American Memoranda by a Mercantile Man During a Short Tour in the Summer of 1843 (Glasgow: Bell & Bain, 1844),
28.

9. AC, Autobiography, 29.

10. Anthony Trollope, North America (1862; New York: Knopf, 1951), 369, 371; Alexander Mackay, The Western
World; or, Travels in the United States in 1846–7, vol. 3 (1849; reprint, New York: Negro Universities Press,
1968), 86.

11. John N. Ingham, Making Iron and Steel: Independent Mills in Pittsburgh, 1820–1920 (Columbus: Ohio State
University Press, 1991), 22–28, 34–37.

12. Burton Hendrick, The Life of Andrew, Carnegie (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Doran, 1932), I, 51–52.

13. AC to Lauder, May 30, 1852, vol. 1, ACLC.

14. Joel A. Tarr, “Infrastructure and City-Building,” in Samuel P. Hayes, ed., City at the Point: Essays on
the Social History of Pittsburgh (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1989), 216–28; Leland D.
Baldwin, Pittsburgh: The Story of a City (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1937), 203, 211–12,
241–43.

15. Writers’ Program of Works Progress Administration (WPA), Story of Old Allegheny City (Pittsburgh:
Allegheny Centennial Committee, 1941).

16. Ormsby O. Gregg, Isaac Gregg, and Moses F. Eaton, Pittsburgh, her advantageous position and great
resources, as a manufacturing and commercial city: embraced in a notice of sale of real estate (Pittsburgh:
Johnston & Stockton, 1845).

17. Neville Craig, History of Pittsburgh (Pittsburgh: J. H. Mellor, 1851), 311; Monte A. Calvert, “The
Allegheny City Cotton Mill Riot of 1848,” Western Pennsylvania Historical Magazine, 46 (April 1963): 100.

18. AC, Autobiography, 29.

19. Calvert, 102–4; 108–24.

20. AC, Autobiography, 33.

21. George Henry Thurston, Pittsburgh As It Is…(Pittsburgh: W. S. Haven, 1857), 164.

22. AC, Autobiography., 34–35.

23. Ibid., 36.

24. AC to Lauder, May 30, 1852, vol. 1, ACLC.

25. AC, Autobiography, 36; James D. Reid, The Telegraph in America (New York: Derby Brothers, 1879), 177.

26. Erasmus Wilson, ed., Standard History of Pittsburg, Pennsylvania (Chicago: H. R. Cornell & Co., 1898),
103; Robert Luther Thompson, Wiring a Continent: The History of the Telegraph Industry in the United States,
1832–1866 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1947), 121–25; Glass to O’Rielly, January 13, 1848, box 7,
O’Rielly.

27. AC, “From Bobbin-Boy,” 87.

28. AC, Autobiography, 41, 46–47.

29. Ibid., 52; Hendrick interview with Macgregor, September 11, 12, 1927, vol. 257. ACLC; David to AC, May 20,
1903, vol. 96, ACLC.

30. Ibid.

31. AC, “From Bobbin-Boy,” 87.

32. AC, “How I Served My Apprenticeship,” in Andrew Carnegie Reader, 35; AC, Autobiography, 57; AC to Dod,
June 22, 1851, ACLC.

33. AC to Lauder, May 30, 1852, vol. 1, ACLC.

34. AC, Autobiography, 43; Aitkin to My Very Dear…, October 7, 1840, vol. 1, ACLC.

35. Wilson, ed., Standard History of Pittsburg, Pennsylvania, 901; Sarah Killikelly, The History of
Pittsburgh: Its Rise and Progress (Pittsburgh: B. C. & Gordon Montgomery, 1906), 549; Story of Old Allegheny
City, 135.

36. See Hendrick, I, 68–70, for complete correspondence.

37. AC, Autobiography, 15, 44.

38. AC to Lauder, May 30, 1852, vol. 1, ACLC.

39. A rather complete set of handwritten letters and transcriptions, 1853–57, between Carnegie and his cousin
Dod, is located in box 9, folder 6, 7, CS; others can be found in vol. 1, ACLC.

40. AC to Dod, August 7, 1853, box 9, folder 7, CS.

41. AC to Dod, draft dated September 13, 1854, vol. 1, ACLC.

42. AC to Dod, August 7, 1853, box 9, folder 7, CS.

43. AC to Dod, February 8, 1854, box 9, folder 7, CS.

44. AC to Lauder, May 30, 1852, vol. 1, ACLC.

45. Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, ed. Philip Bradley (New York: Vintage, 1945), I, 314;
Trollope, 281.

46. AC, Autobiography, 48; Emanuel Swedenborg, excerpts from Heaven and Its Wonders and Hell, trans. George F.
Dole (West Chester, PA: Swedenborg Foundation, n. d.), chap. 27.

47. Unpublished manuscripts, vol. 250, ACLC.

48. Minutes of board meetings, November 1855, 1856, 1857, folder marked “General,” vol. 258, ACLC;
Autobiography, 49.

49. Miller to AC, April 10, 1903, vol. 95, ACLC.

50. Nathan Hatch, The Democratization of American Christianity (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1989), 199;
AC to Dod, August 18, 1853, vol. 1, ACLC.

51. AC to Dod, June 22, 1851, vol. 1, ACLC.

52. AC, Autobiography, 60–61.

53. AC to Lauder, May 30, 1852, March 14, 1853, vol. 1, ACLC.

54. Hendrick interview with Hew Morrison, August 7–8, 1927, vol. 257, ACLC.

CHAPTER THREE: UPWARDBOUND, 1853–1859

1. Blondheim, 80–83.

2. AC, Autobiography, 57–8; AC, “From Bobbin-Boy,” 87.

3. Pennsylvania Railroad Company, Sixth Annual Report to the Stockholders, January 31, 1853, 32; Thompson,
Wiring a Continent, 205–6.

4. PRR minute books, vol. 89, April 6, 1853, 327.

5. AC to Lauder, March 14, 1853, vol. 1, ACLC.

6. D. W. Meinig, The Shaping of America. Volume 2: Continental America, 1800–1867 (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1993), 228, 332; Pennsylvania Railroad, “Sixth Annual Report,” January 31, 1853, 10; Pennsylvania
Railroad, “Twelfth Annual Report,” February 7, 1859, 3.

7. AC to Lauder, March 14, 1853, vol. 1, ACLC.

8. AC, Autobiography, 62.

9. Pennsylvania Railroad Company, “Organization for Conducting the Business of the Road,” 7.

10. Walter Licht, Working for the Railroads: The Organization of Work in the Nineteenth Century (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1983), 84–85, 87.

11. Herbert Gutman, Work, Culture and Society in Industrializing America (New York: Vintage, 1977), 296.

12. AC, Autobiography, 78.

13. Ibid., 70.

14. AC to Lauder, March 14, 1853, vol. 1, ACLC.

15. PRR minutes books, vol. 90, March 14, 1855, 56.

16. The stock certificates are dated April 11, April 17, 1856; the notes are from May 17, 1856, and November
1, 1857; the mortgage is dated March 27, 1858; vol. 1, ACLC.

17. AC, Autobiography, 76; “How I Served My Apprenticeship,” 37.

18. R. Taggart to T. Miller, April 4, 1909, vol. 165, ACLC.

19. Life and reminiscences from birth to manhood of Wm. G. Johnson (Pittsburgh: Knickerbocker Press, 1902),
217; unpublished ms., vol. 250, ACLC.

20. AC, TD (1886), 297–99.

21. Woodruff to AC, June 12, 1886; AC to Woodruff, June 15, 1886, vol. 9, ACLC.

22. Ibid., James A. Ward, J. Edgar Thomson, Master of the Pennsylvania (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1980),
183.

23. Ibid., 45–46.

24. Thomas C. Cochran, Railroad Leaders, 1845–1890 (New York: Russell & Russell, 1965), 124–25.

25. AC, Autobiography, 80.

26. Ibid., 86.

27. Tom Miller to AC, April 10, 1903, vol. 95, ACLC.

28. AC, Autobiography, 89–90.

29. Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1977), 109–10.; PRR, 13th annual report, February 6, 1860.

30. AC, Autobiography, 87.

CHAPTER FOUR: WAR AND RICHES, 1860–1865

1. AC, Autobiography, 89–90.

2. Personal communication from Chris Baer; Travellers Official Railway Guide, June 1868.

3. AC, Autobiography, 90.

4. Ibid., 93.

5. Ibid., 89.

6. Ibid., 65, 78; AC to Dod, July 15, 1854, box 9, folder 7, CS.

7. AC to Dod, November 12, 1855, box 9, folder 7, CS.

8. Wilson, ed., Standard History of Pittsburg, Pennsylvania, 552.

9. Samuel Richey Kamm, The Civil War Career of Thomas A. Scott (Philadelphia, 1940), 23; Thomas A. Scott, NYT,
August 15, 1862; TAS to JET, April 20, 1862, RG 19, box 1, PSA.

10. TAS to AC, AC to TAS, April 19–21, 1861, RG 19, box 1, PSA.

11. Alan Nevins, The War for the Union (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1959), I, 80.

12. United States War Department, The War of the Rebellion: A Compilation of the Official Records of the Union
and Confederate Armies (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1880, 1901), I, 2, 7.

13. George Edgar Turner, Victory Rode the Rails (Westwood, CT: Greenwood Press, 1972), 53; War of the
Rebellion, I, 2, 10; Benjamin F. Butler, Butler’s Book (Boston: A. M. Thayer & Co., 1892), 181.

14. AC to TAS, April 20 (two telegrams), 21 (three telegrams), RG 19, box 1, PSA.

15. AC, Autobiography, 95–96.

16. Kamm, 34–35; AC to TAS, April 29, 1861, m504, reel 3, NA.

17. Hermon K. Murphey, “The Northern Railroads and the Civil War,” Mississippi Valley Historical Review 5
(December 1918): 331–32; Thomas Weber, The Northern Railroads in the Civil War, 1861–1865 (New York: King’s
Crown Press, 1952), 61–66.

18. Constance McLaughlin Green, Washington; Village and Capital, 1800–1878 (Princeton, Princeton University
Press, 1962), 242.

19. AC to TAC, July 19, m540, reel 3, NA.

20. TMC to AC, July 22, m540, reel 3, NA.

21. John Cowan to AC, “attachment,” April 29, 1911, vol. 192, ACLC.

22. AC to W. H. Holmes, July 16, 1861, vol. 1, ACLC.

23. AC to TMC, n. d., m540, reel 3, NA.

24. On Carnegie’s return to civilian life, see AC to Enoch Lewis, Altoona, August, 1861, m540, reel 3, NA; AC
to Enoch Lewis, October 5, 1861, vol. 1, ACLC; on his stock holdings, see Tom Miller to AC, April 2, 1903,
vol. 95, ACLC.

25. Samuel W. Durant, History of Allegheny Co., Pennsylvania (Philadelphia: L. H. Everts, 1876), 179–80.

26. AC, Autobiography, 132.

27. Andrew Cone, Petrolia (New York: D. Appleton, 1870), 259; Paul Henry Giddens, Early Days of Oil
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1948), 26.

28. Tom Miller to AC, April 2, 1903, vol. 95, ACLC; AC to Dod, June 21, 1863, vol. 1, ACLC.

29. AC, Autobiography, 111; AC, note on Pittsburgh Division stationery, May 21, 1863, box 25, folder 8, CS;
Ward, 177.

30. Tom Miller to AC, April 2, 1903, vol. 95, ACLC.

31. AC to Dod, May 26, 1862, vol. 3, ACLC.

32. Hendrick interview with Eliza Lauder, September 2, 1927, vol. 257, ACLC; AC, Autobiography, 106–9.

33. AC to TMC, September 25, 1862, CFP.

34. AC to Dod, June 21, 1863, vol. 3, ACLC.

35. Ibid.

36. Weber, 132; Kamm, 135–37.

37. Arthur B. Fox, Pittsburgh During the American Civil War, 1860–1865 (Chicora, PA: Mechling Bookbindery,
2002), 179–82.

38. AC to Dod, June 21, 1863, vol. 3, ACLC.

39. Receipt, dated June 19, 1864, and “Certificate of Non-Liability,” July 19, 1864, Miscellaneous Papers
file, CS, cited in Joseph Frazier Wall, Andrew Carnegie (1970; Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press,
1989), 190.

40. Hendrick, I, 120.

41. Fox, 77–78.

42. James Howard Bridge, The Inside History of the Carnegie Steel Company: A Romance of Millions (1903;
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1991), 15.

43. AC, Autobiography, 128.

CHAPTER FIVE: BRANCHING OUT, 1865–1866

1. Internal Revenue Assessment lists, 1862–1874, m787, reels 93, 94, NA.

2. AC to TAS, January 1, 1865; TAS to Cameron, n. d., Cameron.

3. AC, Autobiography, 137.

4. AC to TMC, MC, May 25, 1865 letters, CFP.

5. AC to TMC, MC, June 15, 1865, CFP.

6. AC to TMC, June 30, 1865; AC to TMC, MC, July 4, 1865, CFP.

7. AC to TMC, MC, various dates, CFP.

8. John Franks (JF) to Emma Franks (EF), November 12, 1865, Franks.

9. AC to TMC, MC, June 23, 1865, CFP.

10. JF to EF, October 18, 29, November 19, December 17, 1865, Franks.

11. AC to MC, June 30, 1865, CFP.

12. AC to TMC, November 2, 1865, CFP.

13. AC to TMC, MC, July 20; AC to TMC, November 2, 1865, CFP.

14. AC to TMC, July 20, August 17, 1865, CFP.

15. JF to EF, November 12, 1865, Franks.

16. Author interviews with Morehead Kennedy, Warwick Scott Wheeler, 2004.

17. AC, “From Bobbin-Boy,” 88.

18. AC to MC, June 30, 1865, CFP.

19. AC to TMC, December 14, 1865, November 2; AC to MC, September 2, 1865, CFP.

20. AC to TMC, June 23, 1865, CFP.

21. AC to TMC, n. d., CFP.

22. JF to EF, November 19, 1865, Franks.

23. AC to TMC, July 26, 1865, CFP.

24. AC to TMC, n. d., CFP.

25. AC to MC, TMC, September 2, 1865, CFP.

26. JF to EF, November 12, 1865, Franks.

27. AC to TMC, November 19, 1865, CFP.

28. Chandler, 22; James Henretta, et al., America’s History (Chicago: Dorsey Press, 1987), 517.

29. Henry Adams, The Education of Henry Adams: An Autobiography (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1918), 239–40.

30. George H. Burgess and Miles C. Kennedy, Centennial History of The Pennsylvania Railroad Company, 1846–1946
(Philadelphia: Pennsylvania Railroad Company, 1949), 292–93; Chris Baer, 1865 PRR Chronology, June 26, 1865.

31. JET to AC, March 12, 15, 1867, box 44, folder 3, CS.

32. JET to AC, June 6, 1867, March 5, 1868; W. H. Wilson to AC, June 21, 1867, box 44, folder 3, CS.

33. Agreement, February 11, 1865; Biddle to AC, April 6, 1866, box 33, folder 4, CS.

34. Internal Revenue Assessment lists, 1862–1874, m787, reels 94, 96, NA.

35. AC to TAS, March 8, 1869, box 10, folder 6, CS.

36. AC, Autobiography, 112.

37. Ward, 177; JET to AC, March 4, 1868, box 44, folder 3, CS; AC to TAS, May 13, 1869, box 10, folder 6, CS.

38. Washington A. Roebling to John A. Roebling, October 11, 1868, Roebling.

39. David McCullough, The Great Bridge: The Epic Story of the Building of the Brooklyn Bridge (New York: Simon
& Schuster, 1872), 308, 322.

CHAPTER SIX: A MAN OF ENERGY, 1867–1868

1. Howard Mumford Jones, The Age of Energy: Varieties of American Experience, 1865–1914 (New York: Viking
Press, 1971), 104–5.

2. Ward, 191–92; Meinig, III, 17–18.

3. Noble to AC, December 25, 1866, March 18, 1867, May 28, 1867, box 25, folder 8, CS; City of Ellsworth Web
site @http://skyways.lib.ks.us.

4. Draft agreement, September 13, 1867, box 85, folder 3, CS; Reid, 448–50.

5. Memo, March 10, 1871, box 85, folder 5, CS; see letters to and from AC and JET, Thurston, Edmund Smith, and
others, dated May, 1873, box 85, folder 1, CS.

6. NYT, June 6, 1867, 1.

7. Charles Edgar Ames, Pioneering the Union Pacific: A Reappraisal of the Builders of the Railroad (New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1969), 152–54.

8. See letters and memoranda, box 67, folders 6, 7, 8, CS.

9. AC to GP, March 8, 1869, box 67, folder 6, CS.

10. GP to AC, March 19, 1872; AC to JET, March 29, 1872, box 67, folder 8, CS.

11. Report of the Investigating Committee of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company (Philadelphia: Allen, Lane &
Scott’s Printing House, 1874), 125–27; Burgess & Kennedy, 329.

12. Robert W. Jackson, Rails Across the Mississippi: A History of the St. Louis Bridge (Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 2001), 18.

13. AC to TAS, January 24, 1870, Scott.

14. AC to TAS, June 25, 1871, box 1, folder 1, CS.

15. AC to JET, December 10, 1868, AC to H. T. Reid, December 10, 1868, box 47, folder 1.

16. AC, “1868,” ACAC.

CHAPTER SEVEN: “MR. CARNEGIE IS NOW 35 YEARS OF AGE, AND IS SAID TO BE WORTH ONE MILLION OF DOLLARS,"
1870–1872

1. NYT, March 9, 1870; Strouse, 138.

2. Strouse, 138–39; AC to J. S. Morgan & Co., March 28, 1870; AC to JET, March 31, 1870, box 51, folder 2, CS.

3. AC to JET, April 2, 6, 1870, box 51, folder 2, CS; AC, Autobiography, 151.

4. Trow’s New York City Directory [for year ending May 1, 1870] (New York: J. F. Trow, 1870).

5. Howard Chudacoff, The Age of the Bachelor: Creating an American Subculture (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1999), 47–48; 98–101.

6. Trollope, 491.

7. Miller’s New York as it is…(New York: J. Miller, 1866); David Dunlap, On Broadway: A Journey Uptown Over
Time (New York: Rizzoli, 1990), 77–86.

8. Timothy J. Gilfoyle, City of Eros: New York City, Prostitution, and the Commercialization of Sex, 1790–1920
(New York: W.W. Norton, 1992), 123–24, 197–202, 237–39; Chudacoff, 169–70.

9. Charles Lockwood, Manhattan Moves Uptown (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1976), 151–58; “Home and Foreign
Gossip,” Harper’s Weekly, January 1, 1866; St. Nicholas Hotel; its plan and arrangements (New York: Barton &
Sons, 1856).

10. Trow’s New York City Directory, 1870, 1871, 1872; Jackson, 126; H. Phipps, Jr., to AC, Jan. 22, 1872, box
5, folder 3, CS.

11. J. D. Reid, “Andrew Carnegie,” Railroad Gazette II, November 19, 1870, 171.

12. Baer, PRR chronologies, 1870, 1871.

13. Gerald Berk, Alternative Tracks: The Constitution of American Industrial Order, 1865–1917 (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994), 47.

14. Ames, 402, 407.

15. AC to TAS, December 31, 1870, Scott.

16. AC to Schuester, February 21, 1871, box 52, folder 11, CS; Ames, 406; Report of the Select Committee of
the House of Representatives, appointed under the Resolution of January 6, 1873 to make inquiry into the
affairs of the Union Pacific Railroad Company…(Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1873), 649.

17. “The New Union Pacific Directory,” Railroad Gazette II, March 11, 1871, 563.

18. GFMc to TMC, May 2, 1871, box 52, folder 11, CS.

19. AC to Linville, July 31, 1871, box 1, folder 1, CS.

20. AC to Linville, August 14, 1871, box 1, folder 1, CS.

21. AC, Autobiography, 161–62.

22. Baring Brothers to AC, August 28, 1871, box 33, folder 5, CS.

23. Morton, Rose to Baring Brothers, August 29, 1871, box 35, folder 7, CS.

24. AC to JET, December 8, box 39, folder 7, CS; Baring Brothers to AC, September 13, 1871, box 35, folder 4,
CS.

25. AC to Baring Brothers, October 12, 1871; J. S. Morgan to AC, December 30, 1871, box 35, folder 4, CS.

26. AC to TAS, January 10, 1872, box 39, folder 7, CS; AC to JET, December 8, 1871, box 1, folder 2, CS.

27. AC to JET, December 8, 1871, box 39, folder 7, CS; AC to JET, January 19, 1872, box 1, folder 2, CS.

28. Richard White, “Information, Markets, and Corruption: Transcontinental Railroads in the Gilded Age,”
Journal of American History (June 2003), 24; J.D. Reid, “Andrew Carnegie,” 171.

29. AC to Baring Brothers, December 8, 1871, box 1, folder 2, CS.

30. AC to J. S. Morgan & Co., November 29, 1871, box 1, folder 2, CS.

31. AC to TAS, July 1, 1872, Scott.

32. White, 30, 31.

33. AC to TAS, August 5, 1871, box 64, folder 4, CS; J. Morgan to AC, December 7, 1871, box 35, folder 4, CS.

34. AC to Hickox, March 18, 25, 1872, box 64, folder 4, CS; Governor of Ohio to “to whom it may concern,”
March 23, 1872, box 64, folder 3, CS; AC to TAS, JET, John Sherman, March 26, 1872, box 1, folder 3, CS.

35. Memorandum of Agreement, Drexel, Morgan and Andrew Carnegie; Memorandum of Agreement, Drexel & Company and
Andrew Carnegie, March 16, 1872, box 58, folder 5, CS.

36. Drexel, Morgan to Sulzbach Brothers, April 1, 1872, box 58, folder 6; J. S. Morgan to AC, June 19, 1872,
box 33, folder 5, CS; AC to Messrs Sulzbach Bros., December 16, 1872, box 1, folder 3, CS.

37. Assorted correspondence, box 58, folder 7, CS.

38. AC to H. H. Porter, February 16, 1872, box 1, folder 2, CS.

39. AC to Baring Brothers, February 24, 1872, box 58, folder 1, CS.

40. E. V. McCandless to GFMc, May 12, 1872, box 5, folder 3, CS.

41. AC to GFMc, May 21, 1872, box 35, folder 2, CS.

42. AC, “Pacifism: ‘International Arbitration’” (1910), in Andrew Carnegie Reader, 308.

43. See, e.g., AC, memo for Gladstone, July 27, 1893, vol. 21, ACLC.

44. NYT, June 7, 1874, 1; June 15, 1871, 8.

45. Morton, Bliss & Co. to AC, December 9, 1871, 2 letters, box 63, folder 1, CS; AC to Morton, Rose & Co.,
February 17, 1872, box 63, folder 4; Morton, Bliss & Co. to AC, April 1, 1872, box 63, folder 1, CS.

46. AC to McPherson, October 5, 1870, Union Iron Mills letterbook, February 26, 1870–October 31, 1870, CS.

47. AC to JET, November 27, 1871, box 1, folder 2, CS.

48. AC to J. S. Morgan, September 24, 1872, Book No. 1872–73, CS; J. S. Morgan to AC, May 8, 1873, box 52,
folder 9, CS.

49. Jackson, 192–95; NYT, July 2, 1874.

50. Vincent P. Carosso, The Morgans: Private International Bankers, 1854–1913 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1987), 242–45; Jackson, 214–17.

CHAPTER EIGHT: “ALL MY EGGS IN ONE BASKET,” 1872–1875

1. TMC to GFMc, September 3, 1872, box 5, folder 3, CS.

2. Carnegie Personal Journal: as of January 1, 1872, series Ic, box 1, CCNY.

3. AC, Autobiography, 129–30.

4. Hendrick interview with Abbott, August 1929, vol. 239, ACLC.

5. AC to Linville, May 6, 1875, box 2, folder 1, CS.

6. AC to J. Lowber Welsh, January 22, 1874, box 1, folder 5, CS.

7. James Dabney McCabe, Illustrated History of the Centennial Exhibition (Philadelphia: National Publishing
Co., 1876), 327.

8. NYT, February 11, 1875; McCabe, 334, 509; J. S. Ingram, The Centennial Exposition, Described and
Illustrated (Philadelphia: Hubbard Bros., c. 1876), 229, 343.

9. Peter Temin, Iron and Steel in Nineteenth-Century America, an Economic Inquiry (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1964), 173; AC, Autobiography, 140–41; U.S. Steel, III, 2446; Richard Franklin Bensel, The Political Economy
of American Industrialization, 1877–1900 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 8–9.

10. U.S. Steel, 2351.

11. Bridge, 72–73; A. Holley to Coleman, September 18, 1872, box 69, folder 1; TMC to AC, September 24, 1872,
box 77, folder 1, CS.

12. Articles of Co-Partnership, November 5, 1872, vol. 4, ACLC.

13. Hendrick, I, 183.

14. AC to F. M. Drake (President of MIK&N), Centreville, September 26, 1872, box 66, folder 7, CS; AC to TAS,
February 12, 1873, Scott.

15. G. Sulzbach to AC, January 16, 1873, box 59, folder 4, CS; J. S. Morgan to AC, May 8, 1873, box 52, folder
9, CS.

16. AC to JET, October 30, 1872, box 1, folder 3, CS.

17. JET to AC, November 14, 1872, box 69, folder 1, CS.

18. Shinn to AC, May 15, 1873, box 69, folder 2; AC to Shinn, May 21, 1873, letterbook, 1872–73, CS.

19. Steven W. Usselman, Regulating Railroad Innovation: Business, Technology, and Politics in America,
1840–1920 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002), 83–84.

20. U.S. Steel, 2382–83.

21. Sven Beckert, The Monied Metropolis: New York City and the Consolidation of the American Bourgeoisie,
1850–1896 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 256–57.

22. John Scott to AC, November 22, 1872; D. McCandless to AC, November 22, 1872, box 69, folder 1, CS.

23. Morrell to AC, December 3, 1872, box 77, folder 1, CS.

24. AC, Autobiography, 196.

25. AC to Sulzbach Bros., December 16, 1872, box 1, folder 3, CS.

26. AC to Tilden, November 11, 1872, box 7, Tilden.

27. See box 5, folder 4, CS.

28. Sr. Anne Frances Pulling, Around Cresson and the Alleghenies (Dover, NH: Arcadia, 1997), 35, 37, 40.

29. Bill from Mountain House, Cresson Springs, September 11, 1873, box 33, folder 6, CS.

30. AC to GFMc, August 7, 1873, box 5, folder 5, CS.

31. AC to GFMc, July 9, 1873, box 5, folder 5, CS.

32. AC to GFMc, September 17, 1873, box 5, folder 5, CS.

33. Harvey O’Connor, Mellon’s Millions (New York: John Day Co., 1933), 30–31.

34. AC to GFMc, October 24, 1873, box 69, folder 2, CS.

35. AC to GFMc, November 4, 8, 1873, box 5, folder 5, CS.

36. AC to GFMc, n. d.; November 25, 1873, box 5, folder 5, CS.

37. AC, Autobiography, 186.

38. AC to J. S. Morgan, December 5, 1873, box 1, folder 5, CS.

39. AC to TAS, February 24, 1872, box 68, folder 3, CS.

40. TAS to AC, May 22, 1872, box 35, folder 1, CS.

41. Ward, 207–08; Baer, 1873 chronology; NYT, September 27, 1873, 2.

42. JET to AC, November 3, 1873, ACNYPL.

43. TAS to AC, January 12, 1874, box 33, folder 7, CS.

44. AC, Autobiography, 167.

45. “A Railroad Prince Dead,” NYT, May 22, 1881, 1; Laura Holloway, Famous American Fortunes…(New York: J. A.
Hill & Co., 1889), 172.

46. AC to Shinn, December 15, 1874, box 2, folder 1, CS; TAS to AC, May 22, 1876, box 35, folder 1, CS.

47. AC to TAS, January, 1879, Scott.

48. AC, “The Road to Business Success,” EB, 9–10; AC, Autobiography, 168.

49. NYT, June 13, 1873, 2.

50. James Howard Bridge, Millionaires and Grub Street (New York: Brentano’s, 1931), 176–78.

51. AC to GFMc, May 21, 1872, box 35, folder 2, CS; AC to GFMc, [August] 28, 1873, box 5, folder 5, CS.

52. Mrs. E. D. Loomis to AC, April 4, 1874, box 5, folder 6, CS.

53. AC, Autobiography, 205; Annette Estess [or Estep] to AC, February 14, 1878, box 6, folder 1; Mary Clark to
AC, December 10, 1879, box 6, folder 4; Bella Wilson to AC, October 5, 1880, box 6, folder 6, CS; Robert
Waller to AC, December 22, 1881, box 6, folder 8, CS; Mackie to AC, March 30, 1883, box 10, folder 1, CS.

54. See assorted bills in box 21, folder 4, CS.

55. P. Tobin to AC, May 19, 1881, February 18, 1882, box 9, folder 4, CS.

56. C. W. Dickel to AC, November 8, 1880; R. Devereaux to AC, May 13, 1881; James McCrea to GFMc, June 12,
1880, box 9, folder 4, CS.

57. AC, “Memorandum of 1868,” ACAC.

58. “Anne C. L. Botta,” Miscellaneous Writings, I, 152–53.

59. Coleman to AC, March 7, 1874, box 69, folder 3, CS.

60. Holley to AC, March 21, 1874; Shinn to Holley, April 6, 1874; John Scott to AC, April 4, 1874, box 69,
folder 3, CS.

61. Alexander Lyman Holley to Alexander Hamilton Holley, August 29, 1874, Holley; AC to Shinn, December 15,
1874, box 2, folder 1, CS.

62. NYT, December 11, 1874, 5.

63. NYT, February 12, 1875, 4.

64. Paul Krause, The Battle for Homestead, 1880–1892: Politics, Culture and Steel (Pittsburgh: University of
Pittsburgh Press, 1992), 116.

CHAPTER NINE: DRIVING THE BANDWAGON, 1875–1878

1. George Thurston, Pittsburgh and Allegheny in the Centennial Year (Pittsburgh: A. A. Anderson & Son, 1876),
197.

2. A. L. Holley and Lenox Smith, “American Iron and Steel Works. No. XXI. The Works of the Edgar Thomson Steel
Company (Limited),” Engineering 25 (April 19, 1878): 295.

3. Upton Sinclair, The Jungle (1905; New York: Signet Classics, 1960), 204–05.

4. AC, Autobiography, 196–97.

5. Ibid, 197.

6. AC, EB, 190, 204.

7. Ibid., 208–09.

8. Thomas J. Misa, A Nation of Steel (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1995), 21; Usselman,
82–83.

9. Robert Kennedy to AC, January 20, 1882, box 79, folder 3, CS.

10. AC to Shinn, June 1, 1875, box 77, folder 1, CS.

11. Morrell to Shinn, June 10, 1875, box 77, folder 1, CS.

12. AC to Shinn, April 10, 1876, vol. 4, ACLC.

13. Usselman, 84–87.

14. AC to William Keyser, November 15, 1875, box 2, folder 2, CS.

15. AC to John Garrett, December 8, 1875, box 2, folder 2, CS; Usselman, 89.

16. Bridge, Inside History, 110–11.

17. AC to Shinn, December 15, 1874, box 2, folder 1, CS.

18. Bridge, Inside History, 112.

19. Bridge, Millionaires, 35.

20. U.S. Steel, 2419.

21. Ibid.

22. AC to J. S. Morgan & Co., August 16, 1875, box 77, folder 2, CS.

23. AC to Gowen, December 24, 1875, box 77, CS.

24. U.S. Steel, 2353.

25. AC to Shinn, November 30, 1875, vol. 4, ACLC; Coleman to TMC, n. d.; “Agreement between Coleman and
Carnegie,” May 1, 1876, box 77, folder 1, CS; “Statement of estate of Wm. Coleman,” box 70, folder 2, CS.

26. AC, Notes of a Trip Round the World (New York, 1879) 73.

27. Misa, 31; Bridge, Inside History, 95–99.

28. AC to Shinn, December 9, 1875, January 15, 1876, letterbook, 1875–76, CS.

29. Shinn to AC, December 13, 1875, box 77, folder 1, CS.

30. AC to Shinn, December 14, 1875, box 77, folder 1, CS.

31. “Agreement signed on May 1, 1877,” box 77, folder 5, CS.

32. May 2, 1870 timetable for “Fast Train” in Travelers’ Official Guide of the Railways (Philadelphia, June
1870).

33. Code books, vol. 259, ACLC.

34. Arthur Pound and Samuel T. Moore, eds., They Told Barron (New York: Harper & Bros., 1930), 85.

35. AC, “An Employer’s View of the Labor Question,” Forum (April 1886), in Andrew Carnegie Reader, 99.

36. Tariff, 1848.

37. Jones to AC, March 28, 1877, box 71, folder 1, CS.

38. Jones to AC, March 24, 1878, box 71, folder 1, CS.

39. NLT, December 9, 1876, 1; Krause, 141–44.

40. AC to Pennsylvania RR Engineers, May 29, 1877, box 2, folder 5, CS.

41. Jones to GFMc, July 11, 1877, box 71, folder 1, CS.

42. Report on the Committee Appointed to Investigate the Railroad Riots in July, 1877 (Harrisburg, 1878);
Krause, 126–33.

43. Jones to AC, May 6, 1878, box 71, folder 1, CS.

CHAPTER TEN: ROUND THE WORLD, 1878–1881

1. A. B. Farquhar, in collaboration with Samuel Crowther, The First Million the Hardest: An Autobiography
(Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page, 1922), 19.

2. Ron Chernow, Titan: The Life of John D. Rockefeller, Sr. (New York: Random House, 1998), 19, 50.

3. All clippings in ACBM.

4. Assorted bills in box 21, folder 8, CS.

5. AC, RTW, 2.

6. Richard Gilder to H. Gilder, April 28, 1906, Letters of Richard Watson Gilder, ed. Rosamond Gilder (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1916), 374.

7. AC, unpublished typescript, 135–36, vol. 247, ACLC.

8. AC to Blackwood, November 25, 1867, Blackwood.

9. Amelia R. Hill to AC, January 22, 1874, box 5, folder 6, CS; JWV to AC, October 7, 1876, box 5, folder 8,
CS; JWV to AC, April 24, 28, May 8, 1877, box 5, folder 9, CS.

10. AC to Townsend, October 12, 1878, box 3, folder 1, CS.

11. AC, RTW, 1; see also original copy of travel diary in Dunfermline.

12. J. W. Vandevort, notebooks, “Around the World,” 1878–79, n. p., Vandevort.

13. AC to GFMc, October 23, 1878, box 6, folder 2, CS.

14. John Steele Gordon, A Thread Across the Ocean (New York: Perennial, 2003), 211–12; Bill Glover, FTL
Design: History of the Atlantic Cable and Submarine Telegraphy, Cable Timeline: 1850–1900:
http://www.atlanticcable.com/Cables/CableTimeLine/index1850.htm.

15. Vandevort, notebooks, “Around the World,” Vandevort.

16. AC, Autobiography, 197, 204; William W. Stowe, Going Abroad: European Travel in Nineteenth-Century
American Culture (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994), 1, 13–15.

17. AC, RTW, 91, 149, 197.

18. Ibid., 17–18.

19. Ibid., 76, 80–81.

20. Ibid., 282–83.

21. AC to Lauder, December 10, 1879, box 10, folder 10, CS; NYT, February 13, 1880, 2.

22. Champlin to GFMc, July 7, 1879, box 6, folder 3, CS.

23. Assorted letters in vol. 4, 5; “Letters transferred from scrapbook ‘Around the World’” in vol. 263, ACLC;
AC, Autobiography, 198.

24. Lauder to S. E. Moore, April 25, 1878, box 6, folder 1, CS.

25. Torn, untitled, undated clipping, box 17, folder 6, CS.

26. AC to Miss Whitfield [spring 1880], box 3, folder 3, CS.

27. Burton J. Hendrick and Daniel Henderson, Louise Whitfield Carnegie: The Life of Mrs. Andrew Carnegie (New
York: Hastings House, 1950), 55.

28. Ibid., 57; AC to LW correspondence, CFP.

29. AC, AF-I-H, 2, 9–10; AC, Our Coaching Trip, Brighton to Inverness (New York: privately printed, 1882); AC
to Messrs. Vernon H. Brown & Co., May 24, 1881, box 10, folder 2, CS.

30. Hendrick and Henderson, 58.

31. Hendrick interview with Mrs. Carnegie, August 22, 1927, vol. 256, ACLC.

32. Ibid.; Stewart to AC, March 17, 1884, box 7, folder 3, CS; Mary Clark file, series VIA, box 29, CCNY.

33. John O’Hara to AC, April 27, 1881, box 6, folder 7, CS; Hendrick and Henderson, 59.

34. AC to LW, May 31, 1881, CFP; Hendrick and Henderson, 59.

35. AC to LW, June 21, 1881, CFP.

36. AC to Messrs. Vernon H. Brown & Co., May 24, 1881, box 10, folder 2, CS.

37. AC, AF-I-H, 18.

38. Ibid., 18–19, 24, 28, 31, 38, 42–43.

39. Ibid., 43–44, 47–50, 53–54.

40. Alice French, “Journal of the Carnegie Tour,” 6, 8, French.

41. AC, AF-I-H, 42–50.

42. Ibid., 151–2, 182, 323.

43. Ibid., 324.

44. Ibid., 10, 239.

45. French, “Journal,” 12; AC, AF-I-H, 82, 281–84; AC, Our Coaching Trip, 184.

46. AC, Our Coaching Trip, 210.

47. AC, AF-I-H, 28.

48 Ibid., 103–04.

49. Ibid., 188.

CHAPTER ELEVEN: MAKING A NAME, 1881–1883

1. NYT, December 27, 1879, 8; February 13, 1880, 8; March 2, 1880, 1; December 12, 1880, 9; February 6, 1881,
7; December 25, 1881, 9; December 27, 1881, 3.

2. Hendrick and Henderson, 73–74; AC to LW, “calling card,” January 1, 1882; February 17, February 18, 1882,
CFP; NYT, April 13, 1882, 2.

3. AC to Shinn, September 14, 1879, box 76, folder 4, CS.

4. Jones to AC, November 5, 9, 1880; AC to Jones, November 8, 1880, box 71, folder 1, CS.

5. John Stover, American Railroads, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997), 77, 134–35; Misa,
32.

6. Bridge, Inside History, 102.

7. “Statement showing status of each partners interest…”; “Statement of Contributions of Partners to the
Capital…,” vol. 5, ACLC.

8. Kenneth Warren, Wealth, Waste, and Alienation: Growth and Decline in the Connellsville Coke Industry
(Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2001), 61–62.

9. Kenneth Warren, Triumphant Capitalism: Henry Clay Frick and the Industrial Transformation of America
(Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1996), 27.

10. AC to Robert Garrett, December 28, 1881, box 3, folder 4, CS; Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 29–32.

11. Jones to AC, December 5, 1879, box 71, folder 3, CS.

12. Jones to AC, April 2, 1880, box 71, folder 1, CS.

13. Jones to AC, November 5, 1880; Mackie to Jones, January 20, 1881, box 3, folder 3, CS; George H. Lamb,
“The Carnegie Free Library,” in The Unwritten History of Braddock’s Field (Braddock: n. p., 1917), 221.

14. Theodore Jones, Carnegie Libraries Across America: A Public Legacy (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997),
9–10; Daniel Nelson, Managers and Workers: Origins of the New Factory System in the United States, 1880–1920
(Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1975), 102; Jones to AC, February 20, 1882, box 71, folder 1, CS.

15. AC to Hon. Robert W. Lyon, November 25, 1881, box 3, folder 4, CS.

16. Jones, 9; Lamb, 220; NLT, January 26, 1884, 4; NYT, October 10, 1885, 2.

17. Krause, 171–92.

18. Jones to AC, February 20, 1882, box 71, folder 1, CS.

19. NLT, April 1, 1882, 4.

20. NLT, April 29, 1882, 4; April 28, 1888, 4; John A. Fitch, The Steel Workers (1910; Pittsburgh: University
of Pittsburgh Press, 1989), 88, 88n.

21. NLT, June 3, 1882, 4; NYT, June 1, 1882, 5.

22. Jones to AC, November 20, 1882, box 71, folder 1, CS.

23. NLT, March 31, April 14, 28, 1883, 4.

24. AC to Carnegie Bros., October 30, 1882, box 3, folder 4, CS.

25. AC to Townsend, April 20, 1882, box 70, folder 2, CS.

26. Townsend to AC, April 21, 1882; AC to Townsend, April 22, 1882, box 70, folder 2, CS.

27. Townsend to AC, April 24, 26, 1882; Townsend to R. T. Wilson & Co., May 2, 1882, box 70, folder 2, CS.

28. AC, TD, 57–58; “Statement of Expenses incurred in showing Party of Scotch Friends the United States,”
October 1882, box 21, folder 10, CS; see also box 6, folder 10, CS.

29. AC to LW, January 1, 1883, n. d., CFP.

30. Chudacoff, 50.

31. AC to LW, June 26, 1882, CFP.

32. AC to LW, n. d., CFP.

33. LW to AC, July 23, 1883, CFP.

34. LW to AC, August 2, 1883, CFP.

35. LW to AC, September 13, 1883, CFP.

36. LW to AC, September 22, 1883, CFP.

CHAPTER TWELVE: MR. SPENCER AND MR. ARNOLD, 1882–1884

1. Courtlandt Palmer, “The Nineteenth Century Club of New York: Shall Similar Associations Become General?”
April 29, 1887 (London: William Reeves, n. d.): 8.

2. AC, Autobiography, 146.

3. “Remarks of Andrew Carnegie before the Nineteenth Century Club upon ‘The Aristocracy of the Dollar’” (n.
d., n. p.): 4.

4. Ibid., 10–11.

5. AC, “As Others See Us,” Fortnightly Review (February 1882): 156.

6. J. D. Y. Peel, Herbert Spencer: The Evolution of a Sociologist (New York: Basic Books, 1971), 2, 41.

7. Richard Hofstadter, Social Darwinism in American Thought, rev. edn. (Boston: Beacon Press, 1955), 33; Henry
Adams, Democracy: An American Novel (1880; rev. edn., New York: Modern Library, 2003), 3.

8. Bridge, Millionaires, 24–27.

9. David Duncan, Life and Letters of Herbert Spencer, vol. 1 (New York: D. Appleton & Co., 1908), 289; Spencer
to Youmans, March 29, 1882, in Herbert Spencer, An Autobiography (New York: D. Appleton & Co., 1904), II, 455.

10. Spencer, Autobiography, I, 424; II, 468.

11. Spencer, Autobiography, II, 467–72.

12. Ibid., 478.

13. Edward L. Youmans, comp., Herbert Spencer on the Americans and the Americans on Herbert Spencer (New York:
Appleton, 1883); NYT, November 10, 1882, 5.

14. Spencer to AC, January 11, 1883, vol. 6, ACLC.

15. AC to Spencer, April 12, 1884, ACBM.

16. AC, Autobiography, 327, AC, “A confession of Religious Faith,” undelivered rectorial speech for St.
Andrews University, October 22, 1902, in MW, II, 297–99.

17. Herbert Spencer, First Principles, 5th London edn. (New York: A. L. Burt Co., n. d.), 237, 275, 342.

18. Peel, 100; Herbert Spencer, Social Statics (London: John Chapman, 1851), 42, 45.

19. Spencer, Social Statics, 42; Herbert Spencer, “Population,” cited in Peel, 138–39.

20. Spencer, Social Statics, 65.

21. AC, Autobiography, 327; Adams, The Education, 232.

22. AC, RTW, 20.

23. Arnold to AC, July 5 [1883], in Cecil Y. Lang, ed., The Letters of Matthew Arnold, vol. 5
(Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 2001), 280–81.

24. AC, Autobiography, 286.

25. Arnold to Frances Arnold, in Lang, ed., 313; Mackie to Hawk & Wetherbee, October 13, 1883, box 10, folder
1, CS.

26. Mackie to Mrs. Youmans, October 25, 1883, box 10, folder 2, CS.

27. NYT, October 28, 1883, 2.

28. Park Honan, Matthew Arnold: A Life (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981), 398–99.

29. AC to Mrs. Annie Adams Fields, October 10, 1888, HL.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN: “THE STAR-SPANGLED SCOTCHMAN,” 1884

1. Mackie to Courtlandt Palmer, April 29, 1884, box 4, folder 1, CS.

2. Mackie to AC, March 30, 1883, box 10, folder 1, CS; Miss Vincent to Mackie, August 14; Mackie to Miss
Vincent, August 20, 1883, box 3, folder 5, CS.

3. Hendrick and Henderson, 67; Hendrick, I, 251.

4. “Mr. Carnegie’s Tour Through Devon,” Pall Mall Gazette, in NYTr, July 4, 1884, 2.

5. William Black, “A Few Days’ More Driving,” Harper’s New Monthly Magazine, 70 (December 1884): 22.

6. AC to Samuel Storey, January 3, 1883, in Hendrick, I, 267.

7. NYT, August 23, 1883, 2.

8. See August 1884 clips in scrapbook, vol. 263, ACLC.

9. Arnold to Lucy Charlotte Arnold Whitridge, March 3, 1885, in Letters of Matthew Arnold, vol. 6, 17.

10. AC to Rosebery, August 31, 1883, Rosebery.

11. AC to Rosebery, June 19, 1884, Rosebery.

12. AC to “My Dear Sir,” January 5, 1885, box 16, folder 5, CS.

13. AC to Gladstone, January 11, 1885, Gladstone correspondence.

14. NYT, April 27, 1884; March 10, 1885, 2.

15. AC to LW, July 19, 1884, CFP.

16. AC to LW, marked July 18, 1884, postmarked August 18, CFP.

17. AC to LW, [late 1884], CFP.

18. LW to AC, November 16, 1884, CFP.

19. LW to AC, November 17, 1884, CFP.

20. AC to LW, November 17, 1884, CFP.

21. LW to AC, November 18, 1884, CFP.

22. AC to LW, November 21, 1884, CFP.

23. AC to LW, November 22, 1884, CFP.

24. LW to AC, November 22, 1884, CFP.

25. LW to AC, November 17, 1884, CFP.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN: BOOMS AND BUSTS, 1883–1885

1. Stover, 135; Edward Chase Kirkland, Industry Comes of Age (1961; Chicago: Quadrangle, 1967), 30; NYT,
January 16, 1885, 1.

2. Kenneth Warren, “Charlie: The Businessman as Hero,” n. p., ms in author’s possession.

3. NYT, June 8, 1879, 1; June 1, 1882, 5.

4. NYTr, September 24, 1883; Jones to AC, November 2, 1883, box 71, folder 1, CS.

5. AC to Messrs. Carnegie Bros., November 30, 1883, box 3, folder 5, CS.

6. Spencer, Social Statics, 323.

7. Ibid., 324–25.

8. AC to Frank Thomson, January 23, 1884, box 4, folder 1, CS.

9. AC to John S. Wilson, January 24, February 22, February 25, 1884, box 4, folder 1, CS.

10. W. C. Whitney to AC, February 8, 1883, box 68, folder 2, CS.

11. AC to Twombly, February 8, 1883, box 68, folder 2, CS.

12. Carosso, 254–57.

13. AC to Roberts, n. d., box 7, folder 4, HCFUP; NYT, July 31, 1885, 2; August 8, 1885, 5; August 24, 1885,
5.

14. AC to Roberts, n. d., box 7, folder 4, HCFUP.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN: THE “MILLIONAIRE SOCIALIST,” 1885–1886

1. See correspondence in box 17, folder 2, CS; Beckert, 263–65.

2. NYTr, January 5, 1885, 1.

3. NLT, January 10, 1885, 1.

4. NLT, December 20, 1884, 4.

5. Jones to AC, December 3, 1884, box 71, folder 1, CS.

6. Daniel Rogers, The Work Ethic in Industrial America, 1850–1920 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1978), 159–60.

7. NLT, February 14, 1885, 4.

8. Thomas Bell, Out of This Furnace (1941; Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1976), 47.

9. NYT, January 4, 1886, 2.

10. NLT, January 16, 1886, 4; Fitch, 114.

11. NLT, January 3, 1885, 1; NYT, October 10, 1885, 2; AC to LW, October 17, 1885, CFP.

12. AC, Autobiography, 318.

13. AC, TD, 399.

14. Hendrick, I, 266.

15. Series IX, box 1, folder 10, CCNY.

16. AC, Autobiography, 318–19.

17. Bridge, Millionaires, 159; Mackie to Bridge, October 27, 1884, box 10, folder 2, CS; Champlin to Mackie,
December 4, 1884, box 29, folder 4, CS.

18. Bridge, Millionaires, 37.

19. George W. Bitner to AC, November 11, 1874, box 5, folder 6, CS.

20. Bridge, Millionaires, 37–38.

21. Ibid., 46.

22. Ibid., 54.

23. AC to LW, June 29, 1885, CFP.

24. LW to AC, July 1, 1885, CFP.

25. AC to LW, July 23, 1885, CFP.

26. AC to LW, September 17, 1885, CFP.

27. LW to AC, September 19, 1885, CFP.

28. AC to LW, September 28, 1885, CFP.

29. LW to AC, October 2, 1885, CFP.

30. AC to LW, October 5, 1885, CFP.

31. AC to LW, October 17, 1885, CFP.

32. See, e.g., AC to Blaine, March 13, 1880, box 3, folder 2, CS.

33. American Council of Learned Societies, Dictionary of American Biography (1928–37; New York: Scribner,
1946), vol. 1, 325.

34. AC to Morley, October 8, 1884, vol. 27, ACLC.

35. AC to Gladstone, April 27, 1885, vol. 8, ACLC.

36. AC to Gladstone, July 14, 1885, vol. 8, ACLC.

37. AC to Gladstone, January 25, 1886, vol. 8, ACLC.

38. Duncan, 264.

39. AC, TD, 484.

40. Ibid., 25, 31.

41. Ibid., 40–41.

42. Ibid., 117, 296, 327, 333, 336, 337, 355, 489–91.

43. Ibid., 500, 237.

44. Bridge, Millionaires, 43, 45.

45. Ross to AC, May 16, 1886, vol. 8, ACLC; Morley to AC, May 17, 1886, in Hendrick, I, 278.

46. Spencer to AC, May 18, 1886, vol. 9, ACLC.

47. GP to AC, May 5, 1886; Henry George to AC, May 13, 1886, vol. 9, ACLC.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN: THINGS FALL APART, 1886–1887

1. AC, “An Employer’s View of the Labor Question,” 92–93.

2. Ibid., 93, 96.

3. NYTr, March 23, 1886, 6; NYT, April 2, 1886, 5; NLT, April 3, 1886, 4.

4. AC to LWC, March 10, 1886, CFP.

5. Arnold to Frances…Arnold, July 26, 1886, in Letters of Matthew Arnold, vol. VI, 181.

6. Jeremy Brecher, Strike! (Boston: South End Press, 1977), 28, 31.

7. AC, “Results of the Labor Struggle,” Forum, I (August 1886), in Andrew Carnegie Reader, 102–03.

8. Ibid., 112.

9. AC to LW, July 21, 1886, CFP.

10. AC to LW, July 22, 1886, CFP.

11. Hendrick and Henderson, 77.

12. AC to LW, September 23, 27, 1886, CFP.

13. AC to LW, October 3, 1886, CFP.

14. AC to LW, October 16, 1886, CFP.

15. AC, Autobiography, 205; NYT, October 20, 1886, 3.

16. Bridge, Millionaires, 39–40.

17. Hendrick interview with John Walker, Dr. Fred Dennis, vol. 239, ACLC.

18. Bridge, Millionaires, 40–41; NYT, October 21, 1856, 5; October 22, 1; October 31, 1; Mackie to AC, October
29, 1886, box 10, folder 2, CS.

19. AC to LW, November 24, 1886, CFP.

20. AC to LW, November 29, 1886, CFP.

21. AC to LW, December 2, 1886, CFP.

22. LW to AC, December 4, 1886, CFP.

23. AC to LW, December 4, 1886, CFP.

24. U.S. Steel, 2408.

25. Article of Agreement between Carnegie Bros. and Company, Ltd., and Andrew Carnegie, Henry Phipps, Jr., et
al., vol. 10, ACLC.

26. AC, Autobiography, 204.

27. HCF to AC, August 13, 1883, box 1, folder 1, HCFUP.

28. AC to Carnegie Bros., February 10, 1886; Phipps to Lauder, February 19, 1886; AC to HCF, February 23,
1886, HCFFM.

29. AC to HCF, February 25,[1886], HCFFM.

30. Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 42–43; Article of Agreement between Carnegie Bros. and Company, Ltd., and
Henry C. Frick, January 10, 1887, vol. 10, ACLC.

31. Bridge, Millionaires, 41–42; Hendrick and Henderson, 81–82; LW to AC, February 9, 1887, CFP.

32. AC to LW, February 22, 1887, CFP.

33. AC to LW, January 21, 1887; LW to AC, January 24, 1887, CFP.

34. LW to AC, March 12, 1887, CFP.

35. LW to AC, assorted letters, March, 1887, CFP.

36. Robert A. M. Stern, et al., New York 1880 (New York: Monacelli Press, 1999, 578–601; M. Christine Boyer,
Manhattan Manners: Architecture and Style, 1850–1900 (New York: Rizzoli, 1985), 184–87.

37. David Lavender, The Great Pretender (Garden City, NY: Doubleday & Co., 1970), 346; LW to AC, March 3,
1887; AC to LW, March 5, 1887, CFP.

38. AC to LW, March 2, 1887, LW to AC, March 7, 1887, CFP.

39. LW to AC, January 23, 26, 1887, CFP.

40. AC to LW, February 10, 1887, CFP.

41. AC to LW, April 1, 1887, CFP.

42. AC to Huntington, April 2, 1887, box 4, folder 4, CS.

43. AC to LW, April 4, 6, 7, CFP.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN: A WEDDING AND A HONEYMOON, 1887

1. NYT, April 23, 1887, 1; NYTr, April 23, 1887, 5.

2. Town Topics, April 27, 1887, 2.

3. “Indenture of Marriage Agreement between Andrew Carnegie and Louise Whit-field,” April 22, 1886, Series
VIA, box 8, folder 3, CCNY.

4. AC to LW, April 6, CFP.

5. Hendrick and Henderson, 88–90.

6. Ibid., 91, NYT, June 20, 1887, 5.

7. AC to Rosebery, May 24, 1887, vol. 10, ACLC.

8. Hendrick and Henderson, 94; Philip Magnus, Gladstone (New York: Dutton, 1964), 357; The Gladstone Diaries,
ed. H.C.G. Matthews (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994), vol. 12, 43.

9. AC to Gladstone, June 29, 1887, vol. 10, ACLC.

10. Gladstone to AC, July 18, 1887; AC to Gladstone, July 21, 1887, vol. 10, ACLC.

11. LWC to Mrs. Gladstone, [1888], Gladstone.

12. LWC to Mrs. Whitfield, n. d., in Hendrick and Henderson, 95.

13. LWC to Mrs. Whitfield, July 10, 1887, in ibid., 99–100.

14. Cited in ibid., 98–99.

15. NYT, July 9, 1; July 10, 5; July 12, 1887, 1.

16. Gail Hamilton, Biography of James G. Blaine (Norwich, CT: Henry Bill Publishing Co., 1895), 601; LWC to
Mrs. Whitfield, n. d., in Hendrick and Henderson, 100.

17. LWC to Mrs. Whitfield, July 17, 1887, in ibid., 103.

18. Arnold to Frances…Arnold, September 13, 1887, in Letters of Matthew Arnold, vol. VI, 306–07.

19. Mrs. Blaine to Emmons Blaine, July 15, 1887, in Letters of Mrs. James G. Blaine, ed. Harriet S. Blaine
Beale (New York: Duffield & Co., 1908), vol. II, 156–60.

20. Mrs. Blaine to Miss Dodge, July 18, 1887; Mrs. Blaine to Emmons Blaine, July 15, 1887, in ibid., 156–60.

21. Hay to Adams, July 20, 1887, in William Roscoe Thayer, The Life and Letters of John Hay (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1915) vol. II, 73–74.

22. Mrs. Blaine to Emmons Blaine, July 15, 1887; Mrs. Blaine to Miss Dodge, July 18, 1887, in Letters of Mrs.
James G. Blaine, II, 156–60.

23. Walter Damrosch, My Musical Life (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1926), 90–92; Walter Damrosch to
Frank Damrosch, August 5, 1887, box 2, folder 35, D-BLC.

24. Ibid.

25. Walter to Frank Damrosch, August 9, 1887, box 2, folder 35, D-BLC.

26. “Men You Know: Mr. Andrew Carnegie,” The Bailie, September 14, 1887, in “Biographical Sketches,” Margaret
Barclay Wilson Collection.

27. LWC to Mrs. Whitfield, July 17, 1887, in Hendrick and Henderson, 101–02.

28. Three Days Speeches, reprinted from Dunfermline Saturday Press, September 17, 1887, in Writings,
Addresses, Opinions, vol. 1, Margaret Barclay Wilson Collection.

29. Town Topics, December 15, 1887, 8–9.

30. LWC to Mrs. Whitfield, n. d., in Hendrick and Henderson, 104, 107.

31. Uncle Lauder to AC, n. d., in ibid., 111–12.

32. AC to John Vandevort, December 6, 1887, Vandevort.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN: THE PINKERTONS AND “BRADDOCK’S BATTLEFIELD,” 1887–1888

1. HCF to Phipps, Walker, and others, May 13, 1887, box 1, folder 2, HCFUP.

2. AC to HCF, June 1, 1887, HCFFM.

3. HCF to Phipps, Walker, and others, June 7, 1887, box 1, folder 2, HCFUP.

4. AC to HCF, August 2, 1887, September 9, 1887, box 1, folder 2, HCFUP.

5. AC to William Whitney, August 31, 1887, Cleveland.

6. Triumphant Democracy, in Margaret Barclay Wilson Collection.

7. NYT, December 21, 1887, 2.

8. AC, “An Employer’s View of the Labor Question,” 96.

9. PP, February 25, 1888, 1, March 3, 1888, 1; NYT, February 26, 1888, 2.

10. NYT, February 28, 1888, 1; NLT, March 10, 1888, 2; PP, February 29, 1888; March 2, 1888.

11. Kenneth Warren, The American Steel Industry, 1850–1970, A Geographical Interpretation (London: Oxford
University Press, 1973), 116.

12. C&AGW, March 31, 1888, 1.

13. NYT, March 26, 29, 1; PP, March 24, 1888, 1; NLT, March 31, 1888, 1.

14. C&AGW, March 31, 1888, 1.

15. Ibid.

16. Ibid., March 31, 1; April 13, 1888, 1; PP, March, 30 1888, 1; PT, April 20, 1888, 1.

17. C&AGW, April 7, 1888, 1; PT, April 4, 6, 1888, 1.

18. PT, April 13, 17, 1888, 1.

19. PP, April 17, 1888, 1; PT, April 16, 18, 1888, 1.

20. PT, April 20, 1888, 1.

21. PP, PT, April 23, 1888, 1.

22. PP, PT, April 23, 1888, 1; C&AGW, April 28, 1888, 1; U.S. Steel, 2526–31.

23. NLT, April 21, 28, 1888, 1.

24. PT, April 25, 1888, 1.

25. NLT, April 28, 1888, 1; PP, April 28, 1888, 1.

26. PT, April 28, 1888, 1.

27. Ibid., May 3, 1888.

28. C&AGW, May 5, 1888, 1.

29. Ibid., May 12, 1888, 1.

30. Ibid., April 14, 1888, 1.

31. U.S. Steel, 2528.

CHAPTER NINETEEN: FRIENDS IN HIGH PLACES, 1888–1889

1. NYTr, June 8, 1888, 1; Hendrick and Henderson, 118–19.

2. Walter to Frank Damrosch, June 21, 1888, box 2, folder 35, D-BLC; Mrs. James G. Blaine to James Blaine,
June 14, 1888, in Letters of Mrs. James G. Blaine, II, 207.

3. Damrosch, 98.

4. AC, AF-I-H, 34–35.

5. Mrs. James G. Blaine to Walker Blaine, July 10, 1888, in Letters of Mrs. James G. Blaine, xx, 209–10.

6. Walter to Frank Damrosch, July 1, 1888, box 2, folder 35, D-BLC.

7. LCW to Mrs. Whitfield, n. d., in Hendrick and Henderson, 123.

8. Damrosch, 99.

9. Hendrick and Henderson, 126–27; much of the foregoing description of life at Cluny is taken from chap. 6 of
their biography of Louise Whitfield Carnegie, 116–31.

10. Walter Damrosch, “Recollections of Andrew Carnegie,” Andrew Carnegie Centenary (New York: Carnegie
Corporation of New York, 1935), 27; Walter to Frank Damrosch, August 4, 1888, box 2, folder 35, D-BLC.

11. AC to Carnegie Brothers, October 18, 1884, box 4, folder 1, CS.

12. NYT, October 18, 1887, 5.

13. AC to James Swank, May 16, 1888, in NYT, May 18, 1888, 1.

14. NYT, September 9, 1888, 2; September 20, 1888, 5; September 25, 1888, 2; NLT, October 6, 1888, 3.

15. NYT, October 9, 1888, 8; NYTr, October 9, 1888, 1.

16. NLT, October 6, 1888, 2.

17. NYT, October 20, 1888, 6.

18. NYT, October 25, 1888, 1.

19. Knox & Reed to S. E. Moore, October 31, November 1, 1888, series IX, box 1, folder 10, CCNY.

20. “Duplicate Letter of Intent,” series IX, box 1, folder 10, CCNY.

21. AC to Benjamin Harrison, November 7, 1888, Harrison.

22. AC to HCF, September 8, 1888, box 6, folder 13, HCFUP.

23. AC to HCF, February 2, 1889, box 1, folder 3, HCFUP.

24. AC to HCF, February 16, 1889, box 1, folder 3, HCFUP.

25. AC, “Pennsylvania’s Industrial and Railroad Policy,” address to Pennsylvania legislature, April 8, 1889,
in MW, I, 290, 297–305.

26. PT, March 22, April 11, 18, 19, 1889, 1; NYT, April 11, 1889, 5; April 13, 1889, 2; April 15, 1889, 4; May
10, 1889, 4.

27. AC to Gladstone, February 7, 1890, Gladstone.

28. Lamb, 220.

29. AC, “Dedication of the Carnegie Library at the Edgar Thomson Steel Rail Works, Braddock, March 30, 1889,
Address to Workingmen,” CLP.

CHAPTER TWENTY: THE GOSPELS OF ANDREW CARNEGIE, 1889–1892

1. AC, “Dedication,” 15, CLP.

2. AC, “The Bugaboo of Trusts,” North American Review (February 1889), in Andrew Carnegie Reader, 222.

3. John D. Rockefeller, Random Reminiscences of Men and Events (New York: Doubleday, Page, 1909), 90–91; Jay
Gould testimony, U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Education and Labor. Report Upon the Relations Between
Labor and Capital (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1885), 1081.

4. Strouse, 305.

5. AC, “The ABC of Money,” North American Review (June 1891), in Andrew Carnegie Reader, 234, 242–43, 247.

6. Ibid., 256.

7. AC, “Gospel of Wealth II,” 1906, in Problems of To-Day: Wealth, Labor, Socialism (1908; Garden City, NY:
Doubleday, Doran & Co., 1933), 13, 17–21.

8. NYT, October 29, 1882, 8; November 19, 1882, 5.

9. AC, “[Gospel of] Wealth,” North American Review, (June 1889), in Andrew Carnegie Reader, 130–31.

10. Ibid., 132–33.

11. Ibid., 134, 138.

12. Ibid, 133–35.

13. Ibid., 134–36.

14. Ibid., 139.

15. Ibid., 139–40.

16. LWC to Gladstone, June 19, 1889, Gladstone.

17. AC, “The Best Fields for Philanthropy,” North American Review (December 1889), in Andrew Carnegie Reader,
153.

18. “[Gospel] of Wealth,” 138.

19. AC to Gladstone, November 24, 1890, vol. 11, ACLC.

20. W. E. Gladstone, Nineteenth Century 28 (November 1890): 683, 692.

21. AC to Gladstone, November 24, 1890, vol. 11, ACLC; AC, “The Advantages of Poverty,” Nineteenth Century,
(March 1891), in The Gospel of Wealth, ed. Edward C. Kirkland (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965),
64.

22. Manning, Adler, Hughes, “Irresponsible Wealth,” Nineteenth Century, 27 (December 1890): 891.

23. AC, “The Advantages of Poverty,” 51–55.

24. Ibid., 73.

25. Ibid., 75; Edward Kirkland, Dream and Thought in the Business Community, 1860–1900 (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1956), 154–64.

26. AC to Gladstone, March 28, 1892, vol. 15, ACLC.

27. Rosemary Ruhig DuMont, “The Founding of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,” in Robert Sidney Martin, ed.,
Carnegie Denied: Communities Rejecting Carnegie Library Construction Grants, 1898–1925 (Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1993), 3–4.

28. HCF to AC, February 28, 1890, box 2, folder 6, HCFUP.

29. On opposition to the East End site, see Francis G. Couvares, The Remaking of Pittsburgh: Class and Culture
in an Industrializing City, 1877–1919 (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1884), 35–43.

30. AC to James Scott, July 9, 1890, box 1, ACCLP.

31. Franklin Toker, Pittsburgh: An Urban Portrait (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1986), 98.

32. AC to James Scott, March 18, 1891, box 1, ACCLP.

33. AC to James Scott, January 25, 1892, box 1, ACCLP.

34. Toker, 98; AC to James Scott, November 3, 1893, box 1, ACCLP.

35. Damrosch, My Musical Life, 94–95.

36. Richard Schickel, The World of Carnegie Hall (New York: Julian Messner, 1960), 30–34; Ethel Peyser, The
House That Music Built: Carnegie Hall (New York: Robert M. McBride, 1936), 38–47.

37. Extract from the minutes of the Music Hall Company of New York, Ltd., from meeting of September 29, 1890,
vol. 11, ACLC.

38. Peter Tchaikovsky to Eduard Napravnik, May 2, 1891, in Elkhonon Joffe, Tchaikovsky in America: The
Composer’s Visit in 1891 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), 69; Tchaikovsky to Vladimir Davidov, April
30, 1891, in ibid., 62; Tchaikovsky, diary, April 27, 1891, in ibid., 57.

39. Tchaikovsky, diary, April 29, May 10, 1891, in ibid., 57, 61, 111.

40. Tchaikovsky to Napravnic, May 2, 1891, in ibid., 69.

41. AC to Eliot, December 31, 1904, vol. 110, ACLC.

42. “Schedule of Capital, Stock, Bonds Etc., January 1, 1890,” vol. 10, ACLC.

43. AC to Sage, February 3, 1896, vol. 36, ACLC.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE: SURRENDER AT HOMESTEAD, 1889–1890

1. AC, “The Advantages of Poverty,” 72–73.

2. Krause, 243; Steve Brier, “Technological Change at Homestead, 1881–1892,” unpublished paper in author’s
possession; Mark M. Brown, “Technology and the Homestead Steel Works,” Canal History and Technology
Proceedings, 11 (1992): 186–205; “The Homestead Mill,” NLT, April 27, 1889, 1.

3. B. Franklin Cooling, Gray Steel and Blue Water Navy (Hamden, CT: Archon Books, 1979), 71–72.

4. AC to Whitney, December 8, 1886, box 39, Whitney.

5. AC to LW, March 2, 1887, LW to AC, March 7, 1887, CFP.

6. Krause, 224, 246.

7. Krause, 209.

8. AC to HCF, April 26, 1889, box 1, folder 6, HCFUP.

9. AC to HCF, April 13, 1889, box 1, folder 5, HCFUP.

10. AC to Abbott, Saturday [April] 27 [1889], vol. 10, ACLC.

11. AC to Abbott, n. d., vol. 10, ACLC.

12. AC to “Dear Boys,” June 12, 1889, box 1, folder 7, HCFUP.

13. South Fork Fishing Club, notice of board meeting, box 17, folder 2, CS; David McCullough, The Johnstown
Flood (1968; New York: Touchstone, 1987), 203, 229, 256; AC to HCF, June 15, 1889, box 1, folder 7, HCFUP.

14. Dod to AC, [June] 4, 1889, box 1, folder 11, HCFUP; McCullough, Johnstown Flood, 203–29.

15. Jones, Carnegie Libraries, 10.

16. AC to HCF, June 15, 1889, box 1, folder 7, HCFUP.

17. AC to HCF, July 18, 1889, box 1, folder 8, HCFUP.

18. Krause, 241–42; NYT, May 28, 1889, 4; July 17, 1889, 4.

19. Krause, 212–14, 223, 252–66.

20. Ibid., 246–47.

21. NLT, June 15, 1889, 1; AC to “bohoys,” July 9, 1889, box 1, folder 8, HCFUP.

22. Krause, 247–48; NYT, July 16, 1889, 5; NLT, July 13, 1889, 1.

23. Walker to HCF, July 13, 1889, HCFFM.

24. Fitch, 121.

25. AC to Abbott, August 7, 1889, vol. 10, ACLC.

26. AC to HCF, August 7, 1889, box 1, folder 9, HCFUP.

27. HCF to AC, vol. 5, HCFFM.

28. AC to HCF, August 8, 1889, box 1, folder 9, HCFUP.

29. HCF to AC, August 9, 1889, in Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 54.

30. AC to HCF & Boys in General, September 2, 1889, box 1, folder 10, HCFUP.

31. AC to HCF, September 3, 1889, box 1, folder 10, HCFUP.

32. AC to LWC, September 26, 1889, in Hendrick and Henderson, 138.

33. Theodore Dreiser, Newspaper Days, ed. T. D. Nostwich (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
1991), 514–15.

34. AC to HCF, October 19, 1889, box 1, folder 10, HCFUP.

35. AC, “Summing Up the Tariff Discussion,” North American Review (July 1890), in MW, I, 306–50.

36. AC to HCF, January 22, 1890 (rec’d), box 2, folder 4, HCFUP.

37. AC to HCF, July 23, 1889, box 1, folder 8, HCFUP.

38. Bensel, 490; HCF to McKinley, October 2, 1891, Special Correspondence, box 3, HCFFM.

39. The stories of these real estate deals were uncovered and described by Paul Krause, 273–83.

40. HCF to AC, January 6, 1890, box 2, folder 3, HCFUP.

41. HCF to AC, January 13, 1890, box 2, folder 3; AC to HCF, January 15, 1890, box 2, folder 4, HCFUP.

42. Lincoln Steffens, The Shame of the Cities (1904; New York: Hill & Wang, 1957), 107.

43. HCF to AC, March 19, 1890, box 2, folder 7, HCFUP.

44. HCF to AC, July 28, 1890, box 2, folder 10, HCFUP.

45. Blaine to AC, April 18, 1889, vol. 10, ACLC.

46. NYT, March 4, 1890, 3; AC to Duke of Devonshire, December 26, 1895, in Hendrick I, 429.

47. AC to HCF, March 1, 1890, box 2, folder 4, HCFUP; AC to Abbott, n. d., vol. 240, ACLC.

48. Misa, 111–13; AC to Tracy, July 5, 1890, vol. 11, ACLC.

49. Robert Hessen, Steel Titan: The Life of Charles M. Schwab (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 1975),
91; AC to HCF, July 15, 1890, folder 2, box 8; AC to HCF, August 3, 1890, box 2, folder 10, HCFUP.

50. HCF to AC, July 15, 1890, vol. 5, HCFFM.

51. AC to Tracy, n. d., vol. 11, ACLC.

52. AC to Blaine, May 9, 1891, vol. 12, ACLC.

53. AC to HCF, March 31, 1892, box 3, folder 11, HCFUP; Andrew Dickson White, Autobiography of Andrew Dickson
White (New York: The Century Co., 1905), vol. 1, 235.

54. AC to HCF, April 2, 1894, box 5, folder 3, HCFUP.

55. AC to HCF, September 21, 1894, box 5, folder 6, HCFUP.

56. AC to Linderman, February 25, 1895, vol. 31, ACLC; Schwab to AC, March 7, 1898, vol. 49, ACLC.

57. AC to HCF, August 14, September 4, 1891, box 3, folder 6; AC to HCF, September 19, 1891, box 3, folder 7,
HCFUP.

58. HCF to Schwab, October 24, 1894, Special Correspondence, box 5, HCFFM.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO: “THERE WILL NEVER BE A BETTER TIME THAN NOW TO FIGHT IT OUT,” 1890–1891

1. AC to HCF, December 9, 1890, box 2, folder 13, HCFUP.

2. HCF to AC, December 30, 1890, Special Correspondence, box 3, HCF to AC, December 30, 1890, vol. 6, HCFFM.

3. David Montgomery, The Fall of the House of Labor (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987), 30.

4. AC to HCF, rec’d December 31, 1890, box 3, folder 1, HCFUP.

5. Fitch, 146; David Brody (New York: Harper & Row, 1969), 96–97.

6. Schwab to HCF, January 1, 1891, in Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 70.

7. Schwab to HCF, January 1, 1891, in Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 71–72; HCF to Schwab, January 1, 1891,
Special Correspondence, box 3, vol. 2, HCFFM.

8. HCF to AC, January 1, 1891, Special Correspondence, box 3, HCFFM.

9. Schwab to HCF, January 1, 1891, in Warren, TC, 72.

10. Ibid.

11. HCF to Gayley, HCF to Schwab, January 2, 1891, Special Correspondence, box 3, HCFFM.

12. HCF to AC, January 22, 31, 1891, vol. 6, HCFFM.

13. AC to HCF, January 26, February 9, 1891, box 3, folder 2, HCFUP.

14. HCF to AC, March 20, 1891, box 3, folder 2, HCFUP.

15. AC to HCF, March 21, 1891, box 3, folder 2, HCFUP.

16. AC to HCF, rec’d April 1, 1891, box 3, folder 4, HCFUP.

17. HCF to AC, April 1, 1891, Special Correspondence, box 3, HCFFM.

18. NYT, April 9, 1891, 1.

19. AC to HCF, n. d., box 3, folder 4, HCFUP.

20. HCF to AC, April 20, 1891, vol. 6, HCFFM.

21. HCF to AC, April 21, 1891, vol. 6, HCFFM.

22. HCF to AC, May 20, 1891, Special Correspondence, box 3, HCFFM.

23. HCF to AC, July 14, 1891, vol. 6, HCFFM.

24. HCF to Morrison, July 3, 1891, Special Correspondence, box 3, HCFFM.

25. HCF to Morrison, July 6, 1891; HCF to Childs, July 3, 1891, Special Correspondence, box 3, HCFFM.

26. HCF to AC, July 14, 1891, vol. 6, HCFFM.

27. AC, Autobiography, 243.

28. AC to HCF, rec’d January 22, 1890, box 2, folder 4, HCFUP.

29. HCF to AC, March 26, 1891, vol. 6, HCFFM.

30. AC to HCF, March 29, 1891, box 3, folder 4, HCFUP.

31. AC to HCF, rec’d January 22, 1890, box 2, folder 4, HCFUP.

32. Martha Frick Symington Sanger, Henry Clay Frick: An Intimate Portrait (New York: Abbeville Press, 1998),
15.

33. HCF to AC, June 30, 1891, in ibid., 141.

34. HCF to AC, July 9, 1891, vol. 6, HCFFM.

35. AC to HCF, mislabeled July 23, 1889, should be 1891, box 1, folder 8, HCFUP.

36. AC to HCF, July 27, 1891, box 3, folder 6, HCFUP.

37. AC to HCF, September 1, 1891, box 3, folder 6, HCFUP.

38. AC to HCF, September 9, 1891, box 3, folder 6, HCFUP.

39. AC to Champlin, n. d., in Champlin.

40. AC to Champlin, n. d., assorted photographs, in Champlin.

41. AC to Champlin, n. d., in ibid.

42. W. T. Hogan, Economic History of the American Iron and Steel Industry, (Lexington, KY: Heath, 1971), vol.
1, 184–87.

43. Hogan, I, 220–21; Brody, 17.

44. Hogan, I, 213.

45. AC to HCF, January 9, 1892, box 3, folder 10, HCFUP.

46. U.S. Steel, 2388–90.

47. AC to HCF, July 15, 1890, box 2, folder 9, HCFUP.

48. AC to HCF, May 13, 1892, box 3, folder 13, HCFUP.

49. Carnegie Steel Co., “Net profits of the Carnegie Associations,” vol. 73, ACLC.

50. AC to HCF, August 21, 1891, box 3, folder 6, HCFUP.

51. Musical Courier, May 15, 1891, Magazine articles, vol. 5, in Margaret Barclay Wilson Collection.

52. AC to Halford, September 21, 1891, Benjamin Harrison to AC, October 5, 1891, vol. 12, ACLC.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE: THE BATTLE FOR HOMESTEAD, 1892

1. PT, June 1, 1892, in Demarest, 13–15.

2. Montgomery, 35.

3. AC to HCF, January 30, 1891, box 3, folder 2, HCFUP.

4. “Questionnaires,” Martin; Krause, 290–92.

5. AC to HCF, December 19, 1891, box 3, folder 9, HCFUP.

6. Krause, 300–302, 307. While there is a vast literature on the Homestead strike of 1892, Paul Krause’s
account stands out from the rest in its interpretive breadth, its uncovering of new sources, and its use of
the standard ones. My own narrative owes a great deal to Krause’s study. In the story of the strike itself, I
have also benefited greatly from Arthur G. Burgoyne’s eyewitness account and history of The Homestead Strike
of 1892, published in 1893, and David P. Demarest, Jr.’s, documentary history, “The River Ran Red”: Homestead
1892 (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1992).

7. Bridge, Inside History, 204–05.

8. George Harvey, Henry Clay Frick: The Man (1928; New York: The Frick Collection, 1936), 165; AC to HCF,
April 11, 1892, box 3, folder 12, HCFUP.

9. HCF to AC, April 21, 1892 excerpt, Harvey folder, HCFFM.

10. AC to HCF, May 4, 1892, box 3, folder 13, HCFUP.

11. [AC] to HCF, May 23, 1892 excerpt, Harvey folder, HCFFM.

12. AC to HCF, May 24, 1892, box 3, folder 14, HCFUP.

13. AC to HCF, May 13, 1892 box 3, folder 13, HCFUP.

14. AC to HCF, May 24, 1892, box 3, folder 14, HCFUP.

15. HCF to AC, June 2, 1892, box 3, folder 15, HCFUP.

16. AC to HCF rec’d June 23, 1892, box 3, folder 16, HCFUP.

17. AC to HCF, May 30, 1892, box 3, folder 14, HCFUP.

18. AC to HCF, June 10, 1892, box 3, folder 15, HCFUP.

19. Krause, 303.

20. PP, June 4, 1892; Roberts testimony, July 13, 1892, U.S. House of Representatives Report No. 2447, in
Demarest, ed., 29.

21. HCF to AC, June 2, 1892, box 3, folder 15, HCFUP.

22. AC to HCF, June 10 and 14, 1892, box 3, folder 15, HCFUP.

23. AC to HCF, June 17, 1892, box 3, folder 16, HCFUP.

24. HCF to AC, June 20, 1892 excerpt, Harvey folder, HCFFM.

25. HCF to AC, June 22, 1892, box 3, folder 16, HCFUP.

26. AC to HCF, rec’d June 23, 1892, box 3, folder 16, HCFUP.

27. Krause 309–10; HCF to AC, June 24, 1892 excerpt, Harvey folder, HCFFM.

28. PP, June 28, 1892, in Demarest, ed., 40.

29. Ibid.

30. Arthur Burgoyne, The Homestead Strike of 1892 (1893; Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1979),
13–14.

31. HCF to Pinkerton, June 25, 1892, in Harvey, 114; Frick testimony, in Harvey, 115.

32. PP, July 1, 1892, in Demarest, ed., 44–45.

33. Burgoyne, 37–8.

34. NYW, July 3, 1892, in Demarest, ed., 56–57; NYT, PD, July 4, 1892, 1.

35. PD, July 5, 1892, 1, in Demarest, ed., 60.

36. Krause, 313; HCF to Pinkerton, July 4, 1892, Special Correspondence, box 4, HCFFM.

37. HCF to AC, July 4, 1892, Special Correspondence, box 4, HCFFM.

38. PD, July 6, 1892, in Demarest, ed., 66–69; Krause, 313–14.

39. Krause, 18.

40. PP, NYW, July 7, 1892, in Demarest, ed., 85–87.

41. NYW, July 8, 1892, in ibid., 106–07; ibid., 111.

42. Pittsburgh Commercial Gazette, July 8, 1892, in ibid., 114.

43. PP, July 8, 1892.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR: LOCH RANNOCH, THE SUMMER OF 1892

1. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, July 10, 1892, in Demarest, ed., 119; NYT, July 9, 1892, 2; HCF to AC, July 7,
1892, in ibid., 88; AC to HCF, July 7, 1892, in Harvey, 166.

2. NYH, July 10, 1892.

3. NYW, July 10, 1892.

4. Pittsburgh Leader, July 10, 1892, Homestead strike scrapbook, vol. 1, HCFUP.

5. HCF to AC, July 11, 1892, box 4, folder 1, HCFUP.

6. AC to HCF, July 12, 1892, box 4, folder 2, HCFUP.

7. [AC] to HCF, cable, July 12, 1892, Harvey folder, HCFFM.

8. NYH, July 10, 1892; The Times, July 25, 1892; The Echo, July 16, 1892, in Homestead strike scrapbook, vol.
1, HCFUP.

9. AC to HCF, July 14, 1892, box 4, folder 2, HCFUP.

10. AC to Dod, July 17, 1892, vol. 17, ACLC.

11. Burgoyne, 125; Demarest, ed., 22.

12. HCF to AC, July 18, 1892 excerpt, box 4, folder 2, HCFUP.

13. Harvey, 139.

14. AC to Leishman, n. d., in Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 89; AC to HCF, rec’d July 25, 1892, box 4, folder
2, HCFUP.

15. Sanger, 203–07.

16. AC to HCF, rec’d August 6, 1892, box 4, folder 2, HCFUP.

17. NYW, NYH, July 27, 1892.

18. Burgoyne, 24–25.

19. Pittsburgh Leader, July 9, 1892, in Homestead strike scrapbook, vol. 1, HCFUP; Krause, 343–44.

20. Milholland to AC, July 12, 1904; AC to Milholland, July 16, 1904, vol. 106, ACLC; AC to HCF, July 28,
1892, box 4, folder 2, HCFUP.

21. AC to HCF, July 29, 1892, box 4, folder 2, HCFUP.

22. Harvey, 150–52.

23. HCF to AC, August 23, 1892 excerpt, box 4, folder 3, HCFUP.

24. HCF to AC, August 27, 1892, box 4, folder 3, HCFUP.

25. AC to Reid, in HCF to AC, August 27, 1892, box 4, folder 3, HCFUP.

26. HCF to AC, August 27, 1892, box 4, folder 3, HCFUP.

27. AC to HCF, September 9, 1892, in Harvey, 155.

28. HCF to AC, October 31, 1892, box 4, folder 7, HCFUP.

29. AC to HCF, August 29, 1892, box 4, folder 3, HCFUP.

30. AC to HCF, September 3, 1892, box 4, folder 3, HCFUP.

31. AC to HCF, September 20, 1892, box 4, folder 4, HCFUP.

32. AC to HCF, September 24, 1892, box 4, folder 4, HCFUP.

33. AC to HCF, September 28, 1892, box 4, folder 5, HCFUP.

34. AC to HCF, September 30, 1892, box 4, folder 4, HCFUP.

35. HCF to AC, September 10, 1892 excerpt, box 4, folder 4, HCFUP.

36. AC to HFC, rec’d October 8, 1892, box 4, folder 5, HCFUP.

37. [AC] to HCF, October 1, 1892, Harvey folder, HCFFM.

38. HCF to AC, October 12, 1892 excerpt, box 4, folder 5, HCFUP.

39. AC to HCF, October 21, 1892, box 4, folder 6, HCFUP.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE: AFTERMATHS, 1892–1894

1. AC to Stead, August 6, 1892, vol. 17, ACLC.

2. Stead to AC, August 9, 1892, vol. 17, ACLC.

3. AC to Stead, August 11, 1892, vol. 17, ACLC.

4. AC and LWC to Gladstone, August 17, 1892; Gladstone to AC, August 19, 1892, Gladstone.

5. AC to Gladstone, September 24, 1892, Gladstone.

6. NYT, October 15, 1892, 1.

7. AC, “unpublished 1892 manuscript,” ACBM.

8. Charles Scribner to AC, May 4, 1893, vol. 20, ACLC.

9. AC, TD, rev. edn., Based on the census of 1890 (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1893), 548.

10. AC, TD, 1893, 512, 529.

11. Donald Warner, The Idea of Continental Union (Lexington, KY: University of Kentucky Press, 1960), 234–34.

12. Burgoyne, 215; AC to HCF, October 28, 31, 1892, box 4, folder 7, HCFUP.

13. HCF to AC, October 31, 1892, box 4, folder 7, HCFUP.

14. AC to HCF, November 9, 1892, box 4, folder 7, HCFUP.

15. Burgoyne, 220–27.

16. AC to HCF, November 19, 1892, box 4, folder 8, HCFUP; AC to HCF, November 20, 1892, Harvey folder, HCFFM.

17. AC to HCF, November 22, 1892, box 4, folder 8, HCFUP; AC to HCF, November 25, 1892, Harvey folder, HCFFM.

18. AC to HCF, December 2, 1892, box 4, folder 9, HCFUP.

19. PP, December 9, 1892, in Demarest, ed., 195–96.

20. AC to HCF, December 8, 1892, box 4, folder 9, HCFUP.

21. AC to HCF, December 11, 1892, box 4, folder 10, HCFUP.

22. AC to HCF, December 27, 1892, box 4, folder 10, HCFUP.

23. Leishman to AC, May 4, 1893, vol. 20, ACLC.

24. Hamlin Garland, “Homestead and its Perilous Trades—Impressions of a Visit,” McClure’s Magazine III (June
1894).

25. Philadelphia Press, July 9, 1892, in Homestead strike scrapbook, vol. 1, HCFUP.

26. Pittsburgh Leader, July 11, 1892, in Homestead strike scrapbook, vol. 1, HCFUP.

27. G. Brooks, “The Typical American Employer,” Blackstone’s Edinburgh Magazine (October 1892): 572.

28. Knox to AC, February 24, 1893, vol. 18; AC to John Robb, Jr., March 7, 1893, vol. 19, ACLC.

29. AC to Alice French, February 9, 1893, French.

30. AC to Reid, March 20, 1893, vol. 19, ACLC.

31. Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 104, 106.

32. Hessen, 45–58; Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 153–58; Hendrick, II, 401–6.

33. HCF to Herbert, December 4, 13, 1893, Special Correspondence, box 5, HCFFM.

34. AC to Cleveland, December 20, 1893, vol. 23, ACLC.

35. AC to HCF, January 14, 1894, Harvey folder, HCFFM.

36. AC to HCF, March 6, 31, 1894, Harvey folder, HCFFM.

37. AC, Autobiography, 223; Peacock to AC, April 25, 1912, vol. 205; AC to Peacock, April 30, 1912, vol. 206,
ACLC.

38. Montgomery, 41–42.

39. Hogan, I, 87; Warren, American Steel Industry, 177; Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 384, table 4; “Net
profits of the Carnegie Association,” vol. 73, ACLC.

40. Montgomery, 40–42; Brody, 43–45.

41. Dreiser, Newspaper Days, 499–502, 524.

42. Bridge, Inside History, 81; Brody, 105.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX: “BE OF GOOD CHEER—WE WILL BE OVER IT SOON,” 1893–1895

1. AC to Cleveland, April 22, 1893, vol. 20, ACLC.

2. Strouse, 320; Steve Fraser, Every Man a Speculator: A History of Wall Street in American Life (New York:
HarperCollins, 2005), 162.

3. Hogan, I, 184–86.

4. AC to HCF, May 27, 1893, box 4, folder 10, HCFUP.

5. AC to HCF, June 6, 17, 1893; Morris Reno to AC, June 27, 1893, box 4, folder 11, HCFUP; Schickel, 71.

6. AC to HCF, August 1, 1893, box 4, folder 12, HCFUP.

7. HCF to AC, August 7, 1893, box 4, folder 13, HCFUP.

8. AC to HCF, August 8, 1893, box 4, folder 12, HCFUP.

9. Damrosch to AC, n. d.; Caroline Vandevort to AC, n. d..; Lauder to AC, Oct. 11, 1893; C. Scribner to AC,
November 1, 1893, vol. 22, ACLC.

10. AC to HCF, Oct. 3, 1893, box 4, folder 14, HCFUP.

11. Hogan, I, 237; The Carnegie Steel Company, Limited. Accounting Department, “Net Profits of the Carnegie
Associations,” vol. 73, ACLC; Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, table 7, 386.

12. AC to Morley, December 17, 1893, vol. 23, ACLC.

13. AC to HCF, December 26, 1893, box 4, folder 15, HCFUP.

14. AC to HCF, December 26, 28, 1893, box 4, folder 15, HCFUP.

15. AC to HCF, December 29, 1893, box 4, folder 15, HCFUP.

16. HCF to AC, December 28, 1893, box 4, folder 15, HCFUP.

17. AC to HCF, January 1, 1894, box 5, folder 1, HCFUP.

18. AC to HCF, January 1, 1894, box 5, folder 1, HCFUP.

19. AC to HCF, rec’d Jan. 5, 1894, box 5, folder 1, HCFUP.

20. Elizabeth Sanders, Roots of Reform: Farmers, Workers and the American State, 1877–1917 (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1999), 134–35.

21. AC to HCF, December 18, 1892, box 4, folder 10, HCFUP.

22. AC to Dalzell, December 6, 1893; AC to Morley, December 17, 1893, vol. 23, ACLC.

23. AC to Gorman, with attachment, January 2, 1894, vol. 24, ACLC.

24. AC to Reid, January 3, 1894, vol. 24, ACLC.

25. AC to “My Dear Mr. Editor,” January 3, 1894, vol. 24, ACLC.

26. Bensel, 480.

27. AC to HCF, February 13, 1894, vol. 24, ACLC.

28. AC to HCF, February 18, 1894, box 5, folder 1; February 28, box 5, folder 2, HCFUP.

29. AC to Hew Morrison, May 10, 1894, vol. 25, ACLC.

30. Hew Morrison to AC, May 31, 1894, vol. 25, ACLC.

31. AC to HCF, May 27, 1894, Harvey folder, HCFFM.

32. AC to HCF, June 2, 1894, box 5, folder 5, HCFUP.

33. Sanger, 224.

34. AC to HCF, July 2, 1894, box 5, folder 6, HCFUP.

35. Hessen, 57–58.

36. AC to HCF, October 23, 1894, box 5, folder 8, HCFUP.

37. AC to HCF, July 16, 1894, box 5, folder 5, HCFUP.

38. AC to HCF, October 11, 1894, box 5, folder 7, HCFUP.

39. HCF to AC, November 30, 1894, Special Correspondence, box 1; HCF to Quay, November 23, 1894, vol. 10,
HCFFM.

40. HCF to Stone, October 30, 1894; HCF to Hunsiker, November 8, 1894, Special Correspondence, box 5, HCFFM.

41. HCF to Schwab, November 12, 16, 1894; HCF to Gayley, November 16, 1894; HCF to Thomas Morrison, November
19, 1894; HCF to A. R. Whitney, November 17, 1894, Special Correspondence, box 5, HCFFM.

42. AC to HCF, November 26, 1894, box 5, folder 8, HCFUP.

43. HCF to AC [December 17, 1894], Special Correspondence, box 1, HCFFM.

44. AC to HCF, December 18, 1894 (1), box 5, folder 9, HCFUP.

45. AC to HCF, December 18, 1894 (2), box 5, folder 9, HCFUP.

46. HCF to AC, December 20, 1894 (2 letters), Special Correspondence, box 1, HCFFM.

47. AC to Phipps, December 30, 1894, HCFFM; AC to HCF, December 23, 1894, box 5, folder 10, HCFUP.

48. AC to HCF, December 23, 1894, vol. 10, HCFFM.

49. HCF to Walker, December 26, 1894, vol. 10, HCFFM.

50. HCF to AC, December 28, 1894, Special Correspondence, box 1, HCFFM.

51. HCF to AC, December 30, 1894, Special Correspondence, box 1, HCFFM.

52. AC to Phipps, December 30, 1894, HCFFM.

53. HCF to AC, January 1, 1895, Special Correspondence, box 1, HCFFM.

54. AC to HCF, January 5, 1895, box 5, folder 11, HCFUP.

55. HCF to Morse, January 11, 1895, HCF, vol. 10, HCFFM.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN: SIXTY YEARS OLD, 1895–1896

1. Warren Zimmerman, First Great Triumph (New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2002), 153; Nathan Miller,
Theodore Roosevelt: A Life (New York: William Morrow, 1992), 235.

2. Jonathan M. Hansen, The Lost Promise of Patriotism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003), 13–15.

3. AC, letters to editor, The Times (London), December 23, 1895; New York Sun, n. d., vol. 35, ACLC.

4. AC, “The Venezuelan Question,” North American Review (February 1896), in MW, II, 39–40.

5. Ibid., 44, 46.

6. Ibid., 52–53.

7. See, e.g., AC to Gladstone, Balfour, Chamberlain, etc., July 1896, vol. 38, ACLC.

8. AC to Gladstone, July 25, 1896; AC to Morley, August 1, 1896, vol. 38, ACLC.

9. The following record of the event—and transcript of the speeches given—is taken from “Presentation of the
Carnegie Library to the People with a Description of the Dedicatory Exercises, November 5, 1895,” reprinted as
“The Best Use of Wealth,” MW, 203–18.

10. AC to Frew, October 1897, vol. 46, ACLC.

11. Pamphlet, n. d. [1896], CLP; Agnes Dodds Kinard, Celebrating the First 100 Years of The Carnegie in
Pittsburgh: 1895–1995 (n. p., 1995), 82, 97.

12. AC to Frew, December 5, 1896, box 1, Carnegie correspondence, CLP.

13. Tom Rea, Bone Wars: The Excavation and Celebrity of Andrew Carnegie’s Dinosaur (Pittsburgh: University of
Pittsburgh Press, 2001), 40–41.

14. Ibid., 42–43.

15. Ibid., 95–97.

16. AC to Frew, October 4, 1900, box 1, ACCLP.

17. AC to Frew, n. d. [April 1907], ACCLP.

18. AC to Lovejoy, February 11, 1895, vol. 30, ACLC.

19. AC to Lovejoy, December 9, 1895, vol. 35, ACLC.

20. AC to Leishman, February 4, 1896, vol. 36, ACLC.

21. AC to Schwab, October 18, 1897, vol. 46, ACLC.

22. “Minutes of September 25,” with AC’s “Thoughts on Minutes, from September 14, [1897],” vol. 45, ACLC.

23. “Minutes of October 5,” with AC’s “Further Notes on Minutes of August 31, [1897],” vol. 45, ACLC.

24. AC to Schwab, October 1, 1897, vol. 45, ACLC.

25. Schwab to AC, October 5, 1897, vol. 45, ACLC.

CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT: “AN IMPREGNABLE POSITION,” 1896–1898

1. AC to HCF, June 27, 1896, vol. 38, ACLC.

2. AC to HCF, July 28, 1896, vol. 38, ACLC.

3. Hanna to AC, n. d., vol. 39, ACLC.

4. AC to Morley, August 1, 1896, vol. 36, ACLC.

5. AC to Hanna, August 12, Hanna to AC, October 17, 1896, vol. 39, ACLC.

6. AC to President and Board of Managers, August 6, 1896, vol. 38, ACLC.

7. AC to Singer, August 21, 1896, vol. 39, ACLC.

8. AC to Thomson, September 26, 1896, vol. 39, ACLC.

9. AC, “Mr. Bryan the Conjurer,” North American Review (January 1897): 117–18.

10. AC to HCF, August 29, 1892, box 4, folder 3, HCFUP.

11. Chernow, 382–86.

12. AC to HCF, March 16, 1894, in Harvey, 190.

13. AC to HCF, September 4, 1894, vol. 5, folder 6, HCFUP.

14. Rockefeller to AC, January 29, 1896, vol. 36, ACLC.

15. U.S. Steel, 2392.

16. AC to HCF, October 27, 1896, box 5, folder 14, HCFUP; AC to Rockefeller, October 30, 1896, vol. 39, ACLC.

17. AC to Dod, November 18, 1896, vol. 39, ACLC; on final negotiations, see box 5, folder 15, HCFUP; Chernow,
387–88.

18. AC to HCF, October 9, 1897, Harvey folder, HCFFM; AC to Dod, January 1, 1898, vol. 48, ACLC.

19. U. S. Steel, 2392; NYT, January 11, 1912, 1; Cartoon collection, Margaret Barclay Wilson Collection.

20. Rockefeller to AC, February 2, 1903, vol. 94, ACLC.

21. AC to Rockefeller, February 8, 1903, vol. 94, ACLC.

22. AC to HCF, February 7, 1896, HCFFM.

23. HCF to AC, February 22, 1896, box 5, folder 13, HCFUP.

24. AC, “My Experience with, and Views upon, The Tariff,” Century (March, 1908), reprinted as “Railway Rates
and Rebates” in Andrew Carnegie Reader, 86; “Copy of Memo,” May 11, 1896, vol. 38, ACLC.

25. AC to HCF, October 9, 1897, HCFFM.

26. Carnegie Steel Co., “Net Profits of the Carnegie Association,” vol. 73, ACLC; AC to HCF, June 13, 1898,
HCFFM.

27. AC to HCF, April 30, 1898, HCFFM.

28. AC to Leishman, August 21, 1896, ACLC.

29. Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 387, Table 8.

30. AC, “The Advantages of Poverty,” 75.

31. “Presentation of the Carnegie Library…” in MW, II, 209.

CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE: “WE NOW WANT TO TAKE ROOT,” 1897–1898

1. AC to HCF, rec’d, January 22, 1890, box 2, folder 4, HCFUP.

2. AC, Autobiography, 209.

3. AC to HCF, box 3, folder 2, January 26, February 9, 1891, HCFUP.

4. Hendrick and Henderson, 143.

5. Linda Hills, March 2, 2005, private communication, in author’s possession.

6. AC to Dod, November 18, 1896, vol. 39, ACLC.

7. Francis Whiting Halsey, American Authors and Their Homes (New York: James Pott & Co., 1901), 237–42.

8. AC to Gladstone, February 3, 1897, vol. 41, ACLC.

9. Spencer to AC, December 16, 1896, vol. 40, ACLC.

10. AC to Spencer, January 5, 1897, vol. 41, ACLC.

11. Finegan to Church, March 9, 1897, box 1, ACCLP.

12. AC to HCF, February 15, March 1, 1897, box 5, folder 16, HCFUP; AC to Frew, March 6, 1897, box 1, ACCLP.

13. LWC to Ross, March 20, 1897, vol. 41, ACLC.

14. AC, Autobiography, 209.

15. AC to LWC, n. d., in Hendrick and Henderson, 144–45.

16. LCW to Stella Whitfield, n. d., in ibid., 145.

17. HCF to AC, April 30, 1897, box 5, folder 16; AC to HCF, May 8, 1897, box 5, folder 17, HCFUP.

18. AC to Dod, May 31, 1897, vol. 42, ACLC.

19. AC to Gladstone, June 19, 1897, Gladstone.

20. AC to HCF, June 14, 1897, vol. 42, ACLC.

21. HCF to AC, July 6, 1897, box 5, folder 17, HCFUP.

22. Margaret Carnegie Miller, Margaret Carnegie Miller Her Journals, ed. Linda Thorell Hills (2000), 1.

23. LWC to AC, n. d., Hendrick and Henderson, 147.

24. Hendrick and Henderson, 147.

25. See Carnegie Steel, board minutes, June–September, 1897, vols. 42–44, ACLC.

26. Phipps to AC, Sept 25, 1897, vol. 45, ACLC.

27. AC to Phipps, September 29, 1897, box 5, folder 17, HCFUP.

28. AC to HCF, October 9, 1897, HCFFM.

29. Carnegie Steel, board minutes, October 19, 1897, vol. 46, ACLC; HCF to AC, June 10, 1898, box 6, folder 5,
HCFUP.

30. AC to Walter Damrosch, November 11, 1897, box 2, folder 13, D-BLC.

31. AC to Hew Morrison, November 16, 1897, vol. 46, ACLC.

32. LCW to Eaton, n. d., in Hendricks and Henderson, 147.

33. AC to Hew Morrison, October 22, 1897, vol. 46, ACLC.

34. AC to Hew Morrison, November 16, 1897, vol. 46, ACLC.

35. Hendrick interview with Bertram, September 24–27, 1927, vol. 256, ACLC.

36. “Mr. Carnegie’s Gifts,” vol. 48, ACLC.

37. Phipps to AC, copy, June 2, 1895; Dod to AC, copy, June 12, 1896, vol. 32, ACLC.

38. AC to Mander, January 16, 1896, vol. 35; Gladstone to AC, January 4, 1897, Gladstone, ACLC; AC to
Gladstone, February 3, 1897, vol. 41, ACLC.

39. AC to HCF, March 29, 1898, box 6, folder 3, HCFUP.

40. AC to HCF, April 23, 1898, vol. 51, ACLC.

41. AC, RTW, 255.

42. AC to Hew Morrison, June 29, 1898, vol. 53, ACLC.

43. LCW to Eaton, n. d., in Hendrick and Henderson, 152–53; author’s interview with Margaret Thomson, June
2004, Clashmore, Scotland.

44. Morley to AC, July 25, 1898, vol. 53, ACLC.

45. Bridge to AC, December 14, 1893, vol. 23, ACLC.

46. Bridge to AC, August 5, 1898, vol. 54, ACLC.

47. AC to Stead, September [1903], vol. 99, ACLC.

48. AC to Miles, n. d., vol. 53, ACLC; Nelson Miles, Serving the Republic (New York: Harper & Bros., 1911),
273–74.

49. AC, “Distant Possessions: The Parting of the Ways,” North American Review (August 1898), in Andrew
Carnegie Reader, 296.

50. Ibid., 301–2.

51. Ibid., 299–300.

52. John Morley, Recollections, vol. II (New York: Macmillan, 1917), 110–11.

CHAPTER THIRTY: THE ANTI-IMPERIALIST, 1898–1899

1. AC to Schurz, October 24, 1898, vol. 55, ACLC.

2. Godkin to AC, November 1, 1898, vol. 56, ACLC.

3. NYT, October 26, 1898, 3.

4. AC to Hay, November 24, 1898, Hay.

5. AC to McKinley, November 28, 1896, vol. 57, ACLC.

6. Hay to Reid, November 29, 1898, in Thayer, John Hay, II, 188–89.

7. AC to Godkin, November 26, 1898, vol. 57, ACLC.

8. Chandler, 332; Naomi R. Lamoreaux, The Great Merger Movement in American Business, 1895–1904 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1985), 1–2.

9. Chandler, 332.

10. Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 225.

11. HCF to AC, May 12, 1898, vol. 51, ACLC.

12. Dod to AC, June 24, 1898, vol. 52, ACLC.

13. Phipps to HCF, November 23, 28, 1898, in Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 227.

14. Dod to Phipps, November 28, 1898, in ibid., 228.

15. Herbert Myrick to AC, December 6, 1898, vol. 58, ACLC; Clem Studebaker to AC, December 17, 1898; Doubleday
to AC, December 12, 1898, vol. 59, ACLC.

16. AC to Schurz, December 27, 1898, vol. 59, ACLC.

17. NYTr, December 22, 1898.

18. Bryan to AC, December 24, 1898, vol. 59, ACLC.

19. Bryan to AC, December 30, 1898, vol. 59, ACLC.

20. AC to Hay, December 29, 1898, Hay.

21. AC to Hay, December 27, 1898, Hay.

22. AC, “Americanism Versus Imperialism,” North American Review (January 1899): 1–13.

23. The story first appeared in print in the New York Times on May 16, 1902.

24. AC, “Americanism Versus Imperialism—II,” North American Review (March 1899): 362–72.

25. HCF to AC, December 27, 1898, box 6, folder 5, HCFUP; Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 229; HCF to AC,
December 30, 1898, HCFFM.

26. AC to HCF, rec’d January 24, 1899, box 6, folder 6, HCFUP.

27. Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 232–33.

28. U.S. Steel, 2343.

29. HCF, Phipps to AC, May 4; HCF, Phipps to AC, May 10, 1899, Special Correspondence, box 2, HCFFM.

30. HCF to Schoonmaker, May 16, 1899, Special Correspondence, box 2, HCFFM.

31. HCF, Phipps to AC, May 20, 1899, Special Correspondence, box 2, HCFFM.

32. HCF to AC, May 23, 1899, Special Correspondence, box 2, HCFFM.

33. HCF to Moore, May 29, June 2, 1899, Special Correspondence, box 2, HCFFM.

34. Hendrick and Henderson, 154–55.

35. The following description of that summer at Skibo comes largely from Stead, Mr. Carnegie’s Conundrum: £
40,000,000: What Shall I Do With It? (London: Review of Reviews, 1900), 54–57.

36. AC to Dod, June 23, 1899; HCF, Phipps to Schwab, June 24, 1899, in Carnegie Steel, board minutes, June 27,
1899, vol. 66, ACLC.

37. Phipps to HCF, July 15, 1899, in Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 238–39.

38. Stead, Mr. Carnegie’s Conundrum, 58.

39. A copy of the ms can be found in ACBM.

40. AC, “The South African Question,” North American Review (December 1899): 788–804.

41. AC to Harcourt, September 21, 1899, Harcourt.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE: “THE RICHEST MAN IN THE WORLD,” 1899–1901

1. Carnegie Steel, board minutes, September 11, 1899, vol. 68, ACLC.

2. Carnegie Steel, board minutes, October 16, 1899, vol. 69, ACLC.

3. H. C. Frick Coke, board minutes, October 25, 1899, vol. 70, ACLC; Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 245–47. I
am indebted to Kenneth Warren’s discussion of the Frick-Carnegie conflict.

4. Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 245.

5. HCF to AC, November 18, 1899, box 6, folder 7, HCFUP.

6. AC to HCF, November 20, 1899, in Carnegie Steel, board minutes, November 20, 1899, vol. 70, ACLC.

7. AC to HCF, November 21, 1899, box 6, folder 7, HCFUP.

8. Dod to AC, November 24, 1899, vol. 70, ACLC.

9. AC to Dod, November 25, 1899, vol. 70, ACLC.

10. Schwab to AC, November 27, 1899, vol. 70, ACLC, Warren, Triumphant Capitalism, 253.

11. Ibid., 253–4.

12. AC to Board of Managers, December 30, 1899, vol. 60, ACLC.

13. AC to HCF, December 1899, box 6, folder 7, HCFUP.

14. Harvey, 227–30.

15. Hendrick, II, 104.

16. HCF to Lovejoy, January 16, 1900, Special Correspondence, box 11, HCFFM.

17. Frick complaint, February 13, 1900, in U.S. Steel, 2579–80.

18. Ibid., 2573–81.

19. “Response by The Carnegie Steel Co. (Ltd.),” U. S. Steel, 2550–68.

20. AC to Dod, March 4, 1900, vol. 73, ACLC.

21. Westinghouse to AC, February 8, 1900, vol. 73, ACLC.

22. Church to AC, March 13, 1900, box 1, ACCLP.

23. Charter of Carnegie Company, March 22, 1900, vol. 73, ACLC; Bridge, Inside History, 348–53.

24. HCF to A. R. Whitney, n. d., in Harvey, 256.

25. HCF to AC, n. d., in ibid., 257.

26. Sanger, 285; Frew to AC, April 7, 1900, box 1, ACCLP.

27. AC to Morley, December 17, 1899, vol. 70, ACLC.

28. AC to Schwab, June 26, July 7, 1900, in Carnegie Company, board minutes, July 9, 1900, vol. 76, ACLC.

29. AC to Schwab, July 11, 1900, in Carnegie Company, board minutes, July 31, 1900, vol. 76, ACLC.

30. Hessen, 121–2.

31. Carnegie Company, board minutes, November 6, 1900, vol. 79, ACLC.

32. AC to Dod, December 8, 1900, vol. 80, ACLC.

33. Hendrick, II, 131.

34. Hendrick interview with Schwab, box 257, ACLC.

35. Ibid.; U.S. Steel, 1278–79.

36. Hendrick, II, 139; Hendrick interview with Bertram, vol. 256, ACLC.

37. AC to Morley, February 3, 1901, vol. 81, ACLC.

38. Carnegie Company, board minutes, February 4, 1901, vol. 81, ACLC.

39. Clemens to AC, February 6, 1901, Twain.

40. AC to Messrs. J. P. Morgan & Company, February 26, 1901; AC to Dod, February 26, 1901, vol. 82, ACLC.

41. AC to Dod, March 4, 1901, vol. 82, ACLC.

42. AC to Dod, March 5, 12, 1901, vol. 82, ACLC.

43. Brody, 61–68.

44. Andrew S. Dolkart, Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution, 2002),
n. p.

45. AC to Dod, February 26, 1901, vol. 82, ACLC.

46. AC to Dod, March 4, 1901, vol. 82, ACLC.

47. AC to Managers of the Carnegie Company, March 12, 1901, vol. 82, ACLC.

48. AC to Billings, March 12, 1901, ACNYPL.

49. The following discussion is based on Mary B. Dierickx, The Architecture of Literacy: The Carnegie
Libraries of New York City (New York: Cooper Union and NYC Department of General Services, 1996), 15–47.

50. Robert A. M. Stern, et al., New York 1900 (New York: Rizzoli, 1983), 98–101.

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO: “THE SADDEST DAYS OF ALL,” 1901

1. AC, unpublished draft of Autobiography [1911], CBMD.

2. AC to Morley, February 3, 1901, vol. 81, ACLC; Jones, 26.

3. NYT, March 21, 22, 1901.

4. Miller, 2; NYT, May 4, 2001, 2.

5. Miller, 2.

6. AC to Morley, April 9, 1901, vol. 82, ACLC.

7. Lord Shaw [of] Dunfermline, Letters to Isabel (New York: George H. Doran Co., n. d.), 151–70.

8. Scotsman, May 20, 1901, CTUS.

9. Balfour to AC, May 21, 1901, vol. 83, ACLC.

10. Morley to AC, April 17, 1901; AC to Morley, April 19, 1901, vol. 82, ACLC.

11. AC to Morley, May 31, 1901, June 24, 1901, vol. 83, ACLC.

12. AC to Lord Elgin, June 7, 1901, Carnegie University Trust Papers, Elgin.

13. Holls to White, August 26, 1901, White.

14. Bridge to AC, July 23, 1901, vol. 83, ACLC.

15. AC, Autobiography, 263.

16. Frew to AC, December 20, 1900, box 1, ACCLP; Simon Goodenough, The Greatest Good Fortune (Edinburgh:
Macdonald, 1985), 65, 69.

17. AC to White, April 26, 1901, vol. 82, ACLC.

18. Andrew Dickson White, Autobiography of Andrew Dickson White (New York: Century Co., 1905), vol. II, 201.

19. Acton to Hew Morrison, February 5, 1901, vol. 8, ACLC.

20. Joseph Wall, Skibo (New York: Oxford University Press, 1984), 70–71.

21. Hendrick interview with Bertram, September 24–28, 1927, vol. 256, ACLC.

22. Stead, Mr. Carnegie’s Conundrum, 54–55; Spencer to AC, September 2, 1901, vol. 84, ACLC.

23. AC to C-B, June 25, 1901, C-B; AC to Morley, June 24, 1901, vol. 83, ACLC.

24. AC to C-B, November 21, 1901, C-B.

25. Rosebery to AC, December 6, 1901, Rosebery.

26. AC to Strachey, October 21, 1901, Strachey.

27. AC to Dod, September 26, 1901, vol. 84, ACLC.

28. AC to Clemens, November 19, 1901, Twain.

29. Clemens to AC, November 21, 1901, Twain.

30. Hendrick interview with Bertram, box 256, ACLC.

31. George Bobinski, Carnegie Libraries (Chicago: American Library Association, 1969), 203–05.

32. Hendrick interview with Bertram, vol. 256, ACLC; Jones, 25–29; Bobinski, 43, 45, 52–53; “Daily Register of
Donations,” series IC, box 4, CCNY.

33. Jones, 127–66; AC to James Thomson, January 3, 1903, in Bobinski, 14–15.

34. NYT, January 8, 1903.

35. Jones, 127–66; Robert M. Lester, Forty Years of Carnegie Giving (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1941),
93.

36. William T. Stead, “Mr. Carnegie As I Know Him,” Christian Endeavor World, December 18, 1902, in Margaret
Barclay Wilson Collection.

37. A Manual of the Public Benefactions of Andrew Carnegie (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, 1919), 301–3, 320–21.

38. “Daily Register of Donations,” series IC, box 1, CCNY.

39. AC, “Bryan or McKinley?: The Presidential Election—Our Duty,” North American Review (October 1900):
495–507.

40. AC to Dod, September 26, 1901, vol. 84, ACLC.

41. AC to White, June 23, 1900, vol. 76, ACLC.

42. AC to TR, November 28, 1901, Roosevelt.

43. AC to TR, December 2, 1901, Roosevelt.

44. NYT, December 10, 15, 1901; Manual of the Public Benefactions, 79–80; AC to Hay, December 27, 1901, Hay;
AC to TR, December 27, 1901, Roosevelt.

45. TR to AC, December 31, 1901, Roosevelt.

46. AC to Elgin, January 10, 1902, Elgin.

47. AC to C-B, January 10, 1902, C-B.

48. James Bryant Conant, “Andrew Carnegie as Patron of Learning,” Andrew Carnegie Centenary, 1835–1935 (New
York: Carnegie Corporation of New York, 1935), 82; Ellen Condliffe Lagemann, The Politics of Knowledge: The
Carnegie Corporation, Philanthropy, and Public Policy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989), 37;
Goodenough, 103.

49. AC, Autobiography, 251.

50. Carnegie Institution, Year Book, 2003–4 (Washington, DC, 2005).

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE: “A FINE PIECE OF FRIENDSHIP,” 1902–1905

1. Rockefeller, Jr., to AC, August 13, 1902, vol. 90; AC to Morley, October 1, 1902, vol. 91, ACLC.

2. Hendrick, II, 172.

3. Wall, Skibo, 176–77; Miller, 2–3.

4. LWC to Franks, September 15, 1902, vol. 92, ACLC.

5. AC to Holland, October 2, 1902, in Rea, 164; Rea, 177, 187.

6. AC to Avebury, June 10, 1902, Avebury.

7. Doubleday to Church, June 9, 1902, box 2, ACCLP.

8. Doubleday to Church, June 16, 1902, box 2, ACCLP.

9. Church to Doubleday, June 16, 24, 1902, box 2, ACCLP.

10. Alderson to Bertram, October 20, 1902, vol. 91, ACLC.

11. Joaquin Miller to AC, July 21, 1902, vol. 90, ACLC.

12. William T. Stead, “Mr. Carnegie as I Know Him,” Christian Endeavor World, December 18, 1902, in Margaret
Barclay Wilson Collection.

13. AC to Holls, April 4, 1902, Holls.

14. AC to TR, April 30, 1902, Roosevelt.

15. TR to AC, June 13, 1902, Roosevelt.

16. NYT, July 28, 1902, 1.

17. AC to Adams, August 8, 1902, box 8, Adams.

18. AC to TR, August 11, 1902, vol. 90, ACLC.

19. Adams to AC, September 26, 1902, vol. 91, ACLC.

20. AC to Morley, n. d. [late summer 1902], JMBL, O; AC to Butler, April 26, 1902; Butler to AC, April 28,
1902, box 68, Butler.

21. AC to Morley, n. d. [late summer 1902], JMBL, O.

22. Mark Twain in Eruption, ed. Bernard DeVoto (1922; New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1940), 43–44.

23. AC to Swank, March 3, 1904, vol. 101, ACLC.

24. AC to Morley, September 7, 1902; AC to Dod, October 1, 1902, vol. 91, ACLC.

25. Morley to AC, October 4, 1902, vol. 91, ACLC.

26. AC, “A Confession of Religious Faith,” MW, II, 293.

27. Pitcairn to AC, May 31, 1898, vol. 52, ACLC.

28. Shaw, 145.

29. AC to Haldane, May 23, 1902, Haldane.

30. AC, “A Confession of Religious Faith,” MW, II, 296–97, 300, 302–03, 311.

31. AC, “A Rectorial Address…22 October, 1902” in MW, I, 87–88, 118–19.

32. Ibid., 122–24.

33. Ibid., 124–25.

34. AC to Morley, October 18, 1902, vol. 91, ACLC.

35. The following discussion owes much to Robert A. M. Stern, et al., New York 1900, 342; a good deal of the
discussion of the Carnegie residence comes from Dolkart, Cooper-Hewitt.

36. Hendrick, II, 267.

37. NYT, December 28, 1906, 9; June 12, 1904,[Sunday Magazine] 1; October 15, 1905, [Sunday Magazine] 4.

38. NYT, January 8, 1903.

39. Morley, Recollections, II, 110.

40. AC to Gilder, January 18, 1904, vol. 102, ACLC.

41. Clemens to AC, n. d., February 10, 1906, January 22, 1908, April 28, 1908, March 26, 1909, Twain.

42. Cleveland to AC, December 16, 1905, Cleveland.

43. Clemens to Miss Carnegie, May 28, 1900, box 3, ACAC; Fred Kaplan, The Singular Mark Twain (New York:
Doubleday, 2003), 576–77.

44. Hendrick interview with Hew Morrison, August 7–8, 1927, vol. 257, ACLC.

45. Cleveland to AC, January 13, 1902, Cleveland.

46. Hendrick interview with Hew Morrison, August 7–8, 1927, vol. 257, ACLC.

47. Ibid.

48. AC to Gladstone, June 10, 1890, Gladstone; AC to Gladstone, June 13, 1890, in Hendrick, I, 355–56; White
to AC, July 10, 1902, vol. 90, ACLC.

49. Morley to AC, July 17, 1902, vol. 90, ACLC.

50. AC to Morley, July 22, 1902, JMBL, O.

51. Morley to AC, July 27, 1902, JMBL, O.

52. AC to Clevelands, January 11, 1904, Cleveland.

53. Hendrick interview of Abbott, vol. 257, ACLC.

54. AC to Schwab, AC to Morgan, January 14, 1902, in Hessen, 134–35.

55. Schwab to AC, March 19, 1902, vol. 88, ACLC.

56. Schwab to AC, [misdated] July 28, [1902], vol. 90, ACLC.

57. AC to Schwab, March 22, 1906, in Hessen, 176–77.

58. AC to Clemens, August 9, 1905, Twain.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR: “APOSTLE OF PEACE,” 1903–1904

1. AC to Morley, March 29, 1903, vol. 95, ACLC.

2. AC to C-B, August 10, 1903, C-B.

3. AC to Morley, March 29, 1903, vol. 95, ACLC.

4. AC to Gentlemen of the Commission, August 2, 1903, in Manual of the Public Benefactions, 244–45.

5. Goodenough, 118–20.

6. Miller to AC, April 7, 1903, vol. 95, ACLC.

7. Bridge, Millionaires, 76–79.

8. AC to private secretary to Mr. Spencer, August 15, 1903, Bertram.

9. AC to Stead, [September] 1903, vol. 99, ACLC.

10. Bridge to Phipps, February 12, 1904, vol. 103, ACLC.

11. Shaw, 163.

12. Mark Twain in Eruption, 36–52.

13. Spencer, Social Statics (1870), 511.

14. AC to TR, December 26, 1902; “Mr. Carnegie’s New Year Greeting,” Roosevelt.

15. AC to Hay, December 30, 1902, Hay.

16. AC to Adams, February 7, 1903, Adams.

17. AC to Holls, AC to Baron Gevers, April 22, 1903, Holls.

18. AC to Platt, January 13, February 14, 1902, in NYTr, February 17, 1902.

19. Walter LaFeber, The Panama Canal (New York: Oxford University Press, 1979), 33.

20. AC to Morley, January 11, 18, 1904, vol. 102, ACLC.

21. AC to Morley, January 11, 1904, vol. 102, ACLC; TR to AC, February 15, 1904, Roosevelt.

22. NYT, March 10, 1904.

23. AC to TR, March 11, 1904, Roosevelt.

24. Miller, 8–9.

25. AC to Morley, February 8, 1904, vol. 103, ACLC.

26. AC to Dod, May 29, 1904, vol. 105, ACLC.

27. AC to Donaldson, June 29, 1904, vol. 105, ACLC.

28. AC to Morley, June 29, 1904, vol. 105, ACLC.

29. AC to Morley, July 26, 1904; Gilder to AC, August 2, 1904, vol. 106, ACLC.

30. AC to Morley, July 28, 1904, vol. 105, ACLC.

31. AC to Morley, January 4, 11, 1904, vol. 102, August 28, 1904, vol. 106, ACLC.

32. William Griffith, “Andrew Carnegie, Apostle of Peace,” NYT, November 6, 1904 [Sunday Magazine], 1.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE: “INVETERATE OPTIMIST,” 1905–1906

1. NYT, November 11, 1905, 9; October 29, 1906, 1; October 30, 1906, 3.

2. NYT, December 13, 1904, 2; March 5, 1905, 1; David Loth, Gold Brick Cassie (New York: Fawcett Publications,
1954), 57–172.

3. Samuel Clemens, “The Alphabet and Simplified Spelling,” Portable Mark Twain, ed. Tom Quirk (New York:
Penguin, 2004), 552.

4. Goodenough, 223.

5. AC to Frederic Harrison, June 8, 1904, vol. 105, ACLC; AC, Autobiography, 253.

6. Frederick Lynch, “Personal Recollections of Andrew Carnegie,” (1920) at http://www.xooqi.com.

7. AC, Autobiography, 255.

8. A Century of Heroes, 3, 36–37, 57, 61; Mary Brignano, “Ordinary People, Extraordinary Courage,” Western
Pennsylvania History (Spring 2004): 16.

9. AC to TR, February 5 [1905], Roosevelt.

11. Morley to AC, September 5, 1905, JMBL.

12. AC to Morley, September 7, 1905, JMBL.

13. AC, “A League of Peace,” October 17, 1905, in MW, II, 222, 258, 267–70.

14. AC to Dod, March 15, 1905, vol. 112, ACLC; Warren F. Kuehl, Seeking World Order: The United Sates and
International Organization to 1920 (Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press, 1969), 89.

15. AC to Morley, November 1, 1905, JMBL.

16. AC to Trustees of Carnegie Teachers Pension Fund, April 16, 1905, vol. 114, ACLC; AC to White, July 2,
1909, with attachment, White.

17. Joseph Frazier Wall, Andrew Carnegie (1970; Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1989), 877.

18. AC to Morley, November 2, 1905, JMBL; author’s conversations with Linda Hills and Margaret Thomson, July
2005; Nancy Carnegie Rockefeller, The Carnegies & Cumberland Island (Privately printed, 1993), 27–28.

19. AC to Morley, November 2, 1905, JMBL.

20. Miller, 3–4.

21. NYTr, November 11, 1905.

22. AC to Morley, March 21, 1906, JMBL.

23. AC to Morley, December 17, 1905, JMBL.

24. TR to Reid, November 13, 1905, Roosevelt.

25. AC to Morley, December 17, 1905, JMBL.

26. AC to Bryce, December 28, 1905, Bryce.

27. AC to Morley, January 14, 1906, JMBL.

28. Miller, 4.

29. AC to Morley, January 14, 1906, JMBL.

30. AC to TR, March 18, 1906, Roosevelt. 10. TR to AC, February 6, 8, 1905, Roosevelt.

31. AC to Morley, March 21, 1906, JMBL.

32. AC to Morley, May 15, 1906, JMBL.

33. AC to Ross, May 18, 1906, vol. 129, ACLC.

34. AC to Morley, June 14, 1906, JMBL.

35. “Extract from Hon. Elihu Root’s letter of July 3, 1906,” in AC to Morley, July 16, 1906, JMBL.

36. AC to Morley, July 16, 1906, JMBL; AC to TR, July 27, 1906, Roosevelt.

37. TR to AC, August 6, 1906, Roosevelt.

38. AC to TR, August 27, 1906, Roosevelt.

39. AC to Morley, September 5, 1906, JMBL.

40. TR to AC, September 6, 1906, Roosevelt.

41. AC to Morley, two notes [September 1906]; September 19, 1906, JMBL.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX: PEACE CONFERENCES, 1907

1. AC to Morley, January 13, 1907, JMBL.

2. AC to TR, February 14, 1907, Roosevelt.

3. TR to AC, March 11, 1907, Roosevelt.

4. NYT, March 28, 1907.

5. Lynch, “Personal Recollections.”

6. NYT, April 6, 1907, 2.

7. Agnes Dodds Kinard, Celebrating the First 100 Years of The Carnegie in Pittsburgh (1905), 29–30; NYT, April
14, 1907, 1.

8. AC to TR, April 7, 1907, Roosevelt.

9. TR to AC, April 5, 1907, Roosevelt.

10. AC to TR, April 10, 1907, Roosevelt.

11. NYT, April 16, 1907, 1.

12. Lynch, “Personal Recollections.”

13. Ibid.

14. AC to Morley, May 16, 1907, JMBL.

15. AC to Morley [June 1907], JMBL.

16. Morley to AC, June 14, 1902, vol. 142, ACLC.

17. Robert K. Massie, Dreadnought: Britain, Germany, and the Coming of the Great War (New York: Random House,
1991), 157; Michael Balfour, The Kaiser and His Times (New York: Norton, 1972), 152.

18. AC to Margaret Carnegie, June 22, 1907, in Hendrick, II, 316.

19. AC to Wilhelm II, January 19, 1907, in ibid., 311–12.

20. AC to Clemens, [June] 28, 1908, Twain.

21. AC to TR, July 31, 1907, Roosevelt.

22. AC to TR, July 31, 1907, Roosevelt; AC to Morley [August 1907], JMBL.

23. AC to Morley [September, 1907], JMBL.

24. AC to Morley, October 25, 1907, JMBL.

25. AC to Morley, November 10, 1907, JMBL.

26. AC to TR, November 18, 1907, Roosevelt.

28. AC to Morley, November 28, 1907, JMBL.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN: TARIFFS AND TREATIES, 1908–1909

1. AC, “The Worst Banking System in the World,” 1908; NYT, February 6, 1908, 1; February 9, 1908, 7; March 27,
1908; AC to Morley, March 29, 1908, JMBL; NYT, April 28, 1908, 4.

2. AC to Morley, March 29, 1908, JMBL.

3. The Roosevelt Policy, Introduction by Andrew Carnegie (New York: Current Literature Publishing Company,
1908), vol. I, ix–x.

4. TR to AC, April 27, 1908, Roosevelt.

5. AC to His Majesty the Emperor, May 4, 1908, Roosevelt.

6. AC to Morley, April 24, 1908, JMBL.

7. Woodrow Wilson to Ellen Axson Wilson, August 16, 1908, in The Priceless Gift: The Love Letters of Woodrow
Wilson and Ellen Axson Wilson, ed. Eleanor Wilson McAdoo (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1962), 251–53.

8. AC, Problems of To-day: Wealth, Labor, Socialism, 1–2.

9. AC to Strachey, August 22, 1907, Strachey.

10. AC, Problems of To-day, 153, 155.

11. “Memorandum by Mr. Carnegie,” in AC to Easley, May 19, 1911, box 42, folder 4, NCF; NYT, March 16, 1904.

12. Easley to AC, March 13, 1907; AC to Easley, March 16, 1907, NCF.

13. Easley to AC, April 3, 1907, NCF.

14. AC to Easley, February 24, 28, 1908, NCF. 27. TR to AC, November 19, 1907, Roosevelt.

15. AC to Johnson, September 22, 1908, Century; AC, “My Experience with, and Views upon, the Tariff,” Century
magazine (December 1908), in MW, II, 42–44.

16. AC to Morley, December 6, 1908, JMBL.

17. Tariff, 1784.

18. Ibid., 1796.

19. Ibid., 1808.

20. Ibid., 1867.

21. NYT, December 22, 1908, 1.

22. Tariff, 1851–53.

23. TR to AC, August 6, 1906, Roosevelt.

24. AC to TR, November 15, 1908, Roosevelt.

25. AC to TR, March 3, 1909, Roosevelt.

26. AC to Morley, [January] 3, February 24, 1909, JMBL.

27. Archibald Willingham Butt, Taft and Roosevelt, The Intimate Letters of Archie Butt (Garden City, NY:
Doubleday, Doran, 1930), I, 215.

CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT: “SO BE IT,” 1908–1910

1. AC to TR, January 17, 28, 1908, Roosevelt.

2. AC to Jordan, n. d., vol. 136, ACLC.

3. AC to TR, January 28, 1908, Roosevelt.

4. AC to McConway, March 25, 1909, box 3, ACCLP.

5. Lynch, “Personal Recollections”; Booker T. Washington, Up from Slavery (1901; New York: Penguin, 1986),
191–92.

6. Washington to AC, February 24, 1903, vol. 94, ACLC; AC to Archer, August 15, 1910, Archer.

7. AC, “The Negro in America,” October 16, 1907, in MW, II, 88–122.

8. Andrew Carnegie’s donations to peace societies, taken over by Endowment, Secretary’s Office and
Administration, vol. 405, CEIP.

9. AC to Mead, April 2, 1905, box 1, Mead.

10. AC to Mead, April 6, 1905, box 1, Mead.

11. Butler to AC, January 8, 1909; AC to Butler, January 11, 1909, vol. 161, ACLC.

12. Miller, 6; Margaret Thomson to the author, July 18, 2005.

13. Honorary Secretary to AC, December 16, 1896, Hon. Sec’y to Hodgman, March 12, 1897, St. Andrew’s; George
Peper, “The Apple Tree Gang,” Golf (July 1988): 74.

14. Hendrick, II, 266–67; AC to Morley, December 31, 1907, JMBL.

15. NYT, December 30, 1900, 8; AC, “Doctor Golf” (1911), reprinted in Carnegie Magazine (July–August 1996):
18–20.

16. AC to Dod, June 16, 1903, vol. 97, ACLC; AC to Church, July 6, 1906, box 3, ACCLP.

17. Miller, 4; AC to Morley, March, 1909, April 25, December 19, 1909, JMBL.

18. NYT, February 15, 1910, 1.

19. Miller, 18–29; Walter Adams, cited in Goodenough, 103.

20. Miller, 29–32.

21. AC to Morley, April 19, 27, 1910, JMBL.

22. AC to Clemens, [May 22], 1909, Twain.

23. AC to Morley, December 19, 1909, JMBL.

24. AC to Paine, December 10, 1909, Paine.

25. AC to Clemens, April 16, 1910, Twain.

26. AC to Paine, April 28, 1910, Paine.

CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE: THE BEST LAID SCHEMES, 1909–1911

1. Massie, 609–15.

2. NYTr, March 14, 1909.

3. NYT, March 25, 1909, 1; AC, “Armaments and Their Results” (London: The Peace Society, 1909), 5.

4. NYT, April 22, 1909, 6.

5. AC to Morley, April 25, 1909, JMBL.

6. AC to Morley, May 15, 1909, JMBL; Miller, 9–10.

7. NYT, May 18, 1909, 1.

8. AC to Morley, June 20, 1909, JMBL.

9. AC to Morley, June 1909, JMBL.

10. TR to AC, June 1, 1909, in Theodore Roosevelt, Letters, select. and ed. Elting E. Morison (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1951–54), vol. VII, 13–15.

11. AC to Walcott, June 25, 1909, vol. 167, ACLC; Patricia O’Toole, When Trumpets Call: Theodore Roosevelt
After the White House (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2005), 54, 64.

12. AC to TR, June 26, 1909, vol. 167, ACLC.

13. TR to AC, July 26, 1909, in Morison, VII, 24–26.

14. AC to TR, October 6, 1909, vol. 170, ACLC.

15. AC to Morley, October 7, 1909, JMBL.

16. TR to AC, October 16, 1909, in Morison, VII, 36–37.

17. AC to Morley, October 22, 1909, JMBL.

18. AC to Franks, September 14, 1909, vol. 169, ACLC; TR to AC, December 14, 1909, in Morison, VII, 42.

19. AC to TR, December 24, 1909, vol. 172, ACLC.

20. AC to Morley, December 15, 1909, January 17, 1910, JMBL.

21. AC to TR, January 11, 1910, vol. 173, ACLC.

22. TR to AC, February 18, 1910, vol. 174, ACLC.

23. Ibid.; TR to AC, October 16, December 14, 1909, in Morison, VII, 36, 42.

24. TR to Trevelyan, October 1, 1911, in ibid., 377–78.

25. Much of my discussion of Roosevelt’s 1910 tour of Europe comes from O’Toole, 72–92; TR to AC, April 22,
1910, in Morison, VII, 75–76.

26. AC to TR, May 11, 1910, vol. 176, ACLC.

27. TR to Trevelyan, October 1, 1911, in Morison, VII, 394–95.

28. Ibid., 377.

29. Ibid., 379.

30. Ibid, 395–96.

31. AC to TR, May 13, 1910, Roosevelt.

32. AC to TR, May 13, 14, 1910, Roosevelt.

33. O’Toole, 89–90.

34. Larry Fabian, Andrew Carnegie’s Peace Endowment: The Tycoon, The President, and Their Bargain of 1910
(Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 1985), 12.

35. AC to Taft, March 26, 1910, vol. 175, ACLC.

36. AC, Speech at the Annual Meeting of the Peace Society in the Guildhall, reprinted as “Honor and
International Arbitration,” MW, II, 279–80, 288.

37. Taft to AC, June 30, 1910, Taft.

38. Kuehl, 130; AC to TR, June 30, 1910, Roosevelt.

39. Butt, I, 423; Taft to Knox, July 7, 1910, Taft.

40. Taft to AC, October 28, 1910, Taft.

41. AC to Taft, December 10, 1910, Taft.

42. “Mr. Carnegie’s Letter to the Trustees,” December 14, 1910, in A Manual…183–84.

43. “Address to Trustees,” in Proceedings of the First Meeting of the Trustees of the Carnegie Endowment, held
December 14, 1910, Secretary’s Office and Administration, vol. 402, CEIP.

44. Straus, Carnegie, and Root statements in ibid.

45. C. Roland Marchand, The American Peace Movement and Social Reform, 1895–1918 (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1972), 120–21.

46. AC to Taft, December 20, 1910, Taft.

47. AC to Knox, March 21, 1911, vol. 189, ACLC.

48. AC to Bryce, February 15, 1911, Bryce.

49. AC to Ginn, March 22, 1911, AC to James Brown Scott, April 15, 1911, Secretary’s Office and
Administration, vol. 405, CEIP.

50. AC to Bryce, March 25, 1911, Bryce.

51. AC to Taft, March 25, 1911, Taft.

52. Archie Butt, November 1, 1910, II, 553–54; April 30, 1911, ibid., 635.

53. Fabian, 48–49; AC to Taft, with file memo to Knox, March 25, 1911, Taft; Taft to Knox, Knox to AC, March
27, 1911, Knox.

54. Archie Butt, May 6, 1911, II, 640–41.

55. AC to Knox, May 19, 1911, vol. 14, Knox; AC to Taft, May 19, 1911, Taft.

56. John P. Campbell, “Taft, Roosevelt, and the Arbitration Treaties of 1911,” Journal of American History, 53
(September 1966): 284–85.

57. AC to TR, May 21, 1911, Roosevelt.

58. TR to AC, May 23, 1911, Roosevelt.

59. AC to TR, May 24, 1911, Roosevelt.

60. TR to Spring-Rice, August 22, 1911, in Morison, VII, 334.

61. AC to Lodge, September 12, 1911, in ibid., 343.

62. AC to Franks, May 24, 1911; AC to Hilles, June 13, 1911, Taft.

63. AC to Morley, June 29, 1911; Morley to AC, June 30, 1911; AC to Morley, July 2, 1911, vol. 195, ACLC.

64. AC to Murray, June 19, 1911, Murray.

65. AC to Strachey, June 13, 1911, Strachey.

66. AC to Taft, August 3, 4, 1911, Taft.

67. Campbell, 280–82; AC to Bryce, September 2, 1911, Bryce.

68. Taft to R.A. Taft, August 27, 1911, in Henry F. Pringle, The Life and Times of William Howard Taft
(Hamden, Connecticut: Archon Books, 1964), II, 747.

69. Fabian, 54–59.

70. AC to Taft, November 7, 1911, Taft.

71. AC to Taft, November 27, 1911, Taft.

72. Taft to AC, December 29, 1911, Taft.

73. AC, “Interview with Dr. Stopes,” 1911, BL.

CHAPTER FORTY: “BE OF GOOD CHEER,” 1912–1913

1. U.S. Steel, 2364.

2. Ibid., 2349–50.

3. Ibid., 2423–24.

4. Ibid., 2392.

5. Bridge to AC, January 17, 1912; Margery Bridge to AC, January 19, 1912, vol. 203, ACLC; Bridge to Harding,
February 3, 1912, Miscellaneous Materials [Bridge], box 2, folder 1, HCFUP.

6. Bertram to Bridge, March 12, 1912, vol. 204, ACLC.

7. Bertram to Bridge, April 22, 1912, vol. 205, ACLC.

8. Bridge to Bertram, May 14, 1912; Bertram to Bridge, May 16, 1912, vol. 206, ACLC.

9. Hendrick and Henderson, 197–98.

10. AC to Morley, March 23, 1912, vol. 204, ACLC.

11. AC to Rockefeller, Jr., April 5, 1912, vol. 205, ACLC.

12. AC to Dod, April 19, 1912, vol. 205, ACLC.

13. Taft to AC, March 28, 1912; AC to Taft, April 2, 1912, Taft.

14. AC to Morley, February 29, 1912, vol. 204, ACLC.

15. AC to TR, March 1, 1912, vol. 204, ACLC.

16. TR to AC, March 5, 1912, vol. 204, ACLC.

17. AC to TR, March 10, 1912, vol. 204, ACLC.

18. AC to Morley, May 12, 1912, vol. 206, ACLC.

19. AC to Hilles, May 17, 1912, vol. 206, ACLC.

20. AC to Taft, May 22, 1912, Taft.

21. NYT, October 20, 1912, 9.

22. AC to WW, November 6, 1912, vol. 210, ACLC.

23. AC to Morley, November 7, 1912, vol. 210, ACLC.

24. J. D. Rockefeller to AC, November 11, 1911; AC to J. D. Rockefeller, November 13, 1911, series VII, box 3,
folder 4, CCNY.

25. Lagemann, 22; Carnegie Corporation of New York (New York, 1911).

26. Minutes, November 10, 1911, series I, box 1, CCNY.

27. Report of Executive Committee, November 21, 1912, series 1, box 1, folder 2, CCNY; Lester, 65.

28. NYT, November 26, 1912, 11.

29. AC to Asquith, August 16, 1909, Asquith.

30. AC to Bryce, November 12, 1912, vol. 210, ACLC.

31. AC to Taft, December 15, 1912, Taft.

32. Knox to Taft, March 3, 1913, vol. 20, Knox.

33. AC to WW, April 24, 1913, Wilson.

34. AC, Fourth American Peace Congress. Address by Andrew Carnegie (New York: Redfield Brothers, 1913), 16.

35. NYT, May 25, 1913, 5.

36. AC, “Unveiling of Cremer Bust in the Palace of Peace at the Hague: Address by Andrew Carnegie”
(Dunfermline, 1913).

37. Hendrick and Henderson, 181.

38. NYT, November 26, 1913, 10.

39. AC to WW, November 3, 1913, Wilson.

40. The passage is from a Burns poem: Greetings card, January 1, 1914, ACBM.

CHAPTER FORTY-ONE: 1914

1. AC to n. p., January 12, 1914, ACBM.

2. “Resolutions Passed by the Church Peace Union, Founded by Andrew Carnegie,” February 10, 1914, CCEIA;
Lynch, 56–59.

3. AC to WW, February 20, 1914, Wilson.

4. AC to Morley, March 29, 1914, vol. 222, ACLC.

5. Woodrow Wilson, The Papers of Woodrow Wilson, ed. Arthur Link (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1966–94), vol. 29, 417.

6. AC to WW, April 21, 1914, with enclosure of New York World article, Wilson.

7. AC to Tumulty, April 24, 1914, Wilson.

8. NYT, April 26, 1914, 2; Lynch, 35–36.

9. AC to Tumulty, May 7, 1914, Wilson.

10. AC to WW, May 21, 1914, Wilson.

11. WW to AC, May 18, 1914; AC to WW, May 21, 1914, Wilson.

12. AC to Gladstone, January 12, 1891, vol. 12, ACLC.

13. Hendrick, II, 345.

14. AC to Morley, August 4, 1914, vol. 225, ACLC.

15. Lynch to AC, August 6, 1914, vol. 225, ACLC.

16. AC to Ross, [wrongly marked April, should be August 17, 1914], vol. 223, ACLC.

17. Morley to AC, August 28, 1914, vol. 225, ACLC.

18. Hendrick interview with Hew Morrison, August 7–8, 1927, vol. 257, ACLC.

19. LWC to Bryce, September 4, 1914, vol. 239, Bryce.

20. Morley to LWC, August 20, 1919, vol. 239, ACLC.

21. D. A. Hamer, John Morley: Liberal Intellectual in Politics (London: Oxford University Press, 1968), 368.

22. AC, Autobiography, 359–60.

23. AC to William II, October 16, 1914, vol. 226, ACLC.

24. NYT, October 15, 1914, 5.

25. AC to WW, November 23, 1914, Wilson.

26. NYT, November 26, 1914, 7.

CHAPTER FORTY-TWO: LAST DAYS, 1915–1919

1. AC to Ross, January 18, 1915, vol. 228, ACLC.

2. New York Sun, [February 6, 1915], in “Scrapbook with newspaper clips,” series VII, CCNY.

3. NYT, February 9, 1915, 6.

4. February calendar, in pencil, vol. 257, ACLC.

5. Minutes of board meetings, series I, folders 4, 5, CCNY; LWC to Franks, various dates, series VI, box 3,
folder 7, CCNY.

6. Morley to AC, January 12, 1915, vol. 228, ACLC.

7. Hendrick interview with Mrs. Andrew Carnegie, August 1927, vol. 256, ACLC.

8. Morley to LWC, May 19, 1915, in Hendrick, II, 1915.

9. Morley to LWC, December 24, 1915, in ibid., 366–67.

10. LWC to Margaret Carnegie, January 14, 1916, in Hendrick and Henderson, 201–02.

11. Morley to LWC, February 16, 1916, in Hendrick, II, 367–68.

12. Oscar Straus to LWC, March 15, 1916, enclosing letter from Earl Gray from February 24, 1916, box 9, ACAC.

13. Morley to AC, March 6, 1916, in Hendrick, II, 368–69.

14. Morley to AC, April 14, 1916, in ibid., 370.

15. LWC to Bryce, May 16, 1916, Bryce.

16. Morley to AC, September 15, 1916, in Hendrick, II, 370–71.

17. Hendrick and Henderson, 208–09; AC to WW, January 23, 1917, Wilson.

18. AC to WW, February 14, April 7, 1917, in Hendrick, II, 379–80.

19. LWC to Morley, November 1, 1917, JMBL, O.

20. LWC to Morley, November 11, 1917, JMBL, O.

21. AC to Morley, January 21, 1918, in Hendrick, II, 373–74.

22. Miller, 15.

23. Hendrick and Henderson, 211.

24. AC to WW, November 10, 1919; WW to AC, November 13, 1919, Wilson.

25. Morley to AC, November 21, 1918, in Hendrick, II, 375–76.

26. Hendrick and Henderson, 212.

27. LWC to Margaret Carnegie, May 2, 1919, in ibid., 212–14.

28. Hendrick interview with Bertram, September 24–28, 1927, vol. 256, ACLC.

29. Henderson and Hendrick, 216.

30. AC, Will and Testament, vol. 257, ACLC.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY OF WORKS CITED

ADAMS, HENRY.The Education of Henry Adams: An Autobiography. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1918.

———. Democracy: An American Novel. 1880. Rev. edn. New York: Modern Library, 2003.

ALLEGHENY CENTENNIAL COMMITTEE. Writers’ Program of the Works Projects Administration in the State of
Pennsylvania. Story of Old Allegheny City. Pittsburgh: Allegheny Centennial Committee, 1941.

Ames, Charles Edgar. Pioneering the Union Pacific: A Reappraisal of the Builders of the Railroad. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1969.

BALDWIN, LELAND D. Pittsburgh: The Story of a City. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1937.

BALFOUR, MICHAEL.The Kaiser and His Times. New York: W. W. Norton, 1972. Beale, Harriet S. Blaine, ed. Letters
of Mrs. James G. Blaine. Vol. II. New York: Duffield & Co., 1908.

BECKERT, SVEN.The Monied Metropolis: New York City and the Consolidation of the American Bourgeoisie,
1850–1896. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

BELL, THOMAS.Out of This Furnace. 1941. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1976.

BENSEL, RICHARD FRANKLIN.The Political Economy of American Industrialization, 1877–1900. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2000.

BERK, GERALD.Alternative Tracks: The Constitution of American Industrial Order, 1865–1917. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1994.

BLACK, WILLIAM. “A Few Days’ More Driving,” Harper’s New Monthly Magazine, 70 (1884): 22.

BOBINSKI, GEORGE.Carnegie Libraries. Chicago: American Library Association, 1969.

BOYER, M. CHRISTINE.Manhattan Manners: Architecture and Style, 1850–1900. New York: Rizzoli, 1985.

BRECHER, JEREMY.Strike! Boston: South End Press, 1977.

BRIDGE, JAMES HOWARD.The Inside History of the Carnegie Steel Company: A Romance of Millions. 1903.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1991.

——. Millionaires and Grub Street. New York: Brentano’s, 1931.

BRIER, STEVE. “Technological Change at Homestead, 1881–1892,” unpublished paper in author’s possession.

BRIGNANO, MARY. “Ordinary People, Extraordinary Courage,” Western Pennsylvania History (2004).

BRODY, DAVID.Steelworkers in America: The Nonunion Era. 1960. New York: Harper & Row, 1969.

BROOKS, G. “The Typical American Employer,” Blackstone’s Edinburgh Magazine (1892): 572.

BROWN, MARK M. “Technology and the Homestead Steel Works,” Canal History and Technology Proceeding, II (1992):
186–205.

BURGESS, GEORGE H, and MILES C. KENNEDY.Centennial History of The Pennsylvania Railroad Company, 1846–1946.
Pennsylvania Railroad Company, 1949.

Burgoyne, Arthur. The Homestead Strike of 1892. 1893. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1979.

BUTLER, BENJAMIN F. Butler’s Book. A. M. Thayer & Co., 1892.

BUTT, ARCHIBALD WILLINGHAM.Taft and Roosevelt, the Intimate Letters of Archie Butt. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday, Doran & Co., 1930.

CALVERT, MONTE A. “The Allegheny City Cotton Mill Riot of 1848,” Western Pennsylvania Historical Magazine 46
(1963).

CAMPBELL, JOHN P. “Taft, Roosevelt, and the Arbitration Treaties of 1911,” Journal of American History 53
(1966): 79–98.

CARNEGIE, ANDREW.Notes of a Trip Round the World. New York: privately published, 1879.

———. “As Others See Us,” Fortnightly Review (1882).

———. Our Coaching Trip, Brighton to Inverness. New York: privately published, 1882.

———. An American Four-in-Hand in Britain. 1883. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1890.

———. “Remarks of Andrew Carnegie Before the Nineteenth-Century Club upon ‘The Aristocracy of the Dollar.’ My
First Speech in New York Somewhere in the Early Eighties” (1883?).

———. Round the World. 1884. New York: Doubleday, Doran, 1933.

———. “The Road to Business Success: A Talk to Young Men.” (June 1885), in EB.

———. Triumphant Democracy. 1886. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1888.

———. “An Employer’s View of the Labor Question.” Forum (April 1886), in Andrew Carnegie Reader.

———. “Results of the Labor Struggle,” Forum (August 1886), in Andrew Carnegie Reader.

———. “Bugaboo of Trusts,” North American Review (February 1889), in Andrew Carnegie Reader.

———. “Dedication of the Carnegie Library at the Edgar Thomson Steel Rail Works, Braddock, March 30, 1889:
Address to Workingmen.”

———. “The Industries of Pennsylvania, address delivered before the Legislature of Pennsylvania in Harrisburg.”
(April 8, 1889), in MW, I.

———. “Wealth,” North American Review (June 1889), in Andrew Carnegie Reader.

———. “Best Fields for Philanthropy,” North American Review (December 1889), in Andrew Carnegie Reader.

———. “Summing Up the Tariff Discussion,” North American Review (July 1890), in MW, I.

———. “Advantages of Poverty,” Nineteenth Century (March 1891), in Gospel of Wealth.

———. “ABC of Money,” North American Review (June 1891), in Andrew Carnegie Reader.

———. Triumphant Democracy. Revised Edition, Based on the Census of 1890. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1893.

———. “Anne C. L. Botta” (1894), in MW, I.

———. “Presentation of the Carnegie Library to the People with a Description of the Dedicatory Exercises”
(November 6, 1895). Reprinted as “The Best Use of Wealth” in MW, II.

———. “The Venezuelan Question,” North American Review (February 1896), in MW, II.

———. “How I Served My Apprenticeship,” Youth’s Companion (April 23, 1896).

———. “The Ship of State Adrift,” North American Review (June 1896).

———. “The Ship of State Adrift II,” North American Review (October 1896).

———. “Mr. Bryan the Conjurer,” North American Review (January 1897).

———. “Distant Possessions: The Parting of the Ways,” North American Review (August 1898), in Andrew Carnegie
Reader.

———. “From Bobbin-Boy to Millionaire,” Golden Penny (January 1899).

———. “Americanism Versus Imperialism,” North American Review (January 1899).

———. “Americanism Versus Imperialism, II,” North American Review (December 1899).

———. “The South African Question,” North American Review (December 1899).

———. “Bryan or McKinley? The Presidential Election—Our Duty,” North American Review (October 1900).

———. The Gospel of Wealth and Other Timely Essays, 1901, 1906. Reprinted and edited by Edward C. Kirkland.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965.

———. The Empire of Business. 1902. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page & Company, 1913.

———. “Confession of Religious Faith” (October 11, 1902), in MW, II.

———. “A Rectorial Address, Delivered to the Students in the University of St. Andrews 22 October, 1902,” New
York: Doubleday, Page & Company, 1903, in MW, I.

———. James Watt. 1905. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page & Company, 1913.

———. “The Negro in America: An Address Delivered before the Philosophical Institution of Edinburgh, 16th
October, 1907,” Inverness: Robt. Carruthers & Sons, 1907, in MW, II.

———. Problems of To-Day: Wealth—Labor—Socialism. 1908. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page & Company, 1933.

———. “Introduction,” The Roosevelt Policy, Vol. I. New York: Current Literature Publishing Company, 1908.

———. “The Worst Banking System in the World” (February 5, 1908).

———. “My Experience with, and Views upon, The Tariff,” Century (March 1908). Reprinted as “Railway Rates and
Rebates” in Andrew Carnegie Reader.

———. “Armaments and Their Results,” London: The Peace Society, 1909.

———. “Speech…at the Annual Meeting of the Peace Society, in the Guildhall, London,” London: The Peace Society,
1910. Reprinted as “Honor and International Arbitration,” in MW, II.

———. “A League of Peace” (October 17, 1905). New York: New York Peace Society, 1911, in MW, II.

———. “Doctor Golf,” Independent (June 1911).

———. “Address…at the Fourth American Peace Congress, St. Louis, May, 1913,” New York: Redfield Brothers, Inc.,
1913.

———. “Unveiling of Cremer Bust in the Palace of Peace at the Hague,” Dunfermline, 1913.

———. Autobiography of Andrew Carnegie. 1920. Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1986.

———. Miscellaneous Writings of Andrew Carnegie, 2 vols., ed. Burton Hendrick. Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
Doran, 1933.

———. The Andrew Carnegie Reader, ed. Joseph Wall. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 1992.

CARNEGIE INSTITUTION.Year Book, 2003–04. Washington, DC, 2005.

CAROSSO, VINCENT.The Morgans: Private International Bankers, 1854–1913. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1987.

CHALMERS, PETER.Historical and Statistical Account of Dunfermline. Edinburgh, 1844.

CHANDLER, ALFRED D. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1977.

CHERNOW, RON.Titan: The Life of John D. Rockefeller, Sr. New York: Random House, 1998.

CHUDACOFF, HOWARD.The Age of the Bachelor: Creating an American Subculture. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1999.

CLEMENS, SAMUEL. “The Alphabet Simplified,” in Portable Mark Twain, ed. Tom Quik. New York: Penguin, 2004.

COCHRAN, THOMAS C. Railroad Leaders, 1845–1890. New York: Russell & Russell, 1965.

CONANT, JAMES BRYANT. “Andrew Carnegie as Patron of Learning,” in Andrew Carnegie Centenary, 1835–1935. New
York: Carnegie Corporation of New York, 1935.

CONE, ANDREW.Petrolia. New York: D. Appleton, 1870.

COOLING, B. FRANKLIN.Gray Steel and Blue Water Navy. Hamden, CT: Archon Books, 1979.

COUVARES, FRANCIS G. The Remaking of Pittsburgh: Class and Culture in an Industrializing City, 1877–1919.
Albany: State University of New York Press, 1984.

CRAIG, NEVILLE.History of Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh: J. H. Mellor, 1851.

CURRIE, DOMINIC J. The Lauder Legacy, the Life and Times of George Lauder and Lauder College. Dunfermline:
Lauder College, 1999.

CURTISS, GEORGE.The Industrial Development of Nations. Vol. II. Binghamton, NY, 1912.

CUTLER, CARL.Queens of the Western Ocean. Annapolis: U.S. Naval Institute, 1961.

DAMROSCH, WALTER.My Musical Life. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1926.

———. “Recollections of Andrew Carnegie,” in Andrew Carnegie Centenary. New York: Carnegie Corporation of New
York, 1935.

DEMAREST, DAVID, ed. “The River Ran Red”: Homestead 1892. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1992.

DEVINE, T.M. The Scottish Nation: A History. New York: Penguin, 1999.

DEVOTO, BERNARD, ed. Mark Twain in Eruption. New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1940.

DIERICKX, MARY.The Architecture of Literacy: The Carnegie Libraries of New York City. New York: Cooper Union
for the Advancement of Science and Art and the New York City Department of General Services, 1996.

DOLKART, ANDREW S. Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution, 2002.

DREISER, THEODORE.Newspaper Days, ed. T. D. Nostwich. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1991.

DUMONT, ROSEMARY RUHIG. “The Founding of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh,” in Carnegie Denied: Communities
Rejecting Carnegie Library Construction Grants, 1898–1925, ed. Robert Sidney Martin. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 1993.

DUNCAN, DAVID.Life and Letters of Herbert Spencer. Vol. 1. New York: D Appleton & Co., 1908.

DUNLAP, DAVID.On Broadway: A Journey Uptown Over Time. New York: Rizzoli, 1990.

DURANT, SAMUEL W. History of Allegheny Co., Pennsylvania. Philadelphia: L. H. Everts, 1876.

FABIAN, LARRY.Andrew Carnegie’s Peace Endowment: The Tycoon, the President, and Their Bargain of 1910.
Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 1985.

FAIRBURN, WILLIAM ARMSTRONG.Merchant Sail V. Center Lovell, Maine: Fairburn Marine educational foundation.

FARQUHAR, A. B. The First Million the Hardest: An Autobiography, in collab. with Samuel Crowther. Garden City,
NY: Doubleday, 1922.

FITCH, JOHN A. The Steel Workers. 1910. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1989.

FOX, ARTHUR B. Pittsburgh During the American Civil War, 1860–1865. Chicora, PA: Mechling Bookbindery, 2002.

FRASER, STEVE.Every Man a Speculator: A History of Wall Street in American Life. New York: HarperCollins,
2005.

GARLAND, HAMLIN. “Homestead and Its Perilous Trades—Impressions of a Visit,” McClure’s Magazine III (1894).

GILDER, ROSAMOND, ed. Letters of Richard Watson Gilder. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1916.

GILFOYLE, TIMOTHY J. City of Eros: New York City, Prostitution, and the Commercialization of Sex, 1790–1920.
New York: W. W. Norton, 1992.

GLADSTONE, W.E. “Mr. Carnegie’s ‘Gospel of Wealth’: A Review and a Recommendation,” Nineteenth Century XXVII
(1890).

GLOVER, BILL. “FTL Design: History of Atlantic Cable & Submarine Telegraphy, Cable Timeline: 1850–1900,”
http://www.atlanticcable.com/Cables/CableTimeLine/index1850.htm.

GOODENOUGH, SIMON.The Greatest Good Fortune. Edinburgh: MacDonald, 1985.

GORDON, JOHN STEELE.A Thread Across the Ocean. New York: Perennial, 2003.

GREEN, CONSTANCE MCLAUGHLIN.Washington: Village and Capital, 1800–1878. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1962.

GREGG, ORMSBY O., Isaac Gregg, and Moses F. Eaton. Pittsburgh, her advantageous position and great resources,
as a manufacturing and commercial city: embraced in a notice of sale of real estate. Pittsburgh: Johnson &
Stockton. 1845.

GUTMAN, HERBERT.Work, Culture and Society in Industrializing America. New York: Vintage, 1977.

HALSEY, FRANCIS WHITING.American Authors and Their Homes. New York: James Pott & Co., 1901.

HAMILTON, GAIL.Biography of James G. Blaine. Norwich, CT: Henry Bill Publishing Co., 1895.

HAMMER, D. A. John Morley: Liberal Intellectual in Politics. London: Oxford University Press, 1968.

HAND-LOOM INQUIRY COMMISSION.Reports of Assistant Commissioners on hand-loom weavers in several districts of
England, Scotland, Ireland, and Continental Europe, 1839–40. 1839. Shannon: Irish University Press, 1970.

HANSEN, JONATHAN M. The Lost Promise of Patriotism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.

HARVEY, GEORGE.Henry Clay Frick: The Man. 1928. New York: The Frick Collection, 1936.

HATCH, NATHAN.The Democratization of American Christianity. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1989.

HENDERSON, EBENEZER.Annals of Dunfermline. Glasgow, 1879.

HENDRICK, BURTON.The Life of Andrew Carnegie. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Doran & Co., 1932.

———, and DANIEL HENDERSON.Louise Whitfield Carnegie: The Life of Mrs. Andrew Carnegie. New York: Hastings
House, 1950.

HENRIETTA, JAMES, et al. America’s History. Chicago: Dorsey Press, 1987.

HESSEN, ROBERT.Steel Titan: The Life of Charles M. Schwab. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1975.

HOFSTADTER, RICHARD.Social Darwinism in American Thought. Rev. edn. Boston: Beacon Press, 1955.

HOGAN, W. T. Economic History of the American Iron and Steel Industry. Lexington, KY: Heath, 1971.

HOLLEY, A.L., and LENOX SMITH. “American Iron and Steel Works. No. XXI. The Works of the Edgar Thomson Steel
Company (Limited),” Engineering 25 (1878): 295.

HOLLOWAY, LAURA.Famous American Fortunes. New York: J. A. Hill & Co., 1889.

“Home and Foreign Gossip,” Harper’s Weekly (1866).

HONAN, PARK.Matthew Arnold: A Life. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981.

INGHAM, JOHN N. Making Iron and Steel: Independent Mills in Pittsburgh, 1820–1920. Columbus: Ohio State
University Press, 1991.

INGRAM, J. S. The Centennial Exposition, Described and Illustrated. Philadelphia: Hubbard Bros., 1876.

JACKSON, ROBERT W. Rails Across the Mississippi: A History of the St. Louis Bridge. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 2001.

JOFFE, ELKHONEN.Tchaikovsky in America: The Composer’s Visit in 1891. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.

JOHNSON, WILLIAM G. Life and Reminiscences from Birth to Manhood of Wm. G. Johnson. Pittsburgh: Knickerbocker
Press, 1902.

JONES, A. The Revenue Book: Containing the New Tariff of 1846, Together with the Tariff of 1842. New York:
Bell & Gould, 1846.

JONES, THEODORE.Carnegie Libraries Across America: A Public Legacy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997.

KAMM, SAMUEL RICHEY.The Civil War Career of Thomas A. Scott. Philadelphia, 1940.

KAPLAN, FRED.The Singular Mark Twain. New York: Doubleday, 2003.

KILLIKELLY, SARAH.The History of Pittsburgh: Its Rise and Progress. Pittsburgh: B. C. & Gordon Montegomery,
1906.

KINARD, AGNES DODDS.Celebrating the First 100 Years of The Carnegie in Pittsburgh: 1895–1995. Pittsburgh:
1995.

KIRKLAND, EDWARD.Dream and Thought in the Business Community, 1860–1900. Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
1956.

——. Industry Comes of Age. 1961. Chicago: Quadrangle, 1967.

KLEIN, MURRAY.The Life and Legend of Jay Gould. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986.

KRAUSE, PAUL.The Battle for Homestead, 1880–1892: Politics, Culture and Steel. Pittsburgh: University of
Pittsburgh Press, 1992.

KUEHL, WARREN F. Seeking World Order: The United States and International Organization to 1920. Nashville, TN:
Vanderbilt University Press, 1969.

LAFEBER, WALTER.The Panama Canal. New York: Oxford University Press, 1979.

LAGEMANN, ELLEN CONDLIFFE.The Politics of Knowledge: The Carnegie Corporation, Philanthropy, and Public
Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.

LAMB, GEORGE H. “The Carnegie Free Library,” in The Unwritten History of Braddock’s Field. Braddock, 1917.

LAMOREAUX, NAOMI R. The Great Merger Movement in American Business, 1895–1904. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1985.

LANG, CECIL Y., ed. The Letters of Matthew Arnold. 6 vols. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia,
1996–.

LAVENDER, DAVID.The Great Pretender. Garden City, NY: Doubleday & Co., 1970.

LESTER, ROBERT M. Forty Years of Carnegie Giving. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1941.

LEVITT, IAN, and CHRISTOPHER SMOUT.The State of the Scottish Working-Class in 1843: A statistical and spatial
enquiry based on the data from the Poor Law Commission Report of 1844. Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press,
1979.

LICHT, WALTER.Working for the Railroads: The Organization of Work in the Nineteenth Century. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1983.

LOCKWOOD, CHARLES.Manhattan Moves Uptown. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1976.

LOTH, DAVID.Gold Brick Cassie. New York: Fawcett Publications, 1954.

LUMSDEN, JAMES.American Memoranda by a Mercantile Man During a Short Tour in the Summer of 1843. Glasgow: Bell
& Bain, 1844.

LYNCH, FREDERICK. “Personal Recollections of Andrew Carnegie” (1920), http://www.xooqi.com.

MCADOO, ELEANOR WILSON, ed. The Priceless Gift: The Love Letters of Woodrow Wilson and Ellen Axson Wilson. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1962.

MCCABE, JAMES DABNEY.Illustrated History of the Centennial Exhibition. Philadelphia: National Publishing Co.,
1876.

MCCULLOUGH, DAVID.The Johnstown Flood. 1968. New York: Touchstone, 1987.

———, The Great Bridge: The Epic Story of the Building of the Brooklyn Bridge. New York: Simon & Schuster,
1972.

MACKAY, ALEXANDER.The Western World; or Travels in the United States in 1846–47. 2nd (1849) edn. Vol. III. New
York: Negro University Press, 1968.

MACKIE, J.B. Andrew Carnegie: His Dunfermline Ties and Benefactions. Dunfermline, 1916.

MAGNUS, PHILIP.Gladstone. New York: Dutton, 1964.

MANNING, CARDINAL, HERMANN ADLER, and HUGH PRICE HUGHES. “Irresponsible Wealth,” Nineteenth Century XXVII
(1890).

Manual of the Public Benefactions of Andrew Carnegie. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace, 1919.

MARCHAND, C. Roland. The American Peace Movement and Social Reform. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1972.

MARTIN, ROBERT SIDNEY, ed. Carnegie Denied: Communities Rejecting Carnegie Library Construction Grants,
1898–1925. Wesport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1993.

MASSIE, ROBERT K. Dreadnought: Britain, Germany, and the Coming of the Great War. New York: Random House,
1991.

MATTHEWS, H.G.C., ed. The Gladstone Diaries. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994.

MEINIG, D.W. The Shaping of America. Vol. 2: Continental America, 1800–1867. New Haven: Yale University Press,
1993.

MILES, NELSON.Serving the Republic. New York: Harper & Bros., 1911.

MILLER, MARGARET CARNEGIE. Margaret Carnegie Miller Her Journals. Edited by Linda Thorell Hills. 2000.

MILLER, NATHAN.Theodore Roosevelt: A Life. New York: William Morrow, 1992.

Miller’s New York as It Is. New York: J. Miller, 1866.

MISA, THOMAS J. A Nation of Steel: The Making of Modern America, 1865–1925. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1995.

“Mr. Carnegie’s Tour Through Devon,” Pall Mall Gazette, in New York-Daily Tribune (1884).

MONTGOMERY, DAVID.The Fall of the House of Labor. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987.

MORLEY, JOHN.Recollections. Vol. II. New York: Harper & Bros., 1917. Morrison, Thomas. Heddekashun and
Handication. Dunfermline: William Liddell, 1834. Murphey, Hermon K. “The Northern Railroads and the Civil
War,” Mississippi Valley Historical Review 5 (1918): 331–32.

MURRAY, NORMAN.The Scottish Hand Loom Weavers, 1790–1840, a Social History. Edinburgh: John Donald, 1978.

NELSON, DANIEL.Managers and Workers: Origins of the New Factory System in the United States, 1880–1920.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1975.

NEVINS, ALAN.The War for the Union. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1959. “New Union Pacific Directory,
The,” Railroad Gazette II (1871).

O’CONNER, HARVEY.Mellon’s Millions. New York: John Day Co., 1933.

OGDEN, E.D. Tariff, or, Rates of Duties Payable on Goods, Wares, and Merchandise. New York: Rich & Loutrel,
1840.

O’TOOLE, PATRICIA.When Trumpets Call: Theodore Roosevelt After the White House. New York: Simon & Schuster,
2005.

PALMER, COURTLANDT.The Nineteenth Century Club of New York: Shall Similar Associations Become General? London:
William Reeves (1887).

PEEL, J.D.Y. Herbert Spencer: The Evolution of a Sociologist. New York: Basic Books, 1971.

PENNSYLVANIA RAILROAD COMPANY. “Sixth Annual Report to the Stockholders,” 1853.

———. “Twelfth Annual Report to the Stockholders,” 1859.

———. Report of the Investigating Committee of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company. Philadelphia: Allen, Lane &
Scott Printing House, 1874.

PEPER, GEORGE. “The Apple Tree Gang,” Golf (1988).

PEYSER, ETHEL.The House That Music Built: Carnegie Hall. New York: Robert M. McBride, 1936.

POND, ARTHUR, and SAMUEL T. MOORE, eds. They Told Barron. New York: Harper & Bros., 1930.

Poor Law Inquiry Commission for Scotland. Appendix, Part One, “Minutes of Evidence.” Edinburgh, 1844.

PRINGLE, HENRY F. The Life and Times of William Howard Taft. 2 vols. Hamden, CT: Archon Books, 1964.

PULLING, SR. ANNE FRANCES.Around Cresson and the Alleghenies. Dover, NH: Arcadia, 1997.

REA, TOM.Bone Wars: The Excavation and Celebrity of Andrew Carnegie’s Dinosaur. Pittsburgh: University of
Pittsburgh Press, 2001.

REID, J.D. “Andrew Carnegie,” Railroad Gazette II (1870).

———. Telegraph in America. Its Founders, Promoters, and Noted Men, The. New York: Derby Brothers, 1879.

ROCKEFELLER, JOHN D. Random Reminiscences of Men and Events. New York: Doubleday, 1909.

ROCKEFELLER, NANCY CARNEGIE.The Carnegies and Cumberland Island. 1993.

ROGERS, DANIEL.The Work Ethic in Industrial America, 1850–1920. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978.

Roosevelt Policy. Introduction by Andrew Carnegie. New York: Current Literature Publishing, 1908.

ROOSEVELT, THEODORE.Letters, ed. Elting E. Morison. Vol. VII. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1951–54.

St. Nicholas Hotel; Its Plan and Arrangements. New York: Barton & Sons (1856).

SANDERS, ELIZABETH.Roots of Reform: Farmers, Workers and the American State, 1877–1917. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1999.

SANGER, MARTHA FRICK SYMINGTON.Henry Clay Frick: An Intimate Portrait. New York: Abbeville Press, 1998.

SARMIENTO, DOMINGO FAUSTINO.Travels in the United States in 1847, ed. Michael Aaron Rockland. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1970.

SCHICKEL, RICHARD.The World of Carnegie Hall. New York: Julian Messner, 1960.

SHAW, LORD OF DUNFERMLINE.Letters to Isabel. New York: George H. Doran Co., n. d.

SHAW, RONALD.Erie Water West. Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, 1966.

SIMPSON, ERIC.The Auld Grey Toun: Dunfermline in the Time of Andrew Carnegie, 1835–1919. Dunfermline: Carnegie
Dunfermline Trust, 1987.

SINCLAIR, UPTON.The Jungle. 1905. New York: Signet Classics. 1960.

SPENCER, HERBERT.Social Statics. London: John Chapman, 1851.

———. An Autobiography. Vol. II. New York: D. Appleton & Co., 1904.

———. First Principles. 5th London edn. New York: A. L. Burt Co., n. d.

STEAD, WILLIAM T. Mr. Carnegie’s Conundrum: £ 40,000,000: What Shall I Do with It? London: Review of Reviews,
1900.

———. “Mr. Carnegie as I Knew Him,” Christian Endeavor World (1902).

STEFFENS, LINCOLN.The Shane of Cities. 1904. New York: Hill & Wang, 1957.

STERN, ROBERT A.M., et al. New York 1880. New York: Monacelli Press, 1999.

———. New York 1900. New York: Rizzoli, 1983.

STOVER, JOHN.American Railroads. 2nd edn. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997.

STOWE, WILLIAM W. Going Abroad: European Travel in Nineteenth-Century American Culture. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1994.

STROUSE, JEAN.Morgan: American Financier. New York: Random House, 1999.

TARR, JOEL A. “Infrastructure and City-Building,” in Samuel P. Hayes, ed., City at the Point: Essays on the
Social History of Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 1989.

TEMIN, PETER.Iron and Steel in Nineteenth-Century America, an Economic Inquiry. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1964.

THAYER, WILLIAM ROSCOE, ed. The Life and Letters of John Hay. Vol. II. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1915.

THOMPSON, ROBERT LUTHER.Wiring a Continent: The History of the Telegraph Industry in the United States,
1832–1866. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1947.

THOMSON, DANIEL.The Weaver’s Craft: Being a History of the Weaver’s Incorporation of Dunfermline. Paisley: A.
Gardner, 1903.

THOMPSON, E.P. The Making of the English Working Class. New York: Vintage, 1966.

THURSTON, GEORGE.Pittsburgh as It Is. Pittsburgh: W. S. Haven, 1857.

———. Pittsburgh and Allegheny in the Centennial Year. Pittsburgh: Anderson & Son, 1876.

TOCQUEVILLE, ALEXIS DE. Democracy in America, ed. Philip Bradley. New York: Vintage, 1945.

TOKER, FRANKLIN.Pittsburgh: An Urban Portrait. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1986.

Traveler’s Official Guide of the Railways. Philadelphia, 1870.

TROLLOPE, ANTHONY.North America. New York: Knopf, 1951.

Trow’s New York City Directory. New York: J. F. Trow, 1870.

TURNER, GEORGE EDGAR.Victory Rode the Rails. Westwood, CT: Greenwood Press, 1972.

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.Report of the Select Committee of the House of Representatives, appointed under
the Resolution of January 6, 1873 to make inquiry into the affairs of the Union Pacific Railroad Company.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office. 1873.

———. Report on the Committee Appointed to Investigate the Railroad Riots in July, 1877. Harrisburg, 1878.

U.S. SENATE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR, testimony of Jay Gould. Report upon the Relations between Labor
and Capital. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office. 1885.

U.S. WAR DEPARTMENT.The War of the Rebellion: A Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and
Confederate Armies. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1880, 1901.

USSELMAN, STEVEN W. Regulating Railroad Innovation: Business, Technology, and Politics in America, 1840–1920.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.

WALL, JOSEPH FRAZIER.Andrew Carnegie. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1989.

———. Skibo. New York: Oxford University Press, 1984.

WARD, JAMES A. J. Edgar Thomson, Master of the Pennsylvania. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1980.

WARNER, DONALD.The Idea of Continental Union. Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, 1960.

WARREN, KENNETH.The American Steel Industry, 1850–1970, a Geographical Interpretation. London: Oxford
University Press, 1973.

———. Triumphant Capitalism: Henry Clay Frick and the Industrial Transformation of America. Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press, 1996.

———. Wealth, Waste, and Alienation: Growth and Decline in the Connellsville Coke Industry. Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press, 2001.

WASHINGTON, BOOKER T. Up from Slavery. 1901. New York: Penguin, 1986.

WEBER, THOMAS.The Northern Railroads in the Civil War, 1861–1865. New York: King’s Crown Press, 1952.

WHITE, ANDREW DICKSON.Autobiography of Andrew Dickson White. Vol. 1. New York: The Century Co., 1905.

WHITE, RICHARD. “Information Markets, and Corruption: Transcontinental Railroads in the Gilded Age,” Journal
of American History (June 2003): 19–43.

WILSON, ALEXANDER.The Chartist Movement in Scotland. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1970.

WILSON, ERASMUS, ed. Standard History of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Chicago: H. R. Cornell amp; Co., 1898.

WILSON, WOODROW.The Papers of Woodrow Wilson, ed. Arthur Link. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966–94.

YOUMANS, EDWARD L., ed. Herbert Spencer on the Americans and the Americans on Herbert Spencer. New York:
Appleton, 1883.

ZIMMERMAN, WARREN.First Great Triumph. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2002.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Members of the Carnegie family generously offered me family stories as well as letters, papers, travel advice,
and plain good times. I am especially grateful to Linda T. Hills and her husband Harold, Kenneth Miller,
Margaret Thomson, and to William and Katrina Thomson.

One of the first persons I contacted on deciding to write this book was Vartan Gregorian, the president of the
Carnegie Corporation of New York. He offered his encouragement then and has continued to do so since. I thank
him also for directing me toward the treasure trove of Home Trust Company papers that included Carnegie’s
prenuptial and citizenship documents and are now part of the Carnegie Corporation of New York archives at
Columbia University.

Janny Scott put me in touch with members of her family, including Morehead Kennedy, Warwick Scott Wheeler, and
H.D.S. Greenway, who provided me with some hitherto unseen correspondence between Carnegie and Tom A. Scott,
his first mentor and business partner.

One of the joys of this project was the opportunity to spend time in Scotland. Nora Rundell, chief executive
of the Carnegie Dunfermline and Hero Fund Trusts, not only arranged for my visits to Dunfermline, but also
responded to dozens of requests for information over the past years. Lorna Owers, manager of the Carnegie
Birthplace Museum in Dunfermline, was a gracious guide to the materials there. Andrew, 11th Earl of Elgin and
14th Earl of Kilmardin, opened his private family archives for me and his insights into Scottish history and
the Carnegie family’s arrival and early years in Fife. I profited greatly from corresponding with Eric Simpson
and A. J. Campbell, historians of Dunfermline and Fife. Angus McLaren showed me around Skibo, Shirley and Ian
Somerville through Rannoch Lodge, Alain Angelil through Cluny.

I have been blessed by a number of inventive and diligent research assistants, among them Morgan Arenson,
Julia Bell, Kris Burrell, Norma Hamm, Dan Lewis, William Menaker, Daniel Nasaw, Peter Nasaw, Valerie Yoshiye
Diane Sakimura, Joseph Sramek, Heather Velez, Martin Woessner. As in the past, my chief research assistant was
my mother, Beatrice Nasaw, who was available to find answers to the weirdest questions I could throw at her.
When the research phase of the project was finished, she shifted gears and became my final proofreader.

Brendan O’Malley, a gifted editor and graduate student, read the final manuscript, then the galleys, and saved
me from committing numerous errors, large and small.

There can be no better environment to work on a project such as this than the CUNY Graduate Center. I thank
former president Frances Degen Horowitz for her support and current president Bill Kelly for his encouragement
and wise counsel on any number of topics, from Mahlsticks to dinosaurs. I am grateful to Aoibheann Sweeney and
Michael Washburn for their good humor and good grammar. As always, I learned a great deal from my graduate
students. My colleagues in the Ph.D. program in history have been generous of their time, their libraries, and
their opinions. I am specially grateful to Joshua Brown, Martin Burke, Jack Diggins, Joshua Freeman, Thomas
Kessner, and James Oakes. Steve Brier read and commented on an early version of the manuscript and saved me
from committing some grievous errors of interpretation.

I thank Christopher Baer of the Hagley Museum and Library for sharing with me his inexhaustible knowledge of
the Pennsylvania Railroad. Author Richard Gachot provided me with materials on Henry Phipps. Architectural
historian Christopher Gray helped me understand how Fifth Avenue was laid out at the turn of the twentieth
century. Paul Krause, whose book on Homestead remains a model of research and scholarship, consulted with me
on Homestead and the Pittsburgh labor movement. Peter Landau, the historian of St. Andrew’s Golf Club at
Hastings-on-Hudson, answered my questions and sent me materials on the club. Jeff Madrick helped me convert
nineteenth-century dollars into today’s currency. Edward Muller of the University of Pittsburgh shared a
manuscript on Pittsburgh city planning. Chuck Sabel of Columbia University introduced me to another way of
looking at nineteenth-century industrial capitalism. Architectural historian Franklin Toker provided expert
advice on Pittsburgh architecture. I am grateful to Steve Fraser and David Rosner for their assistance.

No book of this sort can ever be written without the dogged assistance of the unsung heroes of the scholarly
world, its librarians and archivists. I would like to thank Michael Adams and Beth Posner at the CUNY Graduate
Center, Jennie Benford at Carnegie-Mellon, Michael Dabrishus at the University of Pittsburgh, Gino Francesconi
and Robert Hudson at Carnegie Hall, Jane Gorjevsky at Columbia University, Oliver House at the New Bodleian
Library at Oxford University, Julie Ludwig at the Frick Collection in New York City, Greg Priore at the Oliver
Room at Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Gayle Richardson at The Huntington Library, William Stingone, formerly
at Columbia University, now at the New York Public Library, and the staff of the Western Pennsylvania
Historical Society in Pittsburgh.

At Penguin Press, Liza Darnton and Alex Lane saw the book through the magnificent final stages of production.
Alex, in particular, did a magnificent job in getting me to meet my deadlines.

This book would literally not have been written without Ann Godoff. She suggested the subject, agreed to edit
as well as publish it, and with enthusiasm, wisdom, and no small degree of wit, saw it through to completion,
improving it every step along the way. I am enormously grateful to her.

I am also appreciative of the support of my agent, Andrew Wylie.

The one person who has been indispensable in this project—from first to last—has been Dinitia Smith. I cannot
and will never be able to thank her enough.

## INDEX

Abbey, Edwin

Abbott, Lyman

Abbott, William

“ABC of Money, The” (Carnegie)

Academy of Music, New York City

Academy of Science and Art of Pittsburgh

AC and Louise

age difference between

correspondence of

courtship of

engagement of

entertaining and social life of

first meeting of

honeymoon/honeymoon plans of

marriage/marriage plans of

photos of

prenuptial agreement of

properties and residences of

relationship between

separations of

travel of

Acton, Lord

Adams, Charles Francis

Adams, Charles Francis, II

Adams, Henry

Adams, Walter

Adams Express

Addison, Leila

African Americans

Age of the Bachelor, The (Chudacoff)

Aitkin, Anne (AC’s aunt)

Aitkin, Thomas

Alderson, Bernard

Alexander, Ann

Allegheny Arsenal

Allegheny Bessemer

Allegheny City, Pennsylvania

Carnegie family’s daily life in

Carnegie family’s journey to

conditions in

economy of

history of

libraries

location of

natural resources of

police force

population of

Select and Common Councils

water system of

Allegheny Mountains

Allegheny Portage Railroad

Allegheny River

Allegheny Valley Railroad

Altoona, Pennsylvania

Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers

AC and

AC on

Duquesne steelworks and

Edgar Thomson steelworks and

Homestead steelworks and

Homestead strike and

U.S. Steel and

American Can

American Federation of Labor

American Four-in-Hand in Britain, An (Carnegie),

American Iron and Steel Association

“Americanism Versus Imperialism” (Carnegie)

American Museum of Natural History

American Peace Congress

American Peace Society

American Railway Union (ARU)

American Steel Hoop

American Steel and Wire

American Tin Plate

Anchor Cotton Mills

Anderson, James

Anderson, Maggie

Andrew Carnegie Birthplace Museum

n Andrew Carnegie: The Man and His Work (Alderson)

Anglo-American relations

AC’s informal ambassadorship

arbitration treaty

during British Guiana dispute

during Civil War

German Americans’ role in

Irish Americans’ role in

Anti-Imperialist League

Appleton’s Cyclopedia,

Archer, William

Armour, Philip

arms and armaments

Army of Northern Virginia

Arnold, Edwin

Arnold, Matthew

Asquith, Herbert

Asquith, Margot

Associated Press

Atlantic Monthly,

Atlantic & Ohio Telegraph Company

Auchinduich (cottage)

Austria-Hungary

Author’s Club

Autobiography of Andrew Carnegie (Carnegie)

on AC’s reputation

on Anderson Library

on bond trading

on business career

on Louise Carnegie

on Chartists

on Civil War

on daughter

on Dunfermline

on emigration to U.S.

on father

on first dividend check

on hero fund

on Homestead strike

inaccuracies in

on J. Edgar Thomson

on labor

on mother

on peace program

publication of

on retirement

on schooling

on Scotland

silence on Anne Carnegie

on Herbert Spencer

on steel industry

on telegraphy

on Thomas Scott

on Triumphant Democracy,

unpublished fragment

on William Carnegie

on women

on World War I

writing of

Avebury, Lord

 

Babb, Cook & Willard

Baldwin, Leland

Balfour, Arthur

Balkans

Baltimore

Baltimore & Ohio Railroad

Bancroft, George

banking system, AC on

Bank of Scotland

Baptist Social Union

Bar Harbor, Maine

Baring Brothers

Bates, David Homer

n

Beatty, John

Beaver Falls steel mill

Beecher, Henry Ward

Belgium

Bell, Thomas

Bellevue Hospital Medical College

Belmont, August

Belmont, Mrs. August

Belmont, Perry

Bensel, Richard

Berea College

Berk, Gerald

Berkman, Alexander

Bertram, James

Bessemer, Henry

Bessemer Association

Bessemer & Lake Erie Railroad

Bessemer process

“Best Fields for Philanthropy, The” (Carnegie),

Bethlehem Steel

Beveridge, Erskine

Bierstadt, Albert

Billings, John

Billings, Josh

Birmingham Passenger Railroad

Bitner, George

Black, William

Blackstock, Mr.

Blackwood, William, II

Blackwood’s Magazine,

Blaine, Emmons

Blaine, Harriet

Blaine, James, G., Jr.

Blaine, James, G., Sr.

Blaine, Walker

Blake, James

Boer War

bond trading

Botta, Anna

Braddock steelworks. See Edgar Thomson steelworks

Brecher, Jeremy

Bridge, James

bridge building

Brinkerhoff, Anne

British Empire

British Guiana, Venezuela and

British Museum

British Peace Society

Brody, David

Brooklyn Bridge

Brooks, David

Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers

Brown, John

Brush, Jared

Bryan, William Jennings

Bryce, James

Buchanan, James

Burgoyne, Arthur

Burns, Robert

Bushnell, Cornelius

Butler, Benjamin F.

Butler, H.M.

Butler, Nicholas Murray

Butt, Archie

 

Cambria Iron

Cameron, Simon

Campbell, James

Campbell-Bannerman, Henry

Camp Wilkins, Pittsburgh

Canada

libraries in

U.S. annexation of

Canmore, Malcolm, king of Scotland

capitalism. See also “Gospel of Wealth”

(Carnegie) crony

post-Civil War

utilitarian fictions of

Carnegie, Andrew

William Abbott and

Altoona, move to

appearance

Matthew Arnold and

Astors and

James Bertram and

James Blaine and

James Bridge and

William Jennings Bryan and

burial place

business and investing career

Adams Express

advertising and promotion in

arms and armaments

Autobiography on

bond trading

bridge building

Columbia Oil Company

debt in

first investment

fraud accusations

H. C. Frick Coke Company

headquarters

income/net worth

insider information in

iron industry

iron mining

Keystone Bridge. See Keystone Bridge labor issues in. See Homestead strike (1892); labor and union issues

lawsuits

letter writing in

management style in

motivations in

newspapers

oil

partnerships

at Pennsylvania Railroad. See Pennsylvania

Railroad railroad industry

reputation in

routines in

ruthlessness in

sleeping cars

start-ups

steel industry. See Beaver Falls steel mill; Carnegie Brothers; Carnegie Company; Carnegie Steel; Duquesne
steelworks;

Edgar Thomson steelworks; Homestead steelworks

stock manipulation in

strategies in

telegraphy

Union Iron Mills. See Union Iron Mills

Union Pacific control

Woodruff Sleeping Car Company

on work ethic

Carnegie, Andrew (cont.) caricatures

childhood and early life

adults, relationships with

birth

education

emigration to U.S.

first jobs

free library fight

intellectual pursuits

political exposure

poverty

telegraphy jobs

writings

citizenship

during Civil War

Clemens and

Clemens on

Grover Cleveland and

club memberships

William Coleman and

critics

death

draft, Civil War

entertaining and social life

fame

financial affairs

liabilities in

prenuptial agreement

will and estate

William Frew and

Henry Clay Frick and

friends/friendships. See also specific people

choice of

gifts to

importance of

literary

pensions for

political

with short men

William Gladstone and

U. S. Grant and

hobbies and pastimes

fishing

golf

horses

yachting

honors and awards

St. Andrews rectorship

Collis Huntington and

illness and health

intellectual pursuits

debating society

education of the masses

literary salons

memorization and recitation

Nineteenth Century Club. See Nineteenth

Century Club reading

self-education

during youth

internationalism of

William Jones and

George Lauder, Jr., and

George Lauder, Sr., and

Louise and. See AC and Louise

Louise on

Louise’s biographer on

Gardner McCandless and

William McKinley and

Thomas Miller and

J. P. Morgan and

Junius Morgan and

Daniel Morrell and

John Morley and

John Morley on

New York City, move to

older people and

Harry Oliver and

opinions and beliefs. See also writings of under this heading on African Americans

on American work ethic

on banking system

on Democrats

on English-speaking race

on Germans/Germany

on gold standard

on golf

on government economic regulation

on Great Britain

on immigration

on imperialism

on industrial society

on inherited wealth

on Irish question

on labor and unions

on leisure

on London

on monopolies

on race issues

on science and religion

on socialism

on stock speculation

on tariffs

on trusts

on upward mobility

on U.S., See also Triumphant Democracy

(Carnegie) on U.S. railroads

on wealth. See also

“Gospel of Wealth” (Carnegie)

Panic of 1873 and

papers

patriotism

personal and family life. See also

AC and Louise; friends/friendships under this heading

bachelorhood

blackmail attempt

brother and

Lucy Carnegie and

children and

daughter and

engagement. See AC and Louise fake illegitimate daughter

father and

household members

marriage. See AC and Louiseon mother

mother and

retirement. See retirement and old age under this heading semiretirement

women in

personality and character

ambitiousness

confidence

contradictions in

excesses of

extremism

generosity

goals

hypochondria

impatience

independence

insecurity

loquacity

optimism

rudeness

self-importance

self-satisfaction

talents of

philanthropy and gifts

African American education

to American Federation of Labor

American higher education

in art

borrowing for

as business

Citizens’ Relief Committee, Pittsburgh

conditions attached to

dollar amounts

to Dunfermline

entire fortune, attempt to disburse. See also inherited wealth as example to others

as expiation for sins

fame and

first

to friends

to Gladstone

Hero Funds

higher education

to libraries. See libraries medical education

motivations for

in music

newspaper coverage of

organ program

pace of

Pan-American movement

parks

peace. See peace

pensions

to Pittsburgh

preretirement

recipients, search for

rejection of

requests for

Roosevelt’s African safari

Scottish university system

staff for

teachers’ pensions

technical schools

to Whitfield family

worker pensions

Henry Phipps and

Pittsburgh, move to

political engagement and activism

Anglo-American relations. See Anglo-American relations

Carnegie, Andrew (cont.)

anti-imperialist campaign

antislavery

British Guiana dispute

British radical causes

campaign donations

early experiences

international arbitration

Liberal Party (Britain) donations

lobbying

New York City mayoral race (1905)

Pan-American movement

party affiliation

peace. See peace

presidential election (1896)

presidential election (1900)

Republican Party

style of

tariff reform

portraits and photos

press conferences

properties and residences

George Pullman and

religion and

retirement and old age

activities during

activity level

adjustment to

daily routines during

health during

John D. Rockefeller and

Theodore Roosevelt and

Theodore Roosevelt on

Rosebery and

scandals

Carl Schurz and

Charles Schwab and

Charles Schwab on

Thomas Scott and

Scottish accent

simplified spelling and

speeches/public speaking

last

at New York Peace Society

at Nineteenth Century Club

pamphlets

St. Andrews rectorial addresses

Herbert Spencer and

staff, personal

accountants

assistants and secretaries

bequests to

household

musicians

philanthropy work by

Storey and

Sulzbach Brothers and

William Howard Taft and

William Howard Taft on

Ellen Terry and

J. Edgar Thomson and

Edward Townsend and

travel and vacations

affinity for

coaching trips

diaries. See also American Four-in-

Hand in Britain, An (Carnegie); Notes on a

Trip Round the World (Carnegie); Our

Coaching Trip (Carnegie) diplomatic tour

Dunfermline visits

to Egypt

to Europe

to France

to Great Britain

to London

round the world

to Russia

to Scotland

summer. See also Cresson; Skibo estate to Switzerland

to western U.S.

Vanderbilts and

John Vandevort and

Booker T. Washington and

William Whitney and

Wilhelm II, kaiser, and

Woodrow Wilson and

World War I and

writings of. See also specific titles aborted book projects

anger in

assistants in

autobiography. See Autobiography of Andrew Carnegie (Carnegie)

biography of Watt

on William Jennings Bryan

on business career

Civil War coverage

condolence notes

on daughter

diversity in

on English-speaking race

essay collections

on financial success

on gold standard

on Great Britain

on imperialism

on labor

letters

letters to the editor

memoirs

motivations for

newspaper articles

on peace

on Pennsylvania Railroad

on philanthropy

praise for

on Roosevelt

in self-defense

speech pamphlets

style of

success in

travel diaries. See also American Four-in-Hand in Britain, An (Carnegie); Notes on a Trip Round the World
(Carnegie); Our Coaching Trip (Carnegie)

on U.S. See Triumphant Democracy (Carnegie)

on wealth. See “Gospel of Wealth” (Carnegie)

during youth

writings on

biographies

interviews

magazine articles

newspaper coverage

Carnegie, Andrew (AC’s grandfather)

Carnegie, Anne (AC’s sister)

Carnegie, Elizabeth

Carnegie, James (great grandfather)

Carnegie, Louise (AC’s wife)

on AC

AC and. See AC and Louise

AC’s biographies and

AC’s business affairs and

AC’s old age and

AC’s retirement and

adjustment to married life

appearance of

Autobiography on

biography/biographers of n

Carnegie family and

Margaret Carnegie (AC’s mother) and

children, longing for

on Cluny castle

daily routines of

on daughter

daughter’s illness and

education of

engagement of

first continental visit

William Gladstone and

golf and

Burton Hendrick and n

household duties of

illness and health of

inheritance of

George Lauder and

letters of

marriage of. See AC and Louise

John Morley and

mother and

Nineteenth Centry Club and

personality and character of

portraits and photos of

pregnancy of

religion and

Scotland and

on Skibo

Carnegie, Lucy

Carnegie, Margaret (AC’s daughter)

Carnegie, Margaret (AC’s daughter) (cont.)

AC and

AC on

Autobiography on

birth of

Louise Carnegie on

childhood illness of

Clemens and

debut of

education of

engagement of

golf and

inheritance of

journal of

marriage of

photos of

religion and

travel of

travel diary of

writings of

Carnegie, Margaret (AC’s mother)

AC and

AC on

AC’s business and

AC’s engagement and

as breadwinner

Louise Carnegie and

death of

Dunfermline visits of

emigration decision of

illness and health of

religion and

residences of

salary of

travel of

Whitfield family and

Carnegie, Margaret (AC’s niece)

Carnegie, Nancy

Carnegie, Pennsylvania

Carnegie, Phipps, & Co.

Carnegie, Retta

Carnegie, Thomas Morrison (AC’s nephew)

Carnegie, Thomas (AC’s brother)

AC and

appearance of

business career of

death of

education of

Frick and

illness and health of

marriage of

properties of

religion and

residences of

writings on

Carnegie, William (AC’s father)

AC and

citizenship of

death of

personality and character of

religion and

worklife of

Carnegie (yacht)

Carnegie & Associate

Carnegie Brothers n. See also specific divisions

Frick and

ironclad agreement

merger into Carnegie Steel

organizational structure of

as partnership

Pennsylvania Railroad and

Carnegie Company

AC’s role at

AC’s share in

competition for

formation of

Frick’s share in

Pennsylvania Railroad and

Phipps’s share in

sale of

Schwab at

tubeworks

Carnegie Corporation

Carnegie Council on Ethics in International Affairs n. See also Church Peace Union Carnegie Dunfermline Trust

Carnegie Endowment for International Peace,

arbitration treaty and

board members of

Carnegie family

Allegheny City, arrival in

Allegheny City, journey to

Altoona, move to

Louise Carnegie and

Dunfermline, arrival in

economic strains on

emigration decision of

Pittsburgh, move to

religion and

residences of

Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching

Carnegie Hall, New York City

Carnegie Hero Fund Commission

Carnegie Institute, Pittsburgh

Carnegie Institution, Washington, D.C.

funding of

location of n

mission of

press coverage of

Carnegie International,

Carnegie, Kloman & Co.

Carnegie Library (Edinburgh)

Carnegie Library (Pittsburgh). See also Carnegie Institute

architects of

attempted rejection of

cost of

Museum of Natural History at

music hall in

opening of

Carnegie, McCandless, and Company

Carnegie Relief Fund

Carnegie Steel. See also specific divisions

AC on

AC’s loans from

AC’s philanthropy and

AC’s role at

AC’s share in

armament fraud accusations

benefits, worker

Bethlehem Steel and

board of managers

books about

by-laws

capital improvements in

capitalization of

competition for

criticisms of

during depression of 1890s

dividend payouts

founding of

Frick and

Frick’s resignation from

Frick’s share in

H. C. Frick Coke Company and

ironclad agreement

iron ore supplies for

labor issues at

Lauder and

Lauder’s share in

market share for

as non-union company

as partnership

Pennsylvania Railroad and

Phipps and

Phipps’s share in

profits/profitability of

publicity about

rail pools and

sale of. See sale of Carnegie Steel

Schwab and

spokesmen for

structure of

supplies for

transportation needs

vertical integration of

workers’ compensation at

workers’ salaries at

working conditions at

Carnegie Technical Schools

Carnegie Trust for the Universities of Scotland,

Carrère & Hastings

Cassatt, Alexander

Central American Court of Justice

Central Pacific Railroad

Central Park, New York City

Central Transportation Company

Century,

Chadwick, Cassie

Chalmers, Peter

Chamberlain, Joseph

Champlin, John

Chandler, Alfred

Charity Organization Society

Chartiers, Pennsylvania

Chernow, Ron

Chickering Hall

Childs, Asa

Childs, Otis

China, armament market

Chinese, AC on

Choate, Joseph

Christian Endeavor World,

Chudacoff, Howard

Church, Samuel

Church Peace Union

Citizens’ National Committee

Citizen’s Passenger Railway

City National Bank

Civic Forum

Civil War, U.S.

Alabama claims

armaments

Bull Run

draft

economic boom after

end of

Manassas

Seven Days’ Battle

troop transport

Clanachan, Mrs.

Clark, Mary

Clark, William

Clemenceau, Georges

Clemens, Jean

Clemens, Samuel

on AC

AC and

illness and death of

investing schemes of

letters of

Cleveland, Grover

Cleveland, Mrs.

Cleveland, Ruth

Cluny

Cobbett, William

Cockran, Bourke

code book, Edgar Thomson steelworks

coke industry. See also H.

C. Frick Coke Company

Coleman, Lucy. See Carnegie, Lucy Coleman, William

Colombia, Panama Canal and

Columbia Oil Company

Columbia University n

Commoner & American Glass Worker,

Conant, James Bryant

Congress, U.S.

annuities for ex-presidents

Carnegie Steel investigations by

Civil War draft and

immigration regulations

linen tariffs

peace initiatives and

railroad industry and

U.S. Steel investigation by

Conneaut Harbor

“Conservation of Ores and Related Minerals, The”

(Carnegie speech)

Continental Union League

Cooke, Jay

Cooper, Peter

Cooper-Hewitt Museum

n

Cooper Union

Corey, William

Cornell University

cotton mills, Allegheny City

Coworth Park

Crédit Mobilier scandal

Cremer, Randal

Cresson, Pennsylvania

Crimean War

Crimson (Harvard)

Cuba

Cumberland Island

Cyclops Iron Company

Czolgosz, Leon

 

Dabney, Morgan & Co.

Daily Telegraph (London)

Dallas, George W.

Dalmeny, Lord

Dalzell, John

Damrosch, Frank

Damrosch, Leopold

Damrosch, Walter

Dana, Charles A.

Davenport & St. Paul Railroad

David, Tom

Debs, Eugene

DeLong, C.

Democracy (Adams)

Democrats/Democratic Party

Dennis, Fred

Dennison, William, Jr.

Depew, Chauncey

Descamp, Baron

d’Estournelles de Constant, Baron

Dewey, Melvil

Díaz, Porfirio

Dierick, Mary

Dillon, Sidney

Diplodocus carnegii,

Directory of Pittsburgh and Allegheny Cities,

“Distant Possessions: The Parting of the Ways”

(Carnegie)

Dod. See Lauder, George, Jr.

Dodd, Thomas

Dodge, Gail

Dodge, William

Donaldson, James

Donaldson, Robert

Doubleday, Frank

Doubleday, Page & Co.

Douglas, Euphemia

D’Oyly Carte, Richard

Drake, Edwin

Dreiser, Theodore

Drew, Daniel

Drexel, Anthony

Drexel & Company

Drexel Morgan

Duncan, Edward

Dunfermline, Scotland

AC’s gifts to

AC’s visits to

Autobiography on

Carnegie family history in

economy of

history of

Hunt family and

labor unrest in

libraries

memories of AC in

politics in

schools/schooling in

water system of

Dunfermline Saturday Press,

Dungeness. See also Cumberland Island Duquesne Club

Duquesne steelworks

Eads, James Buchanan

Easley, Ralph

East Side Boys’ Lodging House

Eaton, Charles

Echo de Paris,

Economic Club

economy, U.S.

banking system

Civil War boom

depression of 1890s

gold standard

government regulation of. See also tariffs/tariff rates

Panic of 1837

Panic of 1873

Panic of 1893

Panic of 1907

productivity in

railroads’ importance to

silver standard

tariffs. See tariffs/tariff rates

Edgar Thomson steelworks

AC’s role in

Baltimore & Ohio Railroad and

benefits, worker

coke supplies for

competition for

construction of

design of

founding of

furnace men

injuries and deaths at

labor costs

labor and union issues at

libraries at

management of

materials and supplies for

as partnership

Pennsylvania Railroad and

Pinkerton men at

processes at

profitability of

shipping costs of

shutdowns at

skilled workers at

staff of

strategies at

strikebreakers at

strikes at

union and

union busting at

unskilled workers at

wage reductions at

walkouts at

workday at

workers of, AC’s views on

workers’ compensation at

working conditions at

Edinburgh, Scotland

Edinburgh Philosophical Institution

Edna,

Educational Alliance

Edward VII, king of England

Egypt, AC’s trip to

Eiffel Tower

Elgin, Lady

Elgin, Lord

Eliot, Charles Norton

Elkins, Stephen

Ellsworth, Kansas

Empire of Business, The (Carnegie)

“Employer’s View of the Labor Question, An”

(Carnegie)

Engels, Friedrich

Engineering,

English-speaking race, AC on

Entente Cordiale

Erie Canal

Erie Railroad

Established Church

E.T. See Edgar Thomson steelworks Europe. See also specific countries

AC’s visits to

American bond market in

crop failures in

gold standard in

imperialism of

Evarts, William M.

Evening Post (New York)

Everett & Company

Every Man a Speculator (Fraser)

Ewing, Judge

Exchange National Bank, Pittsburgh

Exposition Society, Pittsburgh

 

Fallières, Armand

Fargee, Ailee

Fargee, Richard

Farquhar, A.B.

Faulkner, Laurie

Federal Steel Corporation

Felton, Samuel

Ferdinand, Archduke Franz

Field, Cyrus

Fifth Avenue Baptist Church

Finch, Mother

Finney, Charles G.

First National City Bank

Fish, Hamilton

Fisk, James

Fiske, John

Fitch, John

Flower, Roswell P.

Folger, F.M.

Forster, John

Fortnightly Review,

Forum,

Foster, William

Foy, Billy

France

AC’s visits to

arbitration treaty with

empire

Great Britain and

Hero Fund

in World War I

Franks, John

Franks, Robert

Fraser, Steve

Freedom Iron Company

Freedom Iron and Steel

French, Alice

Frew, William

Frick, Adelaide

Frick, Helen

Frick, Henry Clay

AC and

AC’s philanthropy and

appearance of

biography of

caricatures

at Carnegie Brothers

Carnegie Steel and

coke business and

divided loyalties of

family life of

Homestead steelworks and

on Homestead strike

Homestead strike and

ironclad agreement and

labor and

Lauder and

lawsuit against AC

letters of

loan to

net worth of

personality and character of

Phipps and

photos of

political connections of

presidential election (1892) and

reputation of

residences of

resignation from Carnegie Steel

salary of

sale of Carnegie Steel and

Schwab and

share of Carnegie Company

share of Carnegie Steel

shooting of

as spokesman

talents of

Frick, Henry Clay, Jr.

Frick, Martha

 

Gage, Lyman

Gardie. See McCandless, Gardner

Gardner, Augustus

Garfield, James

Garland, Hamlin

Garmany, Jasper

Garnier, Charles

Garrett, John

Garrett, Robert

Gary, Elbert

Gates, Frederick

Gates, John

Gayley, James

Gaynor, William

George, David Lloyd

George, Henry

George V, king of England

Germans/Germany

AC on

arbitration agreement with

economy of

empire

Great Britain and

Hero Fund

militarization of

World War I and

Gevers, Baron

Gilder, Richard

Gilman, Daniel Coit

Gilman, Springfield, & Clinton Railroad

Ginn, Edwin

Gladstone, Catherine

Gladstone, Herbert

Gladstone, William

AC and

biography of

Louise Carnegie and

on inherited wealth

political career of

Glasgow Free Press,

Glass, John P.

Godkin, E.L. Going Abroad: European Travel in Nineteenth, Century American Culture (Stowe)

gold standard

Gompers, Samuel

Gordon, Charles

Gorman, Arthur

“Gospel of Wealth” (Carnegie)

Gladstone on

prestatements of

reviews of

Gottheil, Rabbi

Gould, George

Gould, Jay

Gowen, Franklin B.

Grant, Ulysses S.

Great Britain. See also specific countries

AC on

AC’s trips to

constitutional crisis

economy of

elections (1905)

employment in

France and

Germany and

Irish Home Rule

libraries in

Library Act of 1850

militarization of

politics in

Poor Laws

radical politics in

railroads in

Reform Act of 1867

Reform Bill of 1832

South Africa and

steel industry in

strikes in

U.S. and. See Anglo-American relations universal suffrage in

in World War I

Greeley, Horace

Greenback Labor Party

Grey, Edward

Griffith, William

Gutman, Herbert

 

Hague, The

Hague tribunal

Haldane, Richard

Hale, Eugene Pryor

Hale, George Ellery

Hampton Institute

Hanna, Marcus

Harcourt, William

Harding, Horace

Harper, Lydia

Harper’s New Monthly Magazine,

Harper’s Weekly,

Harrison, Benjamin

Harrison, Frederick

Harton, Bertha

Harvey, George

Harwick, Pennsylvania

Hawarden, Wales

Hay, John

Haymarket Square riot (1886)

H. C. Frick Coke Company

AC and

AC’s investment in

Carnegie Steel and

Connellsville strikes

Lauder and

Phipps and

Rainey’s company and

union busting at

Hearst, William Randolph

Heinde, Frederick

Henderson, Daniel

Henderson, Ebenezer

Hendrick, Burton J.

Herbert, Hilary A.

Hewitt, Abram

Hickey, Father

Higginson, Thomas Wentworth

higher education

accrediting bodies

American

professors’ pensions

requests for philanthropy in

scientific research

Scottish universities

Hill, David

Hilles, Charles

Hills, Linda Historical and Statistical Account of Dunfermline

(Chalmers)

Hofstadter, Richard

Hogan, Andrew

Hogan, Thomas

Holland, William J.

Holley, Alexander

Hollidaysburg, Pennsylvania

Holls, Frederick

Holmes, W.H.

Holt, Henry

Homer, Winslow

Homestead, Pennsylvania as company town

contemporary descriptions of

Dreiser on

Homestead, Pennsylvania (cont.) government of

population of

schools in

steelworks in. See Homestead steelworks unemployment in

Homestead Act

Homestead Local News,

Homestead steelworks

AC’s purchase of

armaments production

benefits, worker

competition against

expansion of

fraud accusations against

Frick and

furnace men

investment in

labor costs

labor and union issues at

labor-saving equipment at

newspaper coverage of

products of

profitability of

Schwab and

shutdowns and lockouts

skilled workers at

strikebreakers

strikes at. See Homestead strike (1892) structural products of

superintendent of

technology at

union activities at. See also Homestead strike (1892) union busting at. See also Homestead strike (1892)
unskilled workers at

wage reductions

workday at

workers’ compensation at

workers’ sense of ownership

workforce of

working conditions at

Homestead strike (1892)

AC and

AC on

AC’s biography on

Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel

Workers and

Autobiography on

barricading of plant

British reaction to

end of

fallout and legacy of

Frick and

Frick on

investigation of

Lauder and

lead up to

lockout

newspaper coverage of

Pennsylvania National Guard in

Pinkertons’ role in

presidential election and

standoff

strikebreakers

support for

sympathy strikes

violence and deaths during

workers’ advisory committee

Home Trust Company n

Homewood, Pennsylvania

Hot Springs, Arkansas

House of Commons

House of Lords

House of Representatives, U.S.

Ways and Means Committee

“How to Win Fortune” (Carnegie)

Hubble, Edwin

Hudson River

Hudson Trust Company

Huerta, Victoriano

Hughes, Charles Evans

Hughes, Hugh Price

Hunsiker, Millard

Hunt, James

Hunt, Robert W.

Hunt family

Huntington, Arabella

Huntington, Collis P.

 

Illinois Steel

immigrants/immigration

AC’s opinion on

disembarkation points

Eastern European

German

Irish

regulations

Scottish

steerage conditions for

imperialism, AC’s campaign against

Independent,

industrial society

AC on

government regulation of

Spencer on

Ingersoll, Robert

inherited wealth

AC on

Gladstone on

Inside History of the Carnegie Steel Company: A Romance of Millions (Bridge)

Interstate Commerce Commission

Iowa Contracting Company

Ireland, libraries in

Irish immigrants/Irish Americans

Irish League

Iron Age,

Iron City Forge

ironclad agreement

iron industry. See also specific companies

Dodd process

locational advantages in

union actions in

Webb process

iron mining

Iron and Steel Institute

Irvine (butler)

 

James, William

Japan

Jay Cooke & Co.

Jenkins, Roy

John (valet)

Johns, Jennie

Johnson, Andrew

Johnstown, Pennsylvania

Jones, Howard Mumford

Jones, William, Captain

AC and

AC on

at Cambria Iron

death of

duties of

Edgar Thomson lockout and

Edgar Thomson reading room and

labor and

salary of

Jordan, David Starr

J. S. Morgan & Co.

Jungle, The (Sinclair)

 

Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854

Keating, A. F.

Keokuk Bridge

Keyser, William

Keystone Bridge

Pennsylvania Railroad and

publicity brochures for

reading room at

Scott and

Thomson and

Union Iron Mills and

Keystone Telegraph Company

Kiel Regatta

Kilgraston, England

King, Aggie

King, Alexander

Kipling, Rudyard

Kloman, Andrew

Kloman, Anton

Kloman & Phipps

Knights of Labor

Knox, Philander

 

labor and union issues. See also workers/workingmen

AC and

AC on

Autobiography on

at Carnegie Steel

Dunfermline unrest

at Edgar Thomson steelworks

Frick and

at H. C. Frick Coke Company

at Homestead steelworks

Pennsylvania laws

political activities

at Pullman Company

in railroad industry

in Scottish weaving industry

in steel industry

at Union Iron Mills

unrest of 1886

workday

Lancaster, Joseph

Lauder, George, Jr. (Dod)

AC and

AC’s retirement and

at Carnegie Brothers

Louise Carnegie and

at Carnegie Steel

Carnegie Steel–H. C. Frick Coke merger and

emigration of

Frick and

H. C. Frick Coke Company and

Homestead strike and

letters of

sale of Carnegie Company and

sale of Carnegie Steel and

share in Carnegie Steel

Lauder, George, Sr. (uncle)

AC and

AC’s loan to

Louise Carnegie and

literary tastes of

religion of

Lauder, Maggie

Laughlin, James

League of Nations

League of Peace

“League of Peace, A—Not ‘Preparation for War’” (Carnegie)

Lee, Robert E.

Leishman, John

leisure, AC’s opinion on

Lenox, Massachusetts

Lesseps, Ferdinand-Marie de

Leupp, Francis E.

Liberal Party (Great Britain)

libraries

Aberdeen

AC’s early activism in

Allegheny City

Canada

Carnegie, Pennsylvania

conditions attached to grants

Dunfermline

Edgar Thomson steelworks

Edinburgh

Great Britain

Ireland

Keystone Bridge

locations of

maintenance funds for

naming of

New York. See New York Public Library

New Zealand

number of

openings of

Pennsylvania legislation

Philadelphia

Pittsburgh. See also Carnegie Institute

South Africa

Union Iron Mills reading room

Washington, D.C.

Wick Parish

Library of Congress

Library Hill Company

Licht, Walter

Light of Asia, The (Arnold)

Lincoln, Abraham

Lincoln in the Telegraph Office (Bates) n

Linderman, Robert

Lindew, John

Linville, Jacob

Loch Rannoch

Lodge, Henry Cabot

London

AC on

AC’s business dealings in

AC’s literary dealings in

AC’s visits to

London Echo,

London Trade Council

Longfellow, Alden & Harlow

Loomis, DeWitt

Loomis, Mrs. E.D.

Lorain Steel Company

Los Angeles Times,

Lott, Edward

Loughlin, Lidie

Louise Whitfield Carnegie: The Life of Mrs. Andrew, Carnegie (Hendrick and Henderson) n

Louisville & Nashville Railroad

Lovejoy, Francis

Low, Seth

Lucy (furnace company)

Lumsden, James

Lynch, Frederick

Lynch, Thomas

Lyon, Robert W.

 

McCandless, Alexander

McCandless, David

McCandless, Eddie

McCandless, Gardner (Gardie)

McCandless, Sheriff

McCargo, David

McCleary, William

McClellan, George

McClintock, Barbara

McClure’s,

McConway, William

McCook, Mr.

McCrea, James

Macgregor, William

McIlyar, J.J.

Mackey, Alexander

Mackie, Charles

McKim, Mead & White

McKinley, William

McLuckie, John

McPherson, Mr.

McPherson, William

Macphersons

Madero, Francisco

Magee, Christopher

Mahan, A.T.

Malthus, Thomas

Manhattan Eye and Ear Hospital

Mann, William d’Alton, Colonel

Mansfield, Coldwater & Lake Michigan Railroad,

Mansfield, Pennsylvania

Maravetz, Mr.

Margaret, Saint

Marine Hospital

Martin, Robert

Martin, William

Mathieson, Provost

Matthews, Brander

Mead, Edwin

Mellon, Andrew

Mellon, Thomas

Mellon Bank

Mellon family

Melvin, Samuel H.

Mesabi Range

Metropolitan Opera House

Mexico

Midvale Steel

Miles, Nelson

Milholland, John

Miller, Joaquin

Miller, Roswell

Miller, Thomas

millionaires

AC on

American

criticism of

Pittsburgh

Milwaukee and St. Paul Railroad

Minnesota Iron Company

Misa, Thomas J.

Miss Spence’s School

“Mr. Bryan the Conjurer” (Carnegie)

“Mr. Carnegie’s Conundrum: £40,000,000: What, Shall I Do with It?,”

Mitchell, Alexander

Monongahela House

Monongahela River

monopolies

Monroe Doctrine

Moore, William

Moore brothers

Morgan, J. Pierpont

AC and

purchase of Carnegie Company

Schwab and

Morgan, Junius

Morgan interests

Morley, John

on AC

AC and

AC’s bequest to

AC’s peace campaign and

on AC’s writing

Louise Carnegie and

family background of

Hague peace conference and

letters of

literary career of

personality and character of

political career of

U.S. visit of

on World War I

Morrell, Daniel

Morris, John

Morris, L.M.

Morrison, Anne. See Aitkin, Anne (AC’s aunt)

Morrison, Hew

Morrison, Margaret. See Carnegie, Margaret (AC’s mother)

Morrison, Seaton

Morrison, Thomas (AC’s cousin)

Morrison, Thomas (AC’s grandfather)

Morrison, Thomas (Bailie; AC’s uncle)

Morrison family

Morse, Jay

Morse, Samuel F.B.

Morton, Bliss & Co.

Morton, Levi

Morton & Rose

Mount Wilson Observatory

Mozoomdar, Babu Protap Chundr

Munsey, Frank A.

Munsterberg, Hugo

Murray, Alexander

Museum of Natural History

music

Musical Courier,

 

Nation, The,

National Arbitration Conference

National Civic Federation

National Commission on Accreditation

National Labor Tribune,

National Steel

National Tube

Nation of Steel, A (Misa)

Navy, U.S.

Nelson, Daniel

Nevins, Allan

New Jersey

Newspaper Days (Dreiser)

newspapers, AC’s ownership of

New York, gubernatorial election (1908)

New York Botanical Gardens

New York Central Railroad

New York City

AC’s move to

libraries. See New York Public Library

mayoral race (1905)

music scene in

riding establishments in

taxes

New York Evening Post,

New York Gas Company case

New York Herald,

New York Journal,

New York Peace Society

New York Philharmonic Society

New York Public Library

branch library system

conditions attached to gifts to

press coverage of gift to

New York Stock Exchange

New York Sun,

New York Symphony

New York Times,

on AC

AC’s writings in

New York (Daily) Tribune,

New York Weekly Tribune,

New York World,

New Zealand, libraries in

Nineteenth Century,

Nineteenth Century Club

Noble, George

North American Review,

Northern Pacific Railroad

Notes on a Trip Round the World (Carnegie)

on Chinese

editing of

literary citations in

publication of

reactions to

on women and matrimony

writing style of

 

Oakland, Pennsylvania

Oates, William

O’Donnell, Hugh

Ohio River

Oil Creek

oil/oil industry

Oliver, Harry

Oliver Mining Company

Olmsted, Frederick Law

Olney, Richard

Omaha Bridge

Opper, Frederick

“Opportunity of the United States, The” (Carnegie)

Oratorio Society

O’Rielly, Henry

O’Rielly Telegraph

Our Coaching Trip (Carnegie)

Outlook, The,

Out of This Furnace (Bell)

Overland Monthly,

 

Pacific & Atlantic Telegraph Company

Paderewski, Ignacy Jan

Paine, Albert Bigelow

Pall Mall Gazette,

Palmer, Courtlandt

Palmer, Courtlandt, Jr.

Palmer, Mrs. Courtlandt

Panama Canal

Pan-American movement

Panic of 1837

Panic of 1873

Panic of 1893

Panic of 1907

Paris Exposition (1889)

Paris Peace Conference (1898)

park, New York City, AC’s gift of

Pattison, Robert

Payne, Sereno E.

Peabody, George

peace

AC’s activism for

AC’s funding of. See also Carnegie, Endowment for International Peace; Church Peace Union

AC’s writings on

arbitration treaty

Congress and

disarmament conference

Hague conference

international arbitration agreements

Morley and

National Arbitration Conference

Roosevelt and

Taft and

Peace Palace, The Hague

Peacock, Alexander

Pennsylvania

antitrust injuctions

labor laws

library legislation

Pennsylvania Coal Company

Pennsylvania Company

Pennsylvania National Guard

Pennsylvania Railroad

AC on

AC’s career at

AC’s continued dealings with

AC’s resignation from

Adams Express and

Allegheny Valley Railroad and

bonds of

Cambria Steel and

Carnegie Brothers and

Carnegie Company and

Carnegie Steel and

competing railroads

Dodd process rails and

Edgar Thomson steelworks and

Keystone Bridge and

management of

Pennsylvania Steel and

Piper & Shiffler and

Pittsburgh and

post-Civil war

Pullman cars and

stockholder investigation of

strike

telegraphy and

troop transport and

Union Pacific takeover by

wage cut

Woodruff Sleeping Car Company and,

Pennsylvania Steel

People’s Party, Populists

Phi Beta Kappa

Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, libraries in

Philadelphia Exposition (1876)

Philadelphia Press,

Philadelphia & Reading Railroad

philanthropy

AC on

AC’s. See Carnegie, Andrew

Rockefeller’s n

Philippine Investigation Committee

Philippines

Phillips, William

Phipps, Henry, Jr.

AC and

appearance of

business career of

Carnegie Company share of

Louise Carnegie and

Carnegie Steel and

Carnegie Steel–H. C. Frick Coke merger and,

Frick and

H. C. Frick Coke Company and

ironclad agreement and

labor and

net worth

residences of

retirement of

sale of Carnegie Steel and

share in Carnegie Company

Phipps, Henry, Sr.

Phipps, John

Phipps, Mrs.

Phipps Arboretum

Pinchot, Gifford

Pinkerton, Allan

Pinkerton, Robert

Pinkerton men

Pioneer Coal

Piper, John

Piper & Shiffler

Pitcairn, Robert

Pittencrieff

Pittsburgh

AC and

AC on

AC’s gifts to

Carnegie family’s move to

centennial of

during Civil War

Dreiser on

economy of

European impressions of

journey from New York to

lack of culture in

libraries. See also Carnegie

Institute

locational advantages of

millionaires in

Pennsylvania Railroad and

political corruption in

post-Civil War

rail link to

technical schools

Pittsburgh Art Society

Pittsburgh Bessemer Steel Company

Pittsburgh Chronicle,

Pittsburgh Commercial,

Pittsburgh Commercial Gazette,

Pittsburgh Daily Commercial,

Pittsburgh Daily Gazette,

Pittsburgh Dispatch,

Pittsburgh Gazette,

Pittsburgh Grain Elevator

Pittsburgh Journal,

Pittsburgh Leader,

Pittsburgh Locomotive

Pittsburgh Plate Glass

Pittsburgh Post,

Pittsburgh Press,

Pittsburgh Times,

Pittsburgh University

Poincaré, Raymond

Political Register,

Pond, James B.

Popular Science Monthly,

Porter, Horace

Potter, John

Powderly, Terence

Poynton, John

Precursor, The,

presidential elections, U.S.

1888

1896

1904

1912

Pritchett, Henry

Problems of To-day, Wealth, Labor, Socialism (Carnegie)

Proctor, Redfield

Pulitzer, Joseph

Pullman, George

Pullman Car Company

 

Quay, Matthew

 

race issues, AC and

Railroad Gazette,

railroads/railroad industry. See also specific railroads

AC and. See also Pennsylvania, Railroad

AC on

in Baltimore

bond trading

bridge building and

Congress and

construction

corruption in

draft exemption for employees of

economy, importance to

failures in

government regulation of

in Great Britain

as heart of U.S. economy

infrastructure of

insider information in

iron industry and

labor and union issues

management of

Panic of 1873 and

post-Civil war

single-track

sleeping cars and

steel industry and

transcontinental

Rainey, William

Random Reminiscences of Men and Events (Rockefeller)

Rannoch Lodge

Reay, Lord

Recollections (Morley)

Reed, William

Reform Club

Reid, James

Reid, Whitelaw

religion

AC and

Carnegie family and

importance in U.S.

Reno, Morris

Republican National Committee

Republicans/Republican Party

“Results of the Labor Struggle” (Carnegie)

Review of Reviews,

Richardson, Fanny

Richardson, H.H.

Riddle, Ann Dike

Riddle, Samuel

Ritchie, Robert

“Road to Business Success, The: A Talk to Young, Men” (Carnegie)

Robert the Bruce

Roberts, George

Roberts, William T.

Robertson, Alexander

Robertson, R.

Robinson, Miss

Rockefeller, Abby

Rockefeller, John D., Jr.

Rockefeller, John D., Sr.

AC and

appearance of

autobiography of

during Civil War

corporate headquarters of

in iron mining business

letters of

in oil business

philanthropy of

religion and

Rockefeller University n

Rodgers, Daniel

Roebling, Washington A.

Rogers, Henry

Rolland School

Roosevelt, Ethel

Roosevelt, Kermit

Roosevelt, Theodore

on AC

AC and

AC on

African safari of

antitrust policy

Hague peace conference and

letters of

National Arbitration Conference and

Nobel Prize

peace initiatives and

political career of

reelection campaign of

simplified spelling and

Taft and

Wilhelm II and

Roosevelt Policy, The,

Root, Elihu

Rose, John

Rosebery, Lord

Ross, John

Round the World (Carnegie). See Notes on a Trip

Round the World (Carnegie) science AC on

Russia

AC’s visits to

armament market

Crimean War

Jews, pogroms against

in World War I

Russo-Japanese War

 

St. Andrews, Scotland

St. Andrew’s Golf Club

St. Andrews Society

St. Louis Bridge

St. Nicholas Hotel, New York City

sale of Carnegie Steel

AC and

AC-Frick legal dispute in

Frick and

Moore deal

newspaper coverage of

Phipps and

Salisbury, Lord

Sarmiento, Domingo Faustino

Schlenley, Mary

Schlenley Park

Schoyer, Sol

Schurz, Carl

Schwab, Charles

on AC

AC and

at Carnegie Company

at Carnegie Steel

at Homestead steelworks

letters of

J. Pierpont Morgan and

on steel industry

travel of

science

AC on

at U.S. Steel

requests for funding in

Scotland

AC’s visits to

Louise Carnegie and

Chartist movement in

Crofters Act of 1886

emigration from

employment in

Library Act of 1850

poor, assistance for

social and political upheaval in

universities

weaving in. See weavers/weaving

Scotsman,

Scott, James

Scott, John

Scott, Thomas

AC and

accounting skills of

as assistant secretary of war

Autobiography on

bridge building and

during Civil War

death of

Keystone Bridge and

marriage of

Panic of 1873 and

at Pennsylvania Railroad

politics and

Pullman stock and

railroad financing and

steel industry and

Texas and Pacific Railroad Company and

Union Pacific and

Union Pacific, Eastern Division and

Scott, William Lawrence

Scottish Free Church

Scribner, Charles

Scribner’s, publishers

Scribner’s Statistical Atlas,

Second Great Awakening

Securities and Exchange Act

Senate, U.S.

Serbia

Seymour, Mrs.

Shadowbrook

Shaw, Lord

Shearn, Clarence

sheriffs, Allegheny County

Sherman, John

Sherman Antitrust Act

Sherman Silver Purchase Act

Shiffler, Aaron

Shinn, William

silver standard

Simmons, J. Edward

simplified spelling

Simplified Spelling Board

Sinclair, Upton

Sixth Massachusetts Regiment

Skibo estate

AC’s refurbishment of

Louise Carnegie on

Edward VII’s visit to

purchase of

World War I and

slavery

Sleepy Hollow cemetery

Sloane, John

Smiley, Albert

Smith, Charles Stewart

Smith, Godwin

Smithsonian Institution

socialism, AC’s opinion on

Social Statics (Spencer)

Solar Iron Works

Sons of Vulcans

Sotak, Joseph

South Africa

Great Britain and

libraries in

South Pennsylvania Railroad

Spanish–Cuban–American War

Spectator of London,

Spence, Clara B.

Spencer, Herbert,

AC and

Autobiography on

James Bridge and

letters of

personality and character

theories of

on Triumphant Democracy,

on U. S.

Spring-Rice, Cecil Arthur

Standard History of Pittsburgh (Wilson)

Standard Oil

Stanford, Leland

Stanley, Augustus O.

Stanton, Edwin

Stead, William

Steele, Mr.

steel industry. See also specific companies

AC’s involvement in. See Carnegie Brothers; Carnegie Steel; Edgar Thomson steelworks; Homestead steelworks

Autobiography on

Bessemer process

British

close ties within

compensation system in

cooperation and competition in

depression of 1890s and

governmental role in

lobbying by

locational advantages in

market for

mergers in

nickel-and-steel alloy

overproduction, protections against

price fluctuations in

production

products of

profits in

rail pools

railroads and

Schwab on

Thomas Scott and

structural products

tariffs

technologies of

J. Edgar Thomson and

trusts in

union activities in

wage rates

Steffens, Lincoln

Steinway Hall

Stevens Institute

Stewart, David

Stewart, Rebecca

stock speculation, AC on

Stokes, Anson Phelps

Stopes, Maria

Storey, Samuel

Stowe, William

Strachey, John St. Loe

Straus, Isidor

Straus, Oscar

Strouse, Jean

Stuart, J.E.B.

Studebaker, Clem

Sulzbach Brothers

Sumner, William Graham

Swank, James

Swedenborg, Emanuel

Swedenborgians

Swedes

Swift, Gustavus

Swinton, John

Switzerland, AC’s visit to

Symphony Society

 

Taft, Mrs. William Howard

Taft, William Howard

on AC

AC and

AC’s bequest to

election of

peace initiatives and

Philippines and

Roosevelt and

tariffs and

tariffs/tariff rates

AC’s campaign against

linen

reform of

steel

Taylor, Charles

Tchaikovsky, Pyotr Ilich

Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association

telegrams

telegraphy

Terry, Ellen

Texas and Pacific Railroad Company

Third National Bank, Pittsburgh

Thomas, Theodore

Thompson, Dolly

Thompson, Edward

Thompson, Henry Yates

Thomson, Daniel

Thomson, Frank

Thomson, J. Edgar

AC and

Allegheny Valley Railroad and

Autobiography on

during Civil War

Dodd process rails and

Keystone Bridge and

at Pennsylvania Railroad

Pullman stock and

steel industry and

Texas and Pacific Railway and

Union Pacific and

Union Pacific, Eastern Division and

Thomson, Margaret

Thurston, George

Tilden, Samuel

Times of London,

Titanic,

Tobin, P.

Tocqueville, Alexis de

Toker, Franklin

Townsend, Edward

Town Topics,

Tracy, Benjamin

transport/transportation

Carnegie Steel needs

lowering costs of

in New York

of oil

of troops

travel

AC’s. See Carnegie, Andrew

canal boat

New York to Pittsburgh

rail

steamboat

steerage

Treaty of Paris

Trevelyan, George

Triumphant Democracy (Carnegie)

British reactions to

inaccuracies in

publication of

reception of

second edition of

Spencer on

writing of

Trollope, Anthony

trusts

AC on

Pennsylvania injunctions against

as presidential election issue

Roosevelt and

Sherman Antitrust Act

in steel industry

Tumulty, Joseph

Tuskegee

Tuthill, William

East Ninety-first Street

Twombly, Hamilton

 

Union Iron Mills

Keystone Bridge and

reading room at

union activities at

Union Pacific, Eastern Division

Union Pacific Railroad n

Union Railroad

Union Telegraph and Lochiel Iron

United States

AC on. See also Triumphant Democracy (Carnegie)

economy of. See economy, U.S.

industrial ascendancy of

linen imports in

religion, importance to

Spencer on

westward expansion

United States Commission on Industrial Relations,

United States Golf Association

United States Trust Company

U.S. Steel

Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel, Workers and

antitrust investigation

capitalization of

U.S. Steel (cont.)

formation of

Charles Schwab and

 

Vanderbilt, Cornelius

Vanderbilt, Cornelius, II

Vanderbilt, George W.

Vanderbilt, William Henry

Vanderbilt, William Kissam

Vandevort, Benjie

Vandevort, John

Vandevort, Mrs.

Van Dyke, John

Vaux, Calvert

Venezuela

“Venezuelan Question, The” (Carnegie)

Victor Emmanuel III, king of Italy

Victoria, queen of England

Villa Allerton

Vincent, Miss

 

Walcott, Charles

Walker, John

Wall, Joseph

Waller, Miss

Walsh, Frank P.

Wanamaker, John

“War Abolished—Peace Enthroned” (Carnegie),

Ward, James

Ward, Lester

Warren, Kenneth n

Washington, Booker T.

Washington, D.C.

during Civil War

library

Washington, George

Washington Post,

Watson, Tom

Watt, James

wealth, AC’s opinion on. See also “Gospel of Wealth” (Carnegie) weavers/weaving

decline of

labor unrest among

market for

power looms and

wages of

Weihe, William

Welsh, J. Lowber

Wesley, John

Western Pennsylvania Exposition Society

Western Union

West Highland Railroad

Westinghouse, George

Westminster Gazette,

West Shore Railroad

Wharton, Joseph

White, Andrew

White, Richard

White, Stanford

Whitfield, Estelle

Whitfield, Fannie

Whitfield, Henry

Whitfield, John

Whitfield, Louise. See Carnegie, Louise (AC’s wife) Whitman, Walt

Whitney, William

Wick Parish

Wilhelm II

Wilkins, Mrs.

Wilkins, William

Wilson, Erasmus

Wilson, James

Wilson, John

Wilson, Margaret Barclay

Wilson, William

Wilson, Woodrow

Windsor Hotel

Wiscasset,

W. & J. Sloan Company

Wolf, Joe

Wolfe, Mr.

women

AC and

AC’s writings on

Woodruff, T.T.

Woodruff Sleeping Car Company

workers/workingmen

AC as

AC’s views on

divide and conquer strategy toward

ethnic divisions among

pensions for

politics of

skilled

unskilled

work ethic, U.S., AC’s opinion on

Working for the Railroad (Licht)

workingmen’s organizations, British

World War I

Worshipful Company of Plumbers

Wright, Miss

Wyoming, University of

 

Ximenze, Madame

 

Yorkville library, New York City

Youmans, Edward Livingston

Youmans, Mrs.

Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA)

Youth’s Companion,

^{*}I have not included redundant information in the notes when the source of a citation is found in the text.

^{*}Though the names were similar, the Union Pacific, Eastern Division, was not connected to the Union
Pacific.

^{*}Cacoethes scribendi, translated best into an itch or mania for writing, has been attributed, among others,
to Juvenal, Addison, and Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr.

^{*}Louise Whitfield kept a diary all her life, which forms the basis—with interviews—of the biography written
by Burton Hendrick and his collaborator, Daniel Henderson. Because I was unable to locate any of Louise’s
personal papers, I have had to rely on the Hendrick and Henderson biography for most of what follows. It is
entitled Louise Whitfield Carnegie: The Life of Mrs. Andrew Carnegie, and was published by Hastings House in
1950.

^{*}There are two versions of Carnegie’s account of this trip. The first, privately printed in 1882, was
entitled Our Coaching Trip; the second, published by Charles Scribner’s Sons in 1883, was entitled An American
Four-in-Hand in Britain.

^{*}The magnificent Carnegie library and social center at Braddock, with swimming pool, public baths, bowling
alleys, art gallery, gymnasium, and billiard hall, was constructed in 1889.

^{*}The name was borrowed from the collapsible cane that artists used as a walking stick when strolling the
city’s streets and to prop up their hands while painting.

^{*}Colin Hunter was a well-known painter; the R.A. stands for Royal Academy.

^{*}The original document, on which “duplicate” is clearly written, was sequestered in a safe at the Home
Trust Company in Hoboken, New Jersey, a private bank Carnegie established in 1901 to administer his trust
funds and serve as the executor of his will. Only when the building in which the papers were stored was
demolished in 1998 was this document, along with Carnegie’s 1888 correspondence with his lawyers, discovered
by the contractor and, with the assistance of Kenneth Miller and Vartan Gregorian, purchased by Columbia
University. All documents regarding William Carnegie’s naturalization are in series IX, box 8, folder 10,
CCNY; for a copy of the “Declaration of Intent,” without the “duplicate” notation, see vol. 1, ACLC.

^{*}The Carnegie firms in Pittsburgh were organized into two separate companies, each owned by the same group
of partners. Carnegie, Phipps owned Homestead; Carnegie Brothers, Edgar Thomson. Abbott was the chairman of
the board of Carnegie, Phipps; Frick of Carnegie Brothers.

^{*}We don’t know why he referred to his rivals as blackmailers. In the heat of battle, he was likely to say
such things about competitors.

^{*}Carnegie’s birthplace in Dunfermline has been preserved, but his first home in America was torn down in
the 1960s to make room for Three Rivers Stadium.

^{*}Furnaces, once cooled, were subject to damage and took a considerable amount of time to start up again.

^{*}These figures include only steel made in Bessemer ovens, not that made in the open-hearth ovens like those
Carnegie had installed at Homestead.

^{*}The Homestead events of 1892 can be described as both a lockout and a strike. The lockout came first, when
the plant was shut down. But it was transformed into a strike when Frick invited the workers back to the
plant—on his terms—and they refused to do so.

^{*}We don’t know precisely what Carnegie was referring to here. It might have been the landing of the
Pinkertons or the decision to bring in scab labor.

^{*}For the new few years, the annual exhibition would veer back and forth between being a showcase for
American artists and an exhibition of the year’s best paintings regardless of nationality. Despite Carnegie’s
wishes, the directors and judges would, in rather short order, open the exhibit to non-American artists. Over
the next century and more, the Carnegie International would present the best in contemporary paintings,
sculpture, and, more recently, video and photographic artists, to Pittsburgh audiences.

^{*}Carnegie would, for the rest of his life, insist on misspelling Rockefeller’s name in various ways.

^{*}Carnegie must have been referring to John Stuart Mill here, though I can find no reference to the
statement cited.

^{*}Kenneth Warren, whose account of the breakup is the most compelling we have, concedes that from this point
on it is difficult to follow the sequence of events. “There was clearly further tampering with the company
records. The evidence now available is not complete”—Triumphant Capitalism, 255.

^{*}Years later, according to a story that Schwab told Hendrick, Carnegie and Morgan met on board an ocean
liner crossing the Atlantic. Carnegie told Morgan that he realized now he should have asked for an additional
$100,000. “‘Well,’ replied Morgan with a grin, ‘you would have got it if you had.’” Carnegie denied the story,
and claimed that he had named a price he thought “eminently fair.” “I have been told many times since by
insiders that I should have asked $100 million more and I could have gotten it easily,” he told congressional
investigators in 1912. “Once and for all I want to put a stop to all this talk.”—Hendrick, II, 142; Hendrick
interview with Schwab, vol. 257, ACLC; U.S. Steel, 2379.

^{*}Sixty-seven of them would be built, with Queens getting a few extra. When, in 1996, Mary Dierick wrote her
book about the New York City Carnegie libraries, she found that fifty-seven of the buildings were still
standing, fifty-four of them operating as branch libraries.

^{*}There is a listing for a “Carnegie, William, weaver, Rebecca Street” in Woodward & Rowland’s Allegheny
Directory for the Year 1852.

^{*}The Carnegie Institution began life with a $10 million endowment, to which Carnegie added an additional $2
million in 1909 and $10 million in 1911. Rockefeller’s Institute for Medical Research, the precursor to
Rockefeller University, was launched with a grant of $200,000; in 1903, Rockefeller donated an additional
$660,000 for a tract of land on which to build a permanent home for the institute on York Avenue; in 1907, he
responded to a request from his directors for a $6 million endowment by giving $2.6 million; in 1908, he gave
another $8 million.—Chernow, Titan, 472–78: NYT, February 1, 1902, 1.

^{*}The Carnegie Institution’s administrative headquarters remain in Washington, D.C., where they have always
been, though four of its six departments are located elsewhere: the Department of Embryology, founded in 1913,
in Baltimore; the Department of Global Ecology, the newest addition, established in 2002, at Stanford
University, also the home of the Department of Plant Biology. The departments of Terrestrial Magnetism and the
Geophysical Laboratory remain in Washington.

^{*}Fifty-four caskets and 133 certificates are currently stored at the Birthplace Museum in Dunfermline.

^{*}In 1976, the Carnegie mansion became the home of the Smithsonian Institution’s Cooper-Hewitt Museum.

^{*}Some of these scrapbooks can now be found at the University of Pittsburgh archives.

^{*}Carnegie was turning out pamphlets one after another: that spring, he published “Armaments and Their
Results” and two open letters to the London papers reprinted as “The Path to Peace.”

^{*}The Church Peace Union is still in existence, but is now known as the Carnegie Council on Ethics and
International Affairs.

^{*}The Autobiography would never be finished by Carnegie. The book that was eventually published was
assembled posthumously by an editor chosen by Louise Carnegie.

^{*}He had perversely changed the usual spelling of the family name as a young man.

^{*}There were, indeed, no public libraries in Pittsburgh or Allegheny City, as the Pittsburgh Post complained
bitterly in an 1853 editorial.

^{*}Regrettably, Dod’s letter to Carnegie has been lost. We know of its contents only from Andrew’s response.

^{*}In his Autobiography, Carnegie erroneously dates the change to 1856.

^{*} The only source for this story, except for Carnegie, is David Homer Bates, Lincoln in the Telegraph
Office, published in 1907. Bates tells the same story as Carnegie, but inadvertently qualifies its value as
primary evidence by writing that his “account of Mr. Carnegie’s work…was prepared after a recent interview
with him, and has received his indorsement”—Bates, Lincoln in the Telegraph Office (New York: Century Co.,
1907), 20.

^{*}There is no foolproof scheme of comparing the economic power of individual incomes in years past to today.
Historians have traditionally used the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to compare the worth of dollars in times
past with today. Unfortunately, the CPI, while accounting for inflation over time, cannot measure the economic
power of dollars, based on the size of the total economy. Using data supplied by EH. Net and Professor Samuel
H. Williamson, I have chosen to use either the nominal Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita or the relative
share of the GDP as the measures I apply to compare the values of incomes. This is, though imperfect, the best
way, I believe, to account in today’s dollars, for the economic power of individual incomes in the past. For
the worth of incomes prior to 1890, I use the nominal GDP per capita; after 1890, as the economy begins to
grow enormously in size, I use the relative share of GDP as my measure. As the most recent figures available
for this purpose are the 2004 GDP figures, it is these I use for comparison. For further information on these
measures, please see Samuel H. Williamson, “What Is the Relative Value?” Economic History Services, December
14, 2005: http://www.eh.net/hmit/compare/.
