IRQ
CHARLES A. LINDBERGH
Walter S. Ross

$m
!
!
'

$7.95

je

THE LAST HERO:
CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

NEW

YORK.

|
SI'

By Walter S. Ross

OES IT! 1

Few international celebrities of the first

ILES THR\

magnitude have been so baffling to the
outside world as Charles Lindbergh, who
won the adulation of the world with his
epochal flight of May 21, 1927. In this
perceptive full-length biography, Lind-

FRENCH

bergh emerges as a man who has always
had his own clear idea of who he was and
what he wanted to do, and has had to use
every means in his power to keep his

fame from engulfing his life.
Fame was thrust upon him after his
flight to Paris— and he thrust it back,
turning down millions of dollars in commercial

offers.

He

stubbornly resisted

intrusions into his personal life, but the

pressure of public curiosity was relentless. In 1932 his infant son was kidnaped
and killed, and the tragedy was turned
into a circus by press and public. Then,
in 1940 and 1941, idolatry turned to virulent condemnation when he spoke out
against aid to the Allies and U.S. involvement in the war.
What Walter Ross reveals here are the
qualities which have enabled Lindbergh
to go on with his life and to make sig-

nificant

contributions

widely

separate

Alexis Carrel, the

in

a

fields— his

number of
wctk with

Nobel Prize winning

scientist, in developing a perfusion

to

pump

keep organs alive outside the body;
(Continued on back flap)

With sixteen pages of photographs

YA

0268

MAP OF LINDBERGHS TRANSATLANTIC!

LINDBERGH TRIP

LANCA FLIGHT

thrills

ven Up as Designer

President

h Him— Plane Nar-

Praia

"Heroic Flier" and Con*
for Nungesser and Co

named

CAPITAL THROBS WIT!

Cere-

Kellogg, New, MacNider,!

is

Cheered

Cables

l

•scapes Burning.

:raft

mm

at

nmander, Now Last

and Many More Join In

Waits on Weather.

Tribute to Daring Y

Special to Ta# Ste York

o fault of his own, Clarmberlin, who with Bert
ished a world's non-stop
a few weeks ago, will
reoord-breaking monoattempt to establish a
York-Paria non-stop
lanca, designer of the
harles S. Levine of the
rcraft Company, owner
came to the parting of

WASHINGTON, May
triumph of Captain Charle:
bergh in flying from Ne»
Paris without a stop crea

mendous sensation in
and found in

capital

i

sponse in a host of offi
and statements congr;
daring aviator upon his
President Coolidge >
admiration in a messag

'.

—
r
Y

rk mmt$.
22,

ft«iirin.ri

1927.

Km. i>«

a

today and tomorrow;
moderate to freih aoutheriy »md».

piciur»

••*•

Section

THE WEATHER
<l*ncr«ll\

kitlM

inn..!

!•

lit

i«r

fair

M orb— c
1 1/ P l"* fc' NI T«C
nvr,tr.i>i.'>

n.\. „.,„,,

,n

,„

ri.»«h»r
nr*nktwn i r.\ rr.M

*t*i»tiall«n
„,,

'

•

PARJS /TV 55% HOURS;
JGH SNOW AND SLEET;
WRY -ftiM^QEF
FIELD
%$%%*

—

MB THUHDEBOUS KUK

flm
,

-

.Breaks Through Lines of Soldiers and
Police and

Surging to Plane Lifts

Weary Flier from

His Cockpit

#*-

AVIATORS RESCUE HIM FROM FRENZIED
.

MOB OF 25,000

%
Paris Boulevards Ring With Celebration After Day

SHOWING THE SPEED OF HIS TRIP

and NightWatch

—American

Flag Is Called

For and Wildly Acclaimed.
By EDWIN L. JAMES.
Cupyrlthl. 1BI7. by Th# St
8p»cl«l C«bl» to Till

York Tlrrn Company.

!» Vn|« TlHII.

PARIS, May 21.— Lindbergh did it. Twenty minutes after
10 o'clock tonight suddenly and softly there slipped out of the
darkness a gray-white airplane as 25,000 pairs of eyes
strained
toward it. At 10:24 the Spirit of St. Louis landed
anilines of
soldiers, ranks of policemen and stout steel
fences went down
before a mad rush as irresistible as the tides of the ocean.

"Well,

1

made it," smiled Lindbergh, as the little white

monoplane came to a half in the middle of the field and the first
vanguard reached the plane. Lindbergh made a move to jump
out. Twenty hands reached for him and lifted him out as if ha
were a baby. Several thousands in a minute were around the
plane. Thousands more broke the barriers of Iron rails round
the field, cheering wildly.
Lifted From His Cockpit.
As he was lifted to the ground Lindbergh was pale, and,
with his hair unkempt, he looked completely worn out. He had
strength enough, however, to smile, and waved his hand to the

crowd.

Soldiers with fixed bayonets were unable to keep back
the crowd.

United States Ambassador Herrick was among the first to

welcome and congratulate the hero.

A New York Times man was one of the first to reach the
machine after

its

graceful descent to the field. Those first
had a picture that will live in their

to arrive at the plane

THE LAST HERO: Charles A. Lindbergh

ALSO BY WALTER S. ROSS
The Climate Is Hope
The Man with the Miracle Cure
Coast to Coast

The Immortal

THE LAST HERO:

HARPER & ROW. PUBLISHERS
NEW YORK. EVANSTON, AND LONDON

CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

By Walter S. Ross

Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint excerpts from the
following:

Wings Over America by Harry Bruno. Copyright 1942
printed by permission of Harry Bruno.

by Harry Bruno. Re-

The Hero: Charles A. Lindbergh and the American Dream by Kenneth S.
1959 by Kenneth S. Davis. Reprinted by permission of
Davis. Copyright
Doubleday & Company, Inc.
Of Flight and Life by Charles A. Lindbergh. Copyright 1948 Charles Scribner's

©

Sons. Reprinted with the permission of Charles Scribner's Sons.

The Spirit of St. Louis by Charles Lindbergh. Copyright 1953 Charles Scribner's Sons. Reprinted with the permission of Charles Scribner's Sons.

©

This High Man by Milton Lehman. Copyright
1958 by Milton Lehman.
Reprinted by permission of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Inc.

©

Seed Money by Milton Lomask. Copyright
1964 by Farrar, Straus & Company, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Inc.
Diaries and Letters 1930-1939 by Harold Nicolson, edited by Nigel Nicolson.
1966 by William Collins Sons & Company, Ltd. Reprinted by
Copyright
permission of Atheneum Publishers.

©

©

Air Intelligence Activities by Colonel Truman Smith. Copyright
1968 by Yale
University Library. Used by permission of Yale University Library.

©

Kidnap: The Story of the Lindbergh Case by George Waller. Copyright
1961
by George Waller. Reprinted by permission of the publisher, The Dial Press,
Inc.

Endpapers © 1927 by The New York Times Company.
Reprinted by permission.

the last hero: charles a. Lindbergh. Copyright © 1964, 1965, 1968 by
Walter S. Ross. Printed in the United States of America. All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever
without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in
critical articles and reviews. For information address Harper i? Row, Publishers,
Incorporated, 49 East 33rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10016.

Y

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER: 67-28813

For
Just Lunning

and for
Winifred, Fred and Liz

"Character," says Novalis,
in one of his questionable aphorisms—

"character is destiny."

—George Eliot

CONTENTS

The Last Hero

xiii

1

LINDBERGH TODAY

2

ORIGINS

3

BOYHOOD
27
EARLY FLIGHT

4
5
6

1

9

ARMY
59
AIRMAIL

45

69

9

THE SPIRIT OF ST. LOUIS
NEW YORK-PARIS
98
PARIS AND RETURN
120

10

"WE"

11

13

CELEBRATION
146
FORTY-EIGHT-STATE TOUR
161
MEXICO

14

ANEWLIFE

15

TO THE ORIENT

16

21

194
DEATHS IN THE FAMILY
211
THE HAUPTMANN CASE
229
DR. CARREL
243
DR. GODDARD
THE AIR MAIL CONTROVERSY
ENGLAND, FRANCE, GERMANY

22

AIR POWER

23

SPEAKING OUT

7
8

12

17

18

19

20

78

139

150

170
181

273

285

254
261

CONTENTS

adi

27

289
america first
Lindbergh's personal war
family life
333
change
355

28

a free man

24

25
26

362

Sources and Acknowledgments

Notes

373

Index

391

321

371

.0

Illustrations follow page 204.

THE LAST HERO

CHARLES

A.

LINDBERGH WAS ONCE THE MOST WOR-

shiped, adored, harried, photographed, written-about, and pursued

man in the world—more widely loved than any private citizen in
our century.

Did he deserve all that? Did he want it?
His feat, the first nonstop flight from New York to Paris, in May,
1927—was it the epic deed of a true hero or, as one critic said, "the
climactic stunt of a time of marvelous stunts"?

After the flight we made him a demigod. In "we" are included not

only Americans but the French,
peoples.

the

We extrapolated him and his

invincibility,

incorruptibility,

and many other
deed into a symbol of

British,

of perfect virtue—of everything, in

short, that we wanted in a godhead.

Was he really a hero? Or were we creating an idol to replace
our lost ideals?
We not only made Lindbergh our hero, we kept him that way.
The other great achievers of his day got headlines and then vanished
into vaudeville. But Lindbergh was treated differently from celebri-

champions, and even Presidents. We kept him on our
We followed him around. We clutched at him. We
drove by his house in packed phalanxes on our day off, hoping for
a glimpse of him. We did this not just for nine days, but for eight
years—until he fled the country. And when he came back three years
later, he was still as much of a hero as though he'd never left.
Was there— is there— something about Lindbergh that calls for
this kind of adulation?

ties, stars,

front pages.

No private individual has ever had so much adoration from so
adii

adv

THE LAST HERO

many people for so long a time as Lindbergh. ( In fact, even among
public figures one is hard put to find a parallel. Gandhi, perhaps;
Stalin; Nasser; Charlie Chaplin.)

In any case, nobody ever got so

much sustained attention without wanting it or working at it. Lindbergh did neither.

He was not only extraordinary as a perennial hero; history made
him unique by choosing him as the last hero. This was the result of
many circumstances. The most obvious was that Lindbergh's epic
deed was so much a solo performance from first to last. He spent his
own money and helped raise the rest. He helped design and build
his own airplane. He laid out the route. He selected the time and
place of takeoff. He made all the decisions about what he would

carry and leave behind, where he would fly and where he would
land. And, of course, he flew alone.

His modern counterparts, the astronauts, just do not have the
same opportunities. If one could measure such things, they must be
every bit as brave as Lindbergh. They are certainly better trained
than he was. But they are government employees. They fly in
machines so huge and complex and expensive that only governments can afford them. The operation has to be a team affair, involving thousands of technicians and specialists, billions of dollars
of public funds, directed by computers. Very little of the work the
astronauts do in space or on the ground is of their volition.

And there are other reasons for Lindbergh's unique status. The
world was an innocent place in 1927, its jazzy concerns concealing a
desire to reach backward into the security of the prewar era. We
made Lindbergh a hero because we still believed in heroism. There
are today many bold men exploring frontiers in strange lands, at the
bottom of the sea, in the air, on mountains as well as outer space.
But none of them— the astronauts, Sir Francis Chichester, Lindbergh's own son Jon, a record-holding deep-sea diver— has achieved
a status higher than that of innovator, explorer, adventurer. They
are not heroes, because the world no longer creates heroes,

no

longer believes in heroes.

The contrast between what we formerly made Lindbergh and
what we make of him today is vast. Once a demigod, what is he
now? He is not really forgotten by those who were old enough to
know what was happening between 1927 and 1941, but he is not
remembered by them, either. Mention of his name brings a startled

THE LAST HERO

xv

reaction. Surprise, perhaps, but not the old adoration. Some remember him fondly; many recall him with bitterness. And to a whole
new generation he has never been known at all. A recent informal
survey of a group of high-school students at the exhibit of the
Spirit of St. Louis, Lindbergh's old airplane, in the Smithsonian Institution, revealed that many thought he had died in World War II.

The distance between his elevation and his obscurity, between
total love and nostalgia or perhaps dislike, must measure something

more than the passage of time. What?
It was to answer some of these questions that this book was
written. It started when Harold T. P. Hayes, the editor of Esquire,

asked the writer "Where did Charles A. Lindbergh go?" This
resulted in an article for the magazine with the question as the title.

Genevieve Young, an editor at Harper & Row, suggested the subject
might be worth more research. She thought this might develop into
a book. The writer agreed. Hence this biography.

made clear that this is not an authorized biography.
The writer has never met Lindbergh. Lindbergh has not in any way
It should be

helped with this work. He has instead attempted to discourage it. In
the only communication received from him by the author—it was in
reply to a letter requesting an interview with Mrs. Lindbergh— Mr.
Lindbergh wrote, "I prefer not to have a biography published/'
Why, then, in view of his wish, has this book been written?
Because, as one of his friends said, "He is an historical character,
partly by choice, partly by circumstance. Like it or not, he owes a
debt to history ." The writer feels, too, that we owe Lindbergh
another look—one not clouded by crisis, or polemic, or remembered
controversy. Like any human being, he has the right to be judged
by the truths of our time, by current standards, by his whole life,
and not just by what happened in the past. Lindbergh was formerly
a magnet for news coverage. His absence from the public scene has
left a vacuum. In this news void his image has sprouted myths the
way old statues grow verdigris. So part of the purpose of this book
is

to clarify the record, not to violate his personal life.
It has for a long time been Lindbergh's policy and practice not to

any research that might invade his privacy or indeed that
any living person. His papers are locked up in the Sterling
Library at Yale University, the Library of Congress, and in his own
files, and may not be seen without his permission. He refused
assist

of

THE LAST HERO

acvi

He also refused permission to Harper &
Row for this writer to quote from a few letters and speeches to

permission to this writer.

which he holds copyright. The interested reader is directed to the
originals in the source notes at the back of this book.
Lindbergh has drawn his family and friends into a conspiracy of
silence. His acquaintances and colleagues are widely separated and
often do not know one another. This develops out of Lindbergh's
way of living and traveling, so much alone, to so many different
parts of the world, and out of his current widely separated interests
in science, in aviation, in certain branches of the government, in

The effect is that each group of Lindbergh's
people doesn't know his relationship with other groups. Their only
common denominator is Lindbergh, and they follow his lead in
wildlife conservation.

protecting him from what he hates most: publicity, interviews, the
press.

Lindbergh has thus made

it

difficult

for his biographers.

He

believes that it protects his privacy to permit them to make mistakes
and produce inadequate works— "the badder the better." And this
has led to the creation and perpetuation of errors about him.
How, then, can a reasonably accurate book be written about a

man who has refused to make himself or his papers available?
By treating him as what he is: a historical figure, albeit a living
book the materials of history were usedpublished and unpublished documents, books, magazine and
newspaper articles, personal interviews with friends, colleagues, and
one. In writing this

others.

There is also the fact that even well-organized conspiracies do not
achieve perfect security, and the one around Lindbergh is just a
private affair. The only penalty for talking is the risk of his disapproval.

Some people who know him well will take this risk in

order to clarify the record. And there is much material buried in out-

of-the-way

places,

in

obscure

house

organs,

in

little-known

speeches, in diaries and letters.

Lindbergh himself cannot totally hide his movements. He constantly roams the earth like some great whale, generally out of sight

but having to surface here and there. Where he surfaces, he leaves
some kind of record. Also, while he will not reveal himself completely, he has helped writers who were doing research on the lives
of men with whom he has worked and in the process has had to dis-

THE LAST HERO

xrii

close the roles he has played. Since he is a stickler for accuracy, these
glimpses of Lindbergh may be accepted as accurate.

Thus, there are many bits of the Lindbergh mosaic scattered
around. It is possible to find them and to make a picture. This does
not create a definitive biography, obviously; one cannot be written

without the principal papers. In all cases, however, the account of

what happened or what was said has been derived from published
sources, or from interviews with a witness or participant. Lindbergh's conversations reported in this book have been quoted verbatim as given by the sources; everything that Lindbergh is quoted
as having thought has been drawn from his own works. There has
been no fictionalization, although sentences are sometimes abridged.
In only three instances in this book is a Lindbergh dialogue reported by someone who was not a participant. A few episodes and
conversations are based on the recollection of only one individual;
it is

unfortunate that such incidents could not have been checked

with Lindbergh.
Nonetheless this book is based on known data and verifiable fact.
Speculation and deduction are labeled as such. The author's judgments of Lindbergh rest on the available evidence.

W. S. R.

THE LAST HERO: Charles A. Lindbergh

LINDBERGH TODAY

THE FIRST THINGS TO KNOW ABOUT LINDBERGH ARE THAT
he is alive and sixty-six years old. He lives in a new white threebedroom cottage on the shore of Scott's Cove, an inlet off Long
Island Sound in Darien, Connecticut. The house is the second he
and his wife, the former Anne Morrow, have had on the property,
which they bought in 1946. The first was a large, Tudor-type
mansion with enough bedrooms for each of the five Lindbergh
children, the parents, and a sleep-in cook-housekeeper. ( The reason
for the new house is simply that after the young Lindberghs grew
up and moved out, the parents no longer needed the big house and
sold it. ) The youngest child, Reeve, is a student in a girl's college in

the East; the second youngest, Scott,

is

a student in an English

university. The others are married and have children. They live in

widely separated places: the state of Washington, Montana, and
Paris, France.

The elder Lindberghs own another small house in Vaud, Switzerland, not far from Lausanne on Lake Geneva. They use it as a base
for skiing trips and as a place to write in. Neither house is guarded

by savage dogs or armed men or anything else, but neither is easy to
find.

In both places, Lindbergh is an early riser. Since his childhood in

Minnesota, where he lived on a kind of farm, he has
become used to waking very early— about dawn, or a little later (or
earlier, in the dark, if need be )
Even on a chilly day in Darien—even in midwinter—he will often
put on his swim trunks and take a swim in the Sound first thing. To
get to the water, he has to walk through underbrush and trees he
Little Falls,

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

2

has allowed to grow unhindered on his land, to the break in the sea
wall where he and his wife and the children have often gone swim-

ming. Physical fitness is the necessary prerequisite for the kind of
active life he likes to lead, and even at sixty-six he is still fairly lean

and quite strong.
Lindbergh has often broken the ice near the shore in the winter to
swim in the Sound, and come into the house "as red as a lobster,''
according to one eyewitness, to dry himself off in the warm kitchen.
After his swim, he will shower and shave and comb his gray
thinning hair sideward over his pate.
in blue shirts, simple ties,

and

He dresses himself plainly
suit. He does not

usually a gray

have many clothes, although he is far from poor. His breakfast is
of normal size. He swore off drinking coffee more than forty-five
years ago.
If he is going on a trip, he will take a clean sock and into it drop a

and comb. He knots the sock
and puts it in his pocket. A briefcase may be his only luggage for a
long trip. It usually contains the other sock, a clean shirt and underwear, and an underwater face mask. He acquired the habit of
traveling light in his days as an air-mail pilot during the early
nineteen-rwenties. Today, he says a man can go anywhere in the
world with a clean shirt and an extra pair of socks, and he acts on
his own precept. The face mask is for skin diving, in case he gets a
razor, soap, toothbrush, toothpaste,

chance.

He wears a crushed gray felt fedora in cities to keep his face
shielded from strangers. He may take a topcoat. ( He doesn't usually

wear anything heavier, no matter how cold it is; in fact, he often
does not wear a coat at all.) As he goes out, he may pick up a
handful of birdseed. Outside, he scatters the seed on the lawn
before he goes into the garage. Feeding birds is a habit he picked
up early in life from his father, the late Representative C. A.
Lindbergh, a great outdoorsman. Then he puts his coat and bag in
one of the family cars. This might be a Volkswagen or a Ford
station wagon. When he leaves, he drives out the gate past the
unmarked mailbox that keeps strangers from easily identifying his
house.

When he goes to New York, as he does frequently, Lindbergh
may drive himself to the Darien station of the New Haven Railroad
and park his car. He will wait with the other commuters on the

LINDBERGH TODAY

3

platform, but he will stay aloof from them unless he happens to see

a friend.

A few years ago, when he was meeting a friend at the

he wouldn't get out of his car until the crowd of arriving
passengers had gone, for fear he would be recognized and annoyed.
On that occasion, the friend thought he had missed connections
with Lindbergh until he saw with relief the tall figure get out of the
car and stride toward him. ( Lindbergh's walk is wide-stepping and
station,

determined.

Now, however, Lindbergh knows that most people do not recognize him— or,

if they do, seldom bother him. If he has no friends
with him, he will stand alone on the platform and sit alone in the
train, in a nonsmoking car, and read over whatever it is he happens
to be working on. His new book, perhaps.* When the train arrives
in Grand Central, he will get off and walk through the station to the
Pan Am Building directly behind it. There he will take an elevator,
probably to the forty-sixth floor, where Juan Terry Trippe, president
of Pan American World Airways, has his office. Lindbergh has been
a technical adviser to the company since 1928, then at an estimated
annual salary of around $25,000. He once held a substantial amount
of stock in Pan Am. When he was elected a director of the company
in 1965, he owned six thousand shares. His stipend was then less
than $10,000 a year.

Lindbergh might confer with Trippe about any of several new
aircraft the company is interested in. This development work has
been Lindbergh's main contribution to Pan Am in recent years. He
had a great deal to do with adapting the first passenger jets, the
Boeing 707s, for the airline, and currently he is interested in the
new, huge 747, of which Pan Am has ordered several.
Finishing his work in the office, Lindbergh might head for
Kennedy Airport. His habit is to take the bus. At the airport he stays
in the private lounge that Pan

Am reserves for important passengers

until his flight is called. He usually travels first class because it is in

the forward part of the ship, near the pilot's compartment, and this

enables him to spend time with the crew without having to pass a
lot of strangers.

He frequently flies to Paris, and the jets he takes fol-

* This has been variously described as the rest of his autobiography; or an
account of his war experiences; or a history of flight; or a book on anthropology.
It may be that he is working on more than one book; but the chances are that
what he is writing is autobiographical in part.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

4

low the same great-circle route which he was the first to fly successfully, between Roosevelt Field, Long Island, and Le Bourget
Airport, Paris. Lindbergh travels this way often, and sometimes
much farther. Once, during the famous airlift, he dropped in at
Berlin. He goes to Nairobi or to Tokyo, or wherever else he wishes.
He estimated several years ago that he has flown the Atlantic well
over a hundred times.*
While he is flying, Lindbergh will make notes in longhand with
one of the pencil stubs he carries to write with. These notes might
form part of a report to Trippe, perhaps discussing the operations of
the airline. Lindbergh has always been a strong believer in a wide
safety margin in passenger ships— a margin of at least 35 per cent.
Put another way, he believes that no more than 65 per cent of the
plane's power should be called on under normal conditions.
When he is in Paris, Lindbergh often visits his married 28-yearold daughter Anne, now Mme. Julien Feydy. Anne married Julien
Feydy in December, 1963, at a family ceremony in the French
village of Douzillac, in Dordogne, where Feydy 's parents have a
house.

Typical of a good deal of Lindbergh press coverage, the news-

papers got the basic facts wrong.

None of the information came

from the Lindberghs directly. The New York Times, the Paris
Herald, and the Associated Press recorded the wedding as taking
* On Tuesday, May 16, 1967, at the Lotos Club in New York, many of
Lindbergh's old friends and colleagues gathered at dinner to remember him as
the fortieth anniversary of his famous flight (May 20-21, 1927) approached.
Lauren D. Lyman and C. B. Allen, who covered the takeoff for the New York
Times and the New York World, and Harry Bruno, once Lindbergh's personal
representative, were present. Later the same week there was a dinner with
speeches at the Garden City Hotel, where Lindbergh lived for a week before his
flight; a plaque was dedicated at the approximate spot the Spirit of St. Louis
left the ground (from what used to be Roosevelt Field, and is now a shopping
center); a pilot flew a replica of the Spirit around the Eiffel Tower in Paris,
where Lindbergh's flight was the theme of the American exhibit at the International Air Show; and another pilot flew another replica of the plane at
Lambert Field, St. Louis. Lindbergh was not present at any of these events.
A friend of Lindbergh's offered to keep track of these and other anniversary
celebrations. Lindbergh said, "No, thanks." On the anniversary date of his
flight, he was in Indonesia tracking a rare species of rhinoceros threatened with
extinction. Lindbergh told a friend he thought it futile to keep on promoting
an event that took place forty years ago. "I devoted time to that in 1927 and
'28," he said, "and I've written two books about it. It's not that era any more,
and I'm not that boy."

LINDBERGH TODAY
place

between Jacques Feydy and Miss Lindbergh;

5

actually,

Jacques is the name of the bridegroom's father. The papers reported
that the Feydy family had a chateau; actually, they have a modest
house. A neighbor, riding over on horseback to visit the Feydys a

day or two after the wedding, came late and joked, "I got lost riding
on your lands !" The bridegroom's father is professor of art history at
the University of Paris.

Lindbergh favored the match between his slender blond daughter
and the dark-haired Frenchman of middle height, a year or two
younger than she. Lindbergh told his daughter "you'd better marry
him or you'll lose him," and has displayed warmth toward his son-inlaw since.
In France, Lindbergh often has business to attend to—perhaps a
conference with Sud-Aviation, the French company who, with
British Aircraft, Ltd., are producing the 1,450-m.p.h. Concorde
airplane. After inspecting the French and British plants and analyzing their designs and tests, Lindbergh and the Pan Am engineers

had recommended that their airline order six of these ships. Lindbergh is also currently interested in the status of the American
supersonic jet airliner to be made by Boeing, which may be superior
to the foreign product. Lindbergh and the airline's engineers will
work with the manufacturers on the details of construction, to make
sure the ships conform to the company's requirements. When
prototypes of these craft are ready for flying, Lindbergh will
probably take part in the engineering flight tests, as he has done
with many other airplanes he has helped develop for his airline's
use, starting back in the nineteen-twenties with the early Sikorsky
flying boat.

While in France, Lindbergh might also want to see the factory
people who are producing the Falcon for Pan Am. To do this, he

would motor over to Bretigny, to a private airdrome where Avions
Marcel-Dassault keeps its planes to take visitors from Paris to its
plant in Bordeaux. Dassault builds a small executive twin-engine
jet, which is almost as fast as today's big commercial jets, for Pan
Am. This plane, called the Falcon, is an adaptation of Dassault's
Mystere-20. Pan Am sells it to large corporations. It, too, has been

adapted to the company's needs with Lindbergh's advice.
Sometimes, when he leaves Paris, Lindbergh goes on to Nairobi,
in Kenya. In Nairobi he has stayed with the Chief Game Warden,

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

6

Major I. R. Grimwood, and has flown himself over the game
preserve in a small plane to spot game. A few years ago he took a
trip by car into the preserve. After his trip

he wrote an article for

the Readers Digest, which was published in July, 1964.

To Lindbergh the trip had mystical significance, bringing him
into contact with the past and with "the miracle of life." "For the
first

time [in man] life has progressed to the point where it is able

to recognize itself," he wrote, "to appreciate its value, its quality, its

achievement, even to question what ways of living contribute to its
progress."

In the belief that 'life itself is more important than any material
accomplishment life makes," Lindbergh has become deeply interested and involved in preserving the species of animals that are
threatened with extinction, such as the American eagle, the whooping crane, the Arabian oryx, the mountain gorilla, the blue whale,

and the polar bear.
He ended his essay with the question "Is civilization progress?
The challenge, I think, is clear; and as clearly the final answer will
be given not by our amassment of knowledge, or by the discoveries
of our science, or by the speed of our aircraft, but by the effect our
civilized activities as a whole have upon the quality of our planet's
life— the life of plants and animals as well as that of men."

The questions, the moralizing, the mystical quality of thought,
and the strong,

clear exposition of facts

and ideas— occasionally

interspersed with poetic and tender imagery— are all characteristic
of Lindbergh's later prose. Also characteristic is his willingness to

put his name to something he believes in. It had been many years
since Lindbergh had published any of his writings— yet, in spite of
his well-known love for anonymity and privacy, he wrote an essay
to the largest magazine audience in the world.
Lindbergh has done this sort of thing several times in his life,
although he knew the consequences might involve a violation of his
personal privacy— an intrusion so abhorrent to him that he has
been known to travel thousands of miles to avoid it.
In the United States, Lindbergh often visits the Pentagon. For
most of his adult life, in and out of uniform, he has had some
connection with the nation's air arm. As a youngster of twenty-two,
he studied military aviation at Kelly and Brooks Fields and won his

LINDBERGH TODAY
pilot's wings.

7

When he flew the Atlantic in 1927, he was a captain in
was later made a colonel. He

the Missouri National Guard, and

resigned from the Army in 1941 and until 1954 was a civilian.
President Dwight D. Eisenhower nominated him for a commission as Brigadier General of the Air Force Reserve in 1954, and the

nomination was confirmed by the Senate. Before and since that
time, Lindbergh served on several key committees for the Air Force.
One of these, the von Neuman Committee, made the decision
approving the Atlas missile, the motive power for our Mercury

manned

orbital

flights

into

space,

and recommended ways of

getting it produced.

In Darien he still gets an estimated two to three hundred unsolicited letters and pieces of mail a week. He has the habit of

running his fingers down the left side of the envelopes, riffling
through the pile seeking familiar names and addresses. When he
sees one he recognizes, he puts that envelope aside to be opened.
But those bearing unfamiliar names and addresses he rejects, unopened.

Thus some of the many invitations he

still

receives to

make

speeches and other appearances are never answered. But even
letters

from friends do not always get a prompt reply; they some-

times wait months.

Lindbergh likes to do most chores by himself. When he collects
enough unopened mail, he will load it into a trunk or carton and
deliver it personally in his station wagon to the Sterling Library at

He selected Yale as the repository for most of his papers
because his long-time friend and employer, Juan Terry Trippe, a
Yale alumnus, suggested that it would be a safe place to store them

Yale.

when Lindbergh left the United States with his family in 1935. The
papers were on loan then, but after some years Yale requested their
ownership, and since no one else had asked for them, Lindbergh

made out an irrevocable deed of gift to the library with stipulations
of privacy.

As this suggests, Lindbergh does have a sense of his historical
importance although his sense of privacy supersedes it. He also has
a deep feeling for the history of his family— so much so that he once
employed a genealogist full time to dig into the origins of both
branches, and recently he helped support the researches of a

8

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

Columbia University dentist who was writing a biography of Lindbergh^ maternal grandfather, Dr. Charles H. Land, a dental
pioneer. Lindbergh thought so much of this project, in fact, that he
donated one of his most cherished awards— the thousand dollars he
won, with the Pulitzer Prize, for his autobiography, The Spirit of St.
Louis—to his grandfather's biographer.

2

ORIGINS

THE CHARACTER OF CHARLES A. LINDBERGH CLEARLY REproduces many traits found in his father and his grandfather. The
Lindbergh men all display the same hard, central sense of purpose,
the same fearless, even foolhardy, independence of mind and
action. In different countries, in different centuries, there

is

some-

thing unchanging, refractory, defiant, even downright cussed in
this family. One is not usually afforded such an uncluttered view of
repeated cause and effect in real life.

Thus, even though Charles A. Lindbergh never knew his paternal
grandfather (August Lindbergh died in 1892, ten years before his

grandson was born), the old man laid down some of the attitudes
and behavior patterns that would shape those of his grandson.
Grandfather Lindbergh was an iron man, physically and morally,
who had a stormy career as a reform politician in Sweden. Interestingly, his name had not always been Lindbergh. He was born a
peasant, Ole Manson (or Mansson), in Sweden in 1810. (Swedish
peasant family names were patronyms. Ole's father was Mans. Ole's
sons became Olssons. ) He farmed for his family, then for others, and
finally broke his way through the rigidly class-structured society to
become a landowner himself. Then he could run for the Riksdag
(Parliament) and he was elected to his first term at the age of
thirty-nine.

Although he was unschooled, he had strong intellectual convicand no hesitancy in expressing them. His ideas were radical
for nineteenth-century Sweden. He began a one-man campaign

tions

against the use of the whipping post as punishment for crime. This

enraged the country's conservatives. During his twelve years in the

10

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

Riksdag, Manson (Lindbergh) carried on this campaign, and others:
he sought legal protection for servants against beatings by their
masters, fought for improvements in public transportation, and
tried hard to extend suffrage, which was restricted to the nobility,
clergy, propertied class, and farmers. He was a good friend of the
Crown Prince, who became King Charles XV of Sweden in 1859,
and served as Charles' secretary.
He won his fight against the whipping post, but this victory
helped cost him his career. He had been a director of the loan office
of the Bank of Sweden at Malmo, in southern Sweden. His political
enemies were able to construct a charge of embezzlement against
him, and get him convicted. Later evidence tends to show that this
conviction was more of a technical than a criminal nature, but there
is no doubt that it damaged his reputation. He decided to leave
Sweden.
In 1860, at the age of fifty, Ole Manson took his second wife,
Louisa, aged twenty (his first wife had died), and their newborn
son, Charles Augustus (named for the new king), and sailed for the
United States. He started his new life with the name of Lindbergh.
He explained to one of his children, some years later, that changing
one's name was no disgrace. There had been too many Mansons in
his locality, so he simply took another name.
A biographer of the Lindbergh family says that although August
Lindbergh was hated politically by the conservatives he had fought
so long and hard, he was universally respected personally. "When
this Swedish peasant-gentleman announced that he was going to
America the parliamentary forces he had been fighting got together
and gave him a testimonial. They bought gold and fashioned it into
a token. Their esteem was inscribed upon it, each word as sincere as
the gold was pure," wrote Lynn Haines in The Lindberghs. When he
got to America, Manson, now Lindbergh, traded the gold medal for
a plow, thus establishing a realistic attitude toward trinkets for his
descendants.

Lindbergh took his wife and baby to Minnesota, where he
homesteaded a piece of forest land (known as a pre-emption) in
Melrose, near Sauk Centre. He cut down trees and built a log
house, twelve by sixteen feet, and began to raise a family.
He had almost no money, and cash was hard to come by. The
family burned homemade candles because kerosene cost seventy-

ORIGINS

11

five cents a gallon. Louisa Lindbergh sold her gold watch for a cow

so they had milk and butter. Game was the family's main source of

meat.

Two years after their arrival in America, August Lindbergh
decided to build his family a frame house. The only cash outlay
would be the cost of having logs sawed into planks at the mill ten
miles away, in Sauk Centre, and the nails. He had an axe to cut his
own trees, and an ox to cart them to the mill. A contemporary, the

Reverend C. S. Harrison, told what happened when he got to the
mill. "One day he took a load of logs to the mill and, stumbling, fell
on the saw. This caught him in the back and also took a stab at his
right arm. [It also cut through four ribs.] Witnesses said you could
see Lindbergh's heart beating through the gaping wound.
"It was hot weather and there was no surgeon within fifty miles. I
followed him to his home [August Lindbergh was carried in a cart
over a deeply rutted road] and we did not think that he could live.
I picked out the sawdust and rags from his wound and kept the
mangled arm wrapped in cold water." Through all this, Lindbergh
never cried out. He had kept his arm from bleeding by applying
pressure with his other hand.

There was only one horse in the area, and a neighbor mounted it
and started for the nearest doctor in St. Cloud, thirty miles away. It
happened that the doctor was taking care of a mother in childbirth
on a nearby farm. As soon as the baby and mother were safe, the
doctor left his long vigil to ride to August Lindbergh. By the time
he got to the Lindbergh farm, three days had elapsed since the
accident.

During those three days, Lindbergh lay patiently while his young
and little Charles Augustus took turns going to the
spring for cold water to bathe his wound and keep his fever down.
Writes the Reverend Harrison: "[Lindbergh's] cleanly habits and
wife, Louisa,

robust constitution carried him through the operation successfully. I

helped the doctor and we took off the arm near the shoulder."

The doctor stitched up the wound in the back and August asked
amputated left arm. It was brought to him in a tiny
wooden coffin. He took its hand in his remaining one and said, "You
to see the

have been a good friend to me for fifty years. But you cant be with
me any more. So good-bye. Good-bye, my friend."
There was a long battle against shock, infection, and loss of

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

12

blood. It took the fifty-two-year-old August nearly two years to

recover from this accident. He devised a belt with rings and pockets
to which he could affix one end of an axe or scythe. He invented a

specially balanced axe that he could swing with his one arm, and
he had other tools made for his use. Then he began to chop trees
and do the heavy work again.
During his long convalescence, August Lindbergh had a good
chance to know his son Charles Augustus ( Charlie ) and vice versa.
He conversed with the boy for hours—told him of his life in
Sweden, his career in politics, and he talked about the world in
general. Charlie Lindbergh would grow up to become the flier's
,

father.

Young Charlie Lindbergh had more of his share of chores and
responsibilities, because his father was partly incapacitated and also

because August had chosen to homestead on forest rather then
prairie land. The prairie could have given August Lindbergh a cash
crop in the second year, but he lacked the capital to live that long
without income. To clear and cultivate the forest took a long time,
but the family could live off the land until they raised crops.

became Charlie's responsibility to keep the family supplied with meat and fish; he learned to use a gun at an age when
today's children are going to nursery school. There was never a time
when, if the family needed meat, he couldn't go out with his rifle
and come back half an hour later with a fresh-killed deer. Once,
when he was eight, he got three deer in one day. He had to be a
dead shot, for ammunition cost money and he had to account for
each cartridge. If he missed a bird on one shot, he lined up two on
the next round. This was not so difficult in those days when flights
of game birds literally darkened the sky, he later told his son.
The skins of animals had a cash value. Not deer— they were so
It early

common that a buckskin might fetch only a gallon of kerosene. But
a bearskin would bring ten or twelve dollars; the pelt of a timber
wolf was worth a dollar and a quarter.

The boy was often sent alone to St. Cloud on family errands, a
round trip of sixty miles in the oxcart. If he met trouble— a sudden
storm, a mudhole, a tree across the trail—he had to overcome it
alone. He wasn't burdened with a lot of parental admonitions, nor

ORIGINS

13

did his parents worry him with their concern. They gave him to
understand that they knew he could get along on his own.

He was an independent six-year-old spirit when his father helped
One pleasant day in 1865, August Lindbergh

start the local school.

called his neighbors together and took them to his granary, "a fair-

sized building, half log and half frame." August told them that if
they would help him put in windows, a door, and a chimney, it

would serve nicely for a school.
"I do not think we should wait longer to get our children started
in school. All of the boys and girls must have their chance to get an
education," he said, according to Lynn Haines.

The men came from the neighboring farms, bringing their saws
and hammers, and in a few days had transformed the storage
building into a workable schoolhouse. Not long after that, a teacher,
Miss Jennie Stabler, was brought in to teach the fifteen children of
the neighborhood.

As was the custom in those days, the neighbors shared in the
teachers upkeep. She boarded for a week or two with each family
in turn. "When it came time for me to go to the Lindbergh home, I
was always glad," Miss Stabler said. August Lindbergh "was a welleducated man and
interesting to converse with, although his
speech was somewhat broken," she reported.
Of course, Charlie had to attend classes, but necessity did not
make a scholar. He hankered for his early-won freedom and showed
.

.

.

spirit. His mulishness expressed itself in his frequent
unexplained absences— he had the worst attendance record of any
student in the school— and in the pranks he played. Once, he
enraged the teacher with a trick and was told to go out and bring
back a branch. "Something big and strong," said the teacher. The
criminal was to provide his own means of punishment.
Charlie came back dragging a log so big he couldn't lift it,
obviously useless for a whipping. The teacher sent him out for some-

a rebellious

thing smaller.

He came back with a twig.

Now the teacher got angry. "You know what I want," she said.
"Go and get it."
He went out and did not come back at all that day.
He rejected school because he just didn't take to the discipline of

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

14

rote learning. On his own, he would read what the grownups read-

books when he could find them, and the local newspapers such as
It covered political news in some detail,
and it had a column of rough country humor by Josh Billings.
One thing the Lindbergh house never lacked was ideas, or talk.
Old August looked at the Civil War and the Reconstruction era with
an eye sharpened by his political experience. He saw the post-Civil
the St. Cloud Democrat.

War corruption, the building of the railroads, the rise of corporaand he talked about these things freely. His son heard
philosophy from his father, and since he admired his
father, he accepted the old man's radical approach. Another early
influence on the boy was Ignatius Donnelly, a Minnesota orator,
who hailed the end of the Civil War as bringing unity, "with
protection for the humblest and justice to all; a land without a slave
and without an oppressor."
The Granger movement developed in the Midwest during
Charlie's adolescence, in the eighteen-seventies. This was a selftions,

political

defensive group of farmers responding to the overpowering political

and economic strength of commerce and industry. The Granger
movement sought regulation of the railroads, and set up cooperatives for farmers. Charlie Lindbergh read about it in Sidney M.
Owens Farm, Stock and Home newspaper, and heard about it. The
Granger
Alliance

which were later incorporated into the Farmers'
and the Populist Party, were absorbed as part of his

ideas,

growing-up process.

Except for the hit-or-miss country schooling, young Charlie Lindbergh was, in the formal sense, uneducated at the age of twenty, but
he had read widely, and talked even more. He had ideas, and he
could think. Everything he had learned contrived to point him
toward becoming a lawyer, but of course there were certain educational prerequisites.

He entered Coogan's Academy, near Sauk Centre, in his twentyfirst

year. It was a private school, run by a priest. Charlie paid his

way by hunting and trapping, and he walked the ten miles to school
most days. Sometimes he would arrive with his gun on his shoulder.
When he wanted to, he could learn. He graduated from Coogan's
Academy the next year, and decided to go to the University of
Michigan and study law in the fall.
Meanwhile, to earn some money, he got a job working on the

ORIGINS

15

Great Northern railroad. According to the Haineses, his neighbors,
this was the beginning of his interest in transportation and distribution.

"He discovered what the public was contributing in rights of

way and bonds and land grants/' they wrote. "He could have told
you just from his own figuring pretty accurately what each mile of
construction would cost.

.

.

.

Here it was, also, that he started a

life-long interest in labor/'

At the end of the summer he had some new ideas and a hundred
dollars in cash. He went to Ann Arbor for two years and came out

with a law degree. It was there that his habit of signing his first two
initials, "C.A.," gave him his lifelong nickname.
"His colleagues in law school liked him without knowing why,"

"He lived too much alone to be outstandingly
The professors
did not regard him as brilliant.

say the Haineses.
popular.

.

.

.

.

.

.

He too often disagreed with their conclusions and those of the
learned authors/'
C. A. Lindbergh told his law partner Walter Eli Quigley, years
later, that he "could never see

why [court] decisions made in 1725

or 1854 should apply to conditions in 1890 or 1920. The world is in

constant change. Economics vary in every decade. The law must be
flexible

and applied with common

sense." This was, of course,

contrary to legal pedagogy.

He graduated from the Michigan Law School in 1884. After a
year of clerking for Judge Searle, at St. Cloud, Minnesota, he moved
to Little Falls and opened his own office. This town, on the Mississippi, was a center of the lumbering industry and seemed to offer a

young lawyer the chance for a decent career.
Later, his sisters June and Linda came to Little Falls, followed by
his younger brother, Frank, who went to law school and became his
partner. The elder Lindberghs sold the family farm and moved to
Little Falls, too.

For a time C.A. boarded with a family named La Fond, then
married their daughter Mary. The C. A. Lindberghs had three
daughters, two of whom lived.
C. A. Lindbergh wanted his children to be self-reliant. He tried to
duplicate the conditions that made him that way; for one thing, he

wouldn't do their thinking for them.

When one came to him with some difficulty, he would say, "Now,
you have a head, haven't you?"

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

16

"Yes."

"Well, then, the best thing for you to do

is

think about this

yourself. I'm sure you can tell what to do about it. If you are trying

to

do right, a mistake won't matter.

I'll

help you

if

there's

any

trouble."

Some years later, C. A. Lindbergh stated his theory of childrearing: "Children manage much of the time to have their own way.

That ... is as it should be. The more child life is dominated, the
easier adults are influenced. They become accustomed to having
others direct them and do not think for themselves."
Lindbergh practiced law the way he had argued in law school
that law should be practiced.
His first client came in soon after he opened his office in Little
Falls. The man wanted to sue another man for money he claimed
was due him.
Lindbergh asked him to tell the story. When the man got
through, Lindbergh said, "I'm sorry you're having this trouble, but I
can't take your case. Probably a suit would fail; anyway it should
because the defendant is the one who ought to win."
The client was taken aback. "Ain't you a lawyer?"
C.A. said, "My fee is not the issue. The important fact is that you
ought not to ask the Court to help you press a dishonest advantage
over this man. Morally and, therefore, legally, you have no claim
against him. He does not owe you that amount of money."
The client asked what he should do.
Lindbergh advised him to go to the other man and settle the
claim; he told him how this could be accomplished.
The client listened, and agreed. "I guess you're right about it," he
said. "I'll do it that way. Now, how much do I owe you?"
Lindbergh said, "Nothing. I told you that I could not handle your
case."

Such obvious integrity won him a reputation as an honest lawyer,
and the reputation brought many clients. He soon represented the
two banks in Little Falls, and other sizable businesses. The fact that
his fees were invariably lower than other lawyers' didn't hurt, either.
But it was his insistence on justice that really gave him his name.
When he went to court, it was almost a foregone conclusion that his
client was right and would win; otherwise Lindbergh wouldn't be
representing him.

ORIGINS

17

He put his money into farmland, usually letting the seller set the
Between Lindbergh's legal reputation and his sound judgment of real estate, he earned a good deal of money. After about
twenty years of law practice and real-estate transactions he was
price.

worth about a quarter of a million dollars.
The record clearly shows that he was not interested in accumulating wealth for its own sake. He invested his money in many enterprises not calculated to make profits. For example, he started,
financed, and lost money in two magazines which expressed his
political and economic ideas.
His attitudes toward wealth (his own as well as other people's)
and integrity in money matters strongly reflected his father. He
looked like him, too— six feet two, blond, blue-eyed. He also had
August Lindbergh's stoicism.
Once, he went duck shooting with a farmer. As already mentioned, game was so thick in those days it was not remarkable that
they quickly brought

down a dozen mallards over the farmer's

pond.

The farmer had a well-trained spaniel who began to retrieve the
birds. But the water was near the freezing point. After fetching two

ducks, the dog refused to go back into the pond.
C. A. Lindbergh immediately undressed, hung everything but his
shirt

on some bushes, then put on his shirt and waded into the

frigid water. He got the rest of the ducks and brought them ashore.

Just then, there

was another flight of ducks, and he and the

farmer began shooting again. Lindbergh showed no sign of cold as

he stood there in his wet shirt. A strong breeze was blowing. He
returned three more times to the water to get the ducks, and only

then went into the house to dry himself and put on his clothes.

The bewildered farmer asked, "Haven't you any feeling, man?"
C.A. was just as stoical under the shock of his first wife's death in
1895, after only eight years of marriage. He was left with two little
girls, Eva and Lillian. In 1901 he remarried, and Charles Augustus
Lindbergh, Jr., was born a year later.

A farmer himself, and the son of a farmer, C. A. Lindbergh knew
the problems of farmers. They were always in debt, financing their

crops and their living expenses by paying interest ranging from 12

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

18

to 18 per cent. They often lost their farms on mortgages foreclosed
by the lenders, who were usually out-of-state banks.
Lindbergh himself was asked to buy stock in the two Little Falls
banks and go on their board of directors. He demurred, saying he
had better things to do with his money. But the banks needed his
name, which had become a synonym for probity with the farmers.
They offered to take his note for the value of the stock, and let him
pay off the debt in dividends.
Lindbergh accepted, but warned them, "You may regret it. To
make money, in my opinion, is not the sole purpose of a bank."
Although he built and sold thirty-five houses and was a steady
trader in farms and other real estate, Lindbergh had a reputation

for never squeezing farmers.

On the contrary, he frequently lent

money personally to farmers who were in danger of having their
mortgages foreclosed. No one knew about this except him and the
borrowers.

But once, when he was strapped for cash, he brought a bundle of
papers to his office and tossed them to a clerk.
"See if you can collect something on them," he said.

They were interest coupons on mortgages which he had paid to
keep a number of farms from foreclosure. The total value was
several thousand dollars.

The

clerk drove around the countryside, seeing each of the

debtors, explaining that C. A. Lindbergh needed cash, if they could

spare it. He got all but twenty-five dollars of the money.
It was almost inevitable for farmers to get the idea that Lindbergh would be a good man to represent them in Congress. They
began writing to him suggesting that he run. His friends also urged

him to try for the House of Representatives.
Lindbergh had no stomach for public life, he said. He resisted the
idea for a long time; then, in 1906, he decided to run from the
Sixth District of Minnesota as the Republican candidate for the

U.S. House of Representatives. His opponent, named Buckman, was

a professional politician who used the usual tricks of character assassination.

Lindbergh insisted on sticking to the issues. He spent

very

money on his campaign, most of it on railroad fare.

little

He

used a person-to-person approach, meeting people on the
farms and in mills and factories. He published only one piece of

campaign literature, a pamphlet in which he stated "some of [his]

ORIGINS

19

views on economical questions." One of his points was "positive
laws to prevent discrimination against individual persons or places."
In speeches, he stated his belief that

"all

trade and

commerce

depends on transportation." His economics were classical: "Labor
gives the main wealth of the world." His politics were extremely
progressive: "The day is near at hand when those who furnish the
energy of the world's progress will govern."
Lindbergh bucked the machine and made his points with the
voters. He was elected by 16,762 votes to 13,115.

He moved to Washington in the fall of 1907, settling into a
furnished apartment at 1831 V Street, N.W., with his wife, his two
daughters, and his son, Charles.

On December 2, 1907, C. A. Lindbergh took Charles to the
Capitol and, holding him by the hand, walked to his seat. As was

customary, the new Congress had its picture taken on opening day.

The photo of 1907 shows a little boy in a white sailor collar and
dark suit standing behind Congressman C. A. Lindbergh.

The first votes were to select the Speaker and set the House rules.
There was opposition to Joseph Cannon, the autocrat who had ruled
and often frustrated the House of Representatives as Speaker, and
to the rules which had helped him dominate. Lindbergh voted for
Cannon and for the adoption of the old rules— a straight party-line
vote.
It was the first and last time he was to be "regular." From then on
he charted his career in Congress by his own principles and ideas.
He opposed his party, both parties. He always worked alone—
without a partner in any enterprise.

The Congressman got up at 4 a.m. and reached his office at five.

He once asked a man who wanted an appointment with him to meet
him at 6 a.m. He walked a good deal, and spent the first hour of the
day thinking of his early life in Melrose, of his parents and their
struggle to make a living. These thoughts, he said, gave him the
courage to take on the day's battles and the tranquility he needed to
sustain his spirit.

The panic of 1907 helped to crystallize his economic thinking. He
saw farmers and small businessmen ruined in a country that was
rich and productive. He concluded that the causes of such panics
and depression were in the money and banking system.
His first fight in Congress was against the Aldrich-Vreeland

20

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

Emergency Currency Bill, which set out to establish the Federal
Reserve System. Lindbergh opposed it as a "monstrous scheme to
place under one control the finances of the country/' saying, "With
that power all centered in the great city banks, and these banks
controlled by the trusts and money powers, the politics, as well as
the business of this country, would be under its absolute dictation."
He lost that fight, but never ceased attacking the "money trust."
His record in Congress added to his stature at home, and he had
no trouble getting re-elected each time he stood for his seat.
In 1911, he introduced a resolution to investigate "whether there
are not combinations of financial and other concerns which control
money and credits/' The idea was taken over by the Democrats and
came into being in 1917 as the famous Pujo Committee, counseled
by Samuel Untermyer. After months of hearing testimony, the
committee concluded that there was indeed a money trust, and

named the culprits as J. P. Morgan & Company; First National Bank
of New York; National City Bank of New York; Lee, Higginson &
Company of Boston and New York; Kidder, Peabody & Company of
Boston and New York; and Kuhn, Loeb & Company.
As a result, Congress passed laws prohibiting interlocking direcbanks and trust companies under federal jurisdiction.
Lindbergh was pleased but not satisfied, and continued his crusade
against the big money interests by writing a book called Banking
and Currency.
He had been visited, at the time of his resolution to investigate
the money trust, by an emissary of the big banks, and he told the
House. At that time, he said, he was warned that if he insisted on
pushing his investigation the country would be plunged into the
worst financial panic it had ever known.
Lindbergh later reported an outright attempt to bribe him to
suppress his book Banking and Currency. He told a friend some
years after the event that a man had come to see him in Chicago
and had engaged in what seemed a general conversation about
corruption and bribery in government, and had ended by offering
two million dollars if Lindbergh would suppress Ins book. Lindbergh refused.
The editor of a Duluth newspaper once wrote about Lindbergh:
"Every effort has been made to suppress him, bottle him up,
choke him off, ignore him, squash him and discipline him. ... He
has gone direct to the people and the people seem to like it.
torates of

ORIGINS

21

"Indeed," the editor went on, "Mr. Lindbergh has won distinction
."
by having it so persistently refused him.
An Old Guard politician was asked how the organization could
permit such a radical maverick as Lindbergh to represent the
Republican party in his district for so long. The politician said, "We
.

.

much money trying to lick Lindbergh that his district

spent so

became too prosperous to care about a change."
As it turned out, the machine didn't have to defeat Lindbergh to
get him out of Congress.
His letters show that he was relieved to give up his seat. He
had made his decision not to run before his country entered the war
early in 1917. But he did not leave politics. He tried to get the
Republican nomination for United States Senator from Minnesota.
His opponent in the primary was Frank B. Kellogg, a conservative
Republican,
peace pact.

who later was to win much fame with his postwar

Lindbergh ran on a strongly anti-war platform. Because any
war in 1917 was made to seem like treason,
Kellogg.
Lindbergh lost to
So he finished the book he had started—
Your Country at War, and What Happens to You After the War,
and Related Subjects. The book was a restatement of his previous
criticism of all-out

positions.

"To a greater extent than ever before," he wrote, "the world
presents the failure in some respects of the existing civilization.

The old order of things is what has run us off the track/
and ... a new plan of things must be worked out."
He said that the campaign to help the Allies was motivated by
profit, and he wanted to take the wartime profit out of all mail, tele.

.

.

graph, telephone, transport, banking.

"Trespass upon our rights on the high seas makes our cause just;

do not claim it was wise to enter the war. Our purpose is
humane, nevertheless I believe I have proved that a certain 'inner
circle'
maneuvered
[so] that some of the belligerents
would violate our international rights and bring us to war with
still I

.

.

.

.

.

.

them."
In the spring of 1918, according to Lindbergh's law partner
Walter Quigley, government agents entered the plant where Your
Country at War was being printed and ordered the owner to
destroy all plates of the book and of the earlier Lindbergh book on

money and banking, and all copies of both books. A few thousand

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

22

had already been printed and shipped to
Minnesota, but the rest were destroyed and the book was not again

copies of the former

in print until more than a dozen years had passed.

Also in 1918 a new political force, the Nonpartisan League, which
had come into power in North Dakota, moved into Minnesota. It
was made up of farmers who paid sixteen dollars a head to create
a fund that enabled the League to battle the Republican right
wing for party control. A full slate of candidates, headed by Lindbergh as the gubernatorial candidate, was named to fight the Republican Old Guard in Minnesota.
Three tremendous forces were against them, and more particularly against him. One was the fact that the war was on, and he was
criticizing its conduct and aims and was therefore suspect. He even
spoke against the way Liberty Loan bonds were sold by financial
speculators.

Then, there was the general temper of the times. The successful
1917 revolution in Russia had made almost every businessman in
the United States fear that a similar revolution could take place
here. Trade unions were being influenced by Socialistic ideas. Thus
exposure of the real social lags in American capitalism was resisted

because the criticisms could be tabbed "Bolshevik." True, there
were some very vocal left-wingers— the I. W.W., the syndicalists, the
anarchists. When bombs were mailed to public officials by extremists, the whole left wing was held accountable. The fact was,
however, that there were only about 100,000 persons altogether in
left-wing groups, and the great majority of them were law-abiding

and believed in constitutional processes.
The Nonpartisan League's program supported the war effort, but
also

asked for conscription of wealth, attacked profiteering, de-

manded a state-owned bank, as well as state ownership of terminal
and packing plants. This was very near
Socialism, of course, and so the League and its candidates became
the target of all the good citizens who were frightened of subelevators,

flour

mills,

version.

There was another bloc against Lindbergh, one he had helped to
antagonize during his last term in Congress. This was the Catholic
Church.
In 1916 he had introduced in the House of Representatives a
resolution asking for an investigation of a controversy between the

"

ORIGINS

23

Free Press Defense League and the Church. In defending his
action, and the speeches he made in its favor, Lindbergh wrote, "In

my judgment, the high dignitaries of the Catholic Church made a
grievous mistake in using their political influence to prevent the
investigation.

"read history, you will find that everywhere, in all lands and
at all times, many of the high dignitardzs of the church of rome
have reen the ally of oppression." He went on to say he did not
blame the Church for this, but only those men in the Church who
were corrupted by power.
This abortive resolution and Lindbergh's speeches were brought

up strongly in 1918 by various organs of the Catholic Church. The
Catholic Bulletin, in

its

last issue

before the Minnesota primary

election, called on Catholics to vote against the League. The Right

Reverend Bishop Busch, at the graduation exercises of St. Benedict's Academy in St. Cloud, begged "the good Sisters of the
Academy and all women to throw their whole soul into the prayer
'Lindbergh shall not be Governor.'
The Minnesota Public Safety Commission was headed by John F.
McGee, a Catholic, who had brought Lindbergh's resolution to the
attention of the St. Paul diocese and unleashed the Catholic counterattack. The Commission had great wartime powers, and went all
out to defeat Lindbergh.

With all these elements— money interests, left-wing vs. right-wing
and the Church issue— churning away in an already inflamed wartime situation, the 1918 Minnesota primary campaign
became a vicious and unprincipled display of the democratic process. It was more like a civil war than a political campaign. There
was terror and violence— and not all of it was by vigilantes. Lawenforcement officials allowed mobs to riot, sometimes aided them,
and often took an illegal stand themselves.
After one meeting, Lindbergh came out of the hall to find that the
friend who had driven him there had been dragged from the car by
a mob and beaten nearly unconscious. There was no police protection. Alone and unarmed, C.A. faced the crowd of violent armed
men and spoke to them firmly, without displaying fear. They fell
politics,

back.

When the mob was at a safe distance, Lindbergh turned his back
and helped his friend into the car. The two men had driven only a

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

24

few yards when the spell was broken; the mob began shooting at
them. Bullets hit the car. Lindbergh said to his friend, "We must
not drive so fast. They will think we are afraid of them if we do."
Often Congressman Lindbergh was denied permission to rent
halls in which to hold meetings. On one occasion he was actually
forced out of the state for whose governorship he was contending
by a sheriff who had decided to take the law into his own hands.
During the campaign, Lindbergh was vilified, calumniated,
stoned, and hanged and burned in effigy. "The 1918 campaign will
be remembered as long as anyone lives who took part in it," Lynn
Haines wrote. "It will go down in the history of the state as one
period in which Minnesota forgot the meaning of Democracy and
turned loose the Cossack-minded to 'Ride* down all those who had a
different point of view."

During this violent time, Lindbergh was often driven to meetings
in an automobile by his son, then aged sixteen. An observer reports

that Charles A. Lindbergh, Jr., did not seem to take an interest in

the fierce opposition to his father, but would spend the time while

C.A. spoke tinkering with the engine of the car.

C.A. survived the terror, although he was told more than once

would not walk out of a meeting alive. At one time, it
appeared that he might even win, that the Nonpartisan League
would overcome being called "an American Soviet." But the Catholic backlash turned the balance during the last weeks of the
campaign. The final vote was 150,000 for Lindbergh and the League
that he

to 199,000 for the Old Guard slate.

Lindbergh's contretemps with the Catholic Church and his running fight with the financial establishment had automatically made

him the target of most newspapers, the great majority of which
were extremely conservative. They had bank debts, and their advertisers were also beholden to bankers; it was natural that they should
oppose Lindbergh with his radical economics and his unremitting
attacks on the pro-war politicians as tools of big money. And, of
course, the Catholic issue made Lindbergh seem a bigot. Lindbergh's
partner Quigley recalled that Lindbergh was "punished by the
press, receiving at times a national condemnation which would have
discouraged a less courageous fighter. With the possible exception
of Robert M. La Follette, Sr., no man has been more pilloried in
modern American politics than Lindbergh."

ORIGINS

25

Nevertheless. C. A. Lindbergh liked newspapermen most of his
life.

He said they were "honest, progressive, alert and desirous of

playing fair with the public." "They are caught," he once said, "and
like a lot of other people have to 'obey their master's voice' or stop

eating."

This attitude changed, however, during his later years. From 1906
to 1916

he had never lost an election, spending five consecutive

terms in Congress. But, starting with his abortive senatorial campaign against Kellogg, he never again won an election. And he
attributed this to the fact that he had such a uniformly prejudiced
press opposing him.

He often said that the voters were not being

given a fair choice, since they could not get the truth in their

newspapers. During the later years of his life, he was openly bitter
at newspaper bias.

The press also frustrated him in other directions. After Lindbergh's primary defeat, Bernard Baruch wired in August, 1918,
offering him a position on the War Industries Board. Baruch knew

Lindbergh's reputation as a banker and businessman and also that
the Congressman had volunteered to help the war effort. Lindbergh

wired back: "replying to your telegram will serve anywhere for
THE GENERAL CAUSE. WHEN AND WHERE SHALL I REPORT FOR INFORMATION?"

He was asked to come to Washington. According to his own
account, "I was sworn in, and still carry the card that was issued to

me. Mr. Baruch assigned to me work of great importance, and I
came back to Minnesota. I was to return to Washington within two
weeks.

"When my appointment was announced in Minnesota it raised a
storm of protest from the Federal Reserve Bank of the 9th District,
as well as [other] Reserve Banks.

.

.

.

"Certain of these interests, by virtue of their positions as head of

Liberty Loan Committees, were willing to block the success of the

Liberty Loan and even to obstruct the National Administration in

war program in order to have me removed.
This inspired
campaign was aided by the malicious attacks of certain news-

its

papers.

.

.

.

."
.

.

The attacks, particularly from Minnesota, became so intense that
Lindbergh felt forced to resign. He wrote to his daughter Eva, "I
am not blaming the Administration. They were up against it."

26

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

He never again held public office. He set up a law office in
Minneapolis, but paid little attention to his practice. He was more
interested in politics— he ran a disastrous race for the Senate against

Harold Knutson in 1923— and in writing books about his economic
and political ideas. He represented some Eastern banks and other
business interests in Minnesota, and invested in Florida real estate.
But his $250,000 had shrunk during his years in Congress, and his
health began to interfere with his business.
In 1923 his once-volcanic energy showed signs of diminishing. He
would still come to the office before dawn and work with his oldtime fury, but by noon he would be tired and in the afternoon he
was sometimes incoherent. He had started a new scheme, which
was being well received, to create a cooperative insurance company
for farmers. The purpose was to keep at home the tremendous
amounts of money which Minnesotans were paying out in premiums to the Metropolitan Life and other out-of-state insurance
companies. Also, Lindbergh was going to try for the governorship of
his state once again.

But he never completed these projects. The reason for his declining vigors was diagnosed in February, 1924. He had a brain tumor,
a malignant growth that had already invaded so much of the brain
that it could not be removed. He died of the cancer a few weeks
later. His body was cremated. Some months afterward, young
Charles A. Lindbergh flew his airplane over Little Falls to the
Lindbergh place, a mile and a half outside the town. There he
banked his plane and made a slow turn over the house. With his
free hand, he picked up an urn and upended it over the side of the
cockpit. His father's ashes drifted down to the land he had owned.
A letter C.A. wrote a few years before his death might make his
epitaph. "I will be here [in Florida] ten or twelve days now and
then home again. I say home, but home to me is anywhere. I've
gotten used to being at home where night finds me. It does not
distress me, but guess that's because of habit, for most living
things like to have a home and I would, if I really had one. Since
I have none the world makes a good roomy place."

)

BOYHOOD

AFTER HIS FIRST WIFE DEED IN 1895, C. A. LINDBERGH
became a romantic object: a grief-stricken widower with two young
daughters who needed mothering; the fact that he was tall, handsome, well-to-do, and a successful lawyer did not detract from his
appeal. Yet it was not until five years had passed that he became
serious about another woman. She was younger than he by seventeen years; her name was Evangeline Lodge Land; and she was a
schoolteacher in Little Falls.

The second Mrs. C. A. Lindbergh was born in Detroit in 1876. In
a time when few women got any kind of higher education, she took
a Bachelor of Science degree at the University of Michigan and then

went on to get her Master's degree in science at Columbia UniverNew York. Her education was enough to set her apart from
other women, and she was not merely intellectual but attractive as
well. She came of a family with deep roots in North America. The
first of the Lodges (her mother's family) arrived in New York
sometime after the War of 1812. A Land helped found the city of
Hamilton, in Ontario, Canada. Another ancestor was General Winfield Scott, who led the U.S. Army brilliantly against the Mexicans
in 1847 and was the Whig candidate for the U.S. Presidency in
sity in

1852.

(He lost the election partly as the result of several unfortu-

nate extemporaneous speeches.

Evangeline Lodge Land married C. A. Lindbergh at her parents'
house in Detroit in March, 1901. She was twenty-five, he forty-two.

They went on a honeymoon to California, then returned to live in
Little Falls.

C. A. Lindbergh had bought a piece of land there on the banks of
27

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

28

the Mississippi after his

first

wife died.

It

was a lovely tract of

forest, more than a hundred acres, containing some tall and ancient

whose images reflected in the river. After he remarried, he
decided to build a house on it for his new wife.

trees

When the Lindberghs came back from their honeymoon, the
house was not yet begun. At first they lived in a small cabin hastily
put up on the site; then construction was started on the new house.
It was not going to be a modest place; it would have three stories,
thirteen rooms including a billiard room, and an imposing front hall
and staircase. It was the house of a man who was not only starting a
new family life but was expanding his idea of what life should be;
C. A. Lindbergh built in the manorial style. He even gave the place
a name: Lindholm.
The couple's only child, a son, was born in Detroit at the Land
house on February 4, 1902. His name was Charles Augustus Lindbergh, Jr.

The baby was brought to live at Lindholm when he was two
months old. Young Charles' earliest memories are happy ones of the
big house and the land. He reveled in the openness. Some of the
most poetic passages in The Spirit of St. Louis are of his watching,
from his bed on the second floor, the stars "curve upward in their
courses ... a flock of geese in westward flight— God's arrow
shooting through the sky."

His nights were not all so bright. He had two childhood terrors

which persisted for many years. One was a recurrent dream of
Another was a phobia of the
dark. "As a child, I could wander alone, tranquilly, through the
most isolated places by the light of day. But at night my mind
conjured up drowned bodies on the riverbank, and robbers behind
every sumac clump. ... It was what I couldn't see that frightened
me
the imaginary horrors that took no clear-cut form."
These fears might have been reinforced by what happened when
he was four. In The Spirit of St. Louis he describes being alone in
the house with his nurse when, without warning, it began to burn.
One minute he was playing with his toys, the next he was rudely
yanked out of the kitchen into the back yard.
His nurse took him behind the barn to shield him from the sight.
But he peeked around a corner of the building to see a huge column
falling from a high roof or precipice.

.

.

.

BOYHOOD

29

of black smoke consuming his home. "You mustn't watch!" the nurse
cried.

He knew that something terrible was happening, and he remembers thinking, "Where is my father— my mother— what will happen
to

my toys?"

The place was burned to the ground. The next day his mother
took him to look at it; she tried to comfort him as they poked
through the ashes, saying, "Father will build us a new house." But a
four-year-old mind does not easily grasp the replaceability of possessions. Before them was the still-smoldering mass of the only
shelter Charles really knew— a maze of twisted pipes, melted glass,
blackened fixtures, sunk into the basement and covered with soot
and ashes. A few things had been saved, "but my toys, and the big
."
stairs, and my room above the river, are gone forever.
.

.

The fire forced the family to move to Minneapolis, for the winter,
into a rented apartment. Charles hated the city as a substitute for
his beloved farm. It was cold; you had to be so heavily dressed that
it

was no fun to go out. He got measles there. It is probably the only

time a doctor has had to come to see him. He spent "hours on end in
dry,

heated rooms, with stuffy head and whitening skin

.

.

.

pressing [his] face against a frosted window."

The Lindberghs moved back to Little Falls the next summer and
stayed in a hotel while the new, smaller, but still substantial (ten-

room) house* was being built. Lindbergh played with his two half
sisters, Lillian and Eva, who were considerably older than he, while
the carpenters and masons worked. He paddled with the girls— they
blew up his water wings— and they showed him how to make
teacups out of acorns.
It was

a great life, all play and all outdoors. But it began to be

when Charles was five years old and his father was
elected to Congress. The family— including Charles— had to go to

interrupted

church on Sunday in Little Falls because it was fitting that a
congressman's family be religious. Charles detested having to get
dressed up and sit on a hard seat and listen to stupid talk about

God, and he resented the reason behind it— politics.
* This house and the land were given some years later by Charles A. Lindbergh and his mother to the State of Minnesota as a park, a memorial to
C. A. Lindbergh. The house and the park are still there; even the family's old

car is in the garage.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

30

"It's even hotter in church than behind our team of horses on the
crunching road. ... No breath of air. ... A smell of too many
people weights the sticky dampness. My legs itch under their tight
stockings." When church was over, they would spend the rest of the
day where there was always a cool breeze. "Through the years of
my childhood, church was an ordeal to be cautiously avoided,"

Lindbergh writes.

Church wasn't the most disagreeable result of his fathers new
career in politics. Starting in 1907, Charles and his mother had to

spend winters in Washington.
"For me," wrote Lindbergh, "the city formed a prison. Red brick
houses replaced the woodlands on our farm. Concrete pavement
jarred against my heels.

... It was the clank of street cars, not the

hoot of an owl, that woke me at night."

The resentment he felt for being deprived of his farm was not
assuaged by the privileges accruing to a congressman's son, like
being allowed to walk on the railing in the Capitol grounds. (A
policeman gave his permission when he learned who Charles' father
was.) He has never liked cities and has only rarely lived in them.
In Washington, Charles saw Theodore Roosevelt and President
Taft, stood next to

Woodrow Wilson when Wilson signed one of

C. A. Lindbergh's bills into law. He spent hours on the floor of the

House of Representatives with his father. He met Champ Clark and
Robert M. La Follette, and people told him how lucky he was to be
at the nerve center of the nation's policies. Yet to Charles, Washing-

ton was a penance to be endured because of his father's career; the

House of Representatives reminded him of church, hot and stuffy,
with

speechmaking

congressmen

replacing

the

long-winded

preacher.

There were some compensations. A vacant lot next door to the
apartment house where the Lindberghs lived was a good place to
play and he dug up a fossil leaf there. He climbed the Washington
Monument, saw the Treasury presses at work printing money, and
often visited the Smithsonian Institution, a place he has always
liked. There were Mount Vernon and Arlington Cemetery, and
Rock Creek Park to picnic in, and the zoo to visit with his mother.
Washington wasn't all bad, but it certainly wasn't Little Falls.
There was one other thing which must have left a bad feeling
about Washington in Charles' mind. When the Lindberghs moved

BOYHOOD

31

(The Congressman was
forty-eight, his wife thirty-one; Lillian was nineteen, Eva fourteen,
and Charles five.) It was probably the last time that they lived
together as a family. After that year the two girls were sent away to
school, and sometime quite early in their married life C. A. and
Evangeline L. Lindbergh became estranged. Charles A. Lindbergh
has never publicly commented on this estrangement or even admitted it in his autobiography. He has given ample evidence of
loving both parents much more than most children love theirs. Yet
the separation was there; it is felt. He writes about one parent or the
other in warm and tender terms, but rarely of the two at the same
time. Of the many published photographs of Charles A. Lindbergh,
there are some with his father and some with his mother, but not
there in 1907, they were a family of five.

one of the three together.
There was never a formal separation or a divorce. Tlie Congressman told Charles that henceforth the boy would live with his
mother but that he would see his father every day. However, his
mother liked to travel, and from then on the pattern of his life was
winters in Washington (when he did see his father every day),
summers in Little Falls on the farm (when he saw his father
sometimes), and in between visits to Detroit with his mother— plus
numerous trips with her to different parts of the United States, once
through the Panama Canal.
Evangeline Land Lindbergh was a shy and withdrawn woman

who had easily won a reputation for snobbishness in Little Falls,
which was only forty miles from Sinclair Lewis's Sauk Centre and
spiritually right next door. She was a solitary like her husband and
used to ride her horse through the countryside by herself.

From the time Mrs. Lindbergh became estranged from her husband, she devoted herself to her only child. She was a permissive
mother, not generally overprotective. Lindbergh remembers her
singing to him when he was little. He never mentions being
physically punished by either parent, and it is likely that he never

was. Evangeline Lindbergh was as stoical as her husband with
Charles; she did not try to impose her ideas of what he should do or

how he should behave no matter how deeply she may have disagreed with any of his decisions. And she rarely betrayed her worry
over his safety— perhaps only once or twice during his daredevil
flying career.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

32

The two Detroit families she came from, the Lands and the
Lodges, were both notable for their strong-minded, independent
men. Both families reinforced the intransigence and Puritanism of
the Lindberghs. They were not, however, so resolutely involved in
the welfare of the common man as August and C. A. Lindbergh.
They had more of a sense of lineage, almost aristocracy. ( They were
less political than the Lindberghs. Only one of Charles' granduncles,
John C. Lodge, was active in local and state politics. What political
beliefs the Lodges had were conservative Republican, in strong
contrast with C. A. Lindbergh's extremely left-wing Republicanism.)

But, most important, both the Lodges and the Lands

added

another dimension to young Charles' existence: science.

Grandfather Land was a living influence in Charles' youth. During his frequent visits to Detroit, young Charles spent a great deal
of time with him.

Recalling one of these visits, Charles A. Lindbergh wrote:
face beaming, familiar white mustache
There he is at the gate
and gold-rimmed spectacles, an old black felt hat raised high in his hand
to attract our attention.
He's not tall, and he never elbows his way
to the front, but he's always there to meet us when we arrive.
"Charles, we're having smelts for dinner," he says, "and you and I are
going over to Canada this Sunday, to pick some flowers."
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

The Lands lived in a gray frame house at 64 West Elizabeth
Street. The building, surrounded by apartment houses, had a sign
on the door: "c. h. land, dentist."
The place was a treasure house of wonders for a small boy.
"There's the stuffed head of the big Rocky Mountain sheep that I
the safe which holds
used as a target for my unloaded rifle
platinum foil and bright sheets of dental gold." There was a cabinet
.

full of

.

.

geologic samples, including a piece of a

mammoth tooth.

There was a human skull in a box, and Charles' toys, and a tomcat

named Fluff.
Grandfather Land was much more than a dentist. He was an
first to use porcelain in dental crowns. He held
patents on this and other inventions. He was also an inveterate
seeker and trier. Against the industrial soot of Detroit he had
innovator, the

BOYHOOD

33

invented a kind of air-cleansing system for his house, consisting of a
fan which sucked outside air in through cheesecloth filters.

The house was Dr. Land's workshop, as well as his office and
home. The basement and some of the rooms held much laboratory
equipment, including furnaces for working porcelain and precious
metals.

"My grandfather is as wise as he is old," Lindbergh wrote many
years later, "and he can make anything with his hands." And Dr.

Land was never too busy to answer young Lindbergh's questions, or
to help him in his various projects— polishing the carnelians the boy

had found in Minnesota, mixing clay and making molds, handling
charged wires.

The talk around the Land table was different from that among
The Lands were scientific determinists, interested
in philosophy and the latest scientific discoveries and theories. The
talk didn't "hum in my ears like a church sermon or a political
speech." Science was something solid that young Lindbergh's mind

the Lindberghs.

could grasp; he liked the quick way he could get a definite answer
in science. At the Land house he learned that "science is power." He
thought he might become a scientist when he grew up, perhaps
study biology and medicine, but his marks in school were poor.

He picked up some uncertainties at the Land house, too. There
were debates about evolution, the missing link, and whether or not
the Bible was right. (Grandfather Land said that the Bible might
well be proved wrong. ) Charles Lindbergh thought about this, and
whether there was a God, and an existence after fife. "These
problems continued to throb in my mind
beyond childhood."
There were echoes of the same morality and principle in Grandfather Land that were so apparent in C. A. Lindbergh. Grandfather
Land thought that movies were bad for children; they gave a
distorted view of life. Nevertheless, following through on his ideas
of free inquiry, he gave the boy nickels to go to the movies.
There were other strong male influences in Detroit. Granduncle
Edwin Lodge was a physician who had his own fey way of driving
an automobile. He took Charles on house calls, weaving in and out
through the Detroit streets. He cared for the boy's colds and
childhood cuts and abrasions. He impressed Charles with his dash
and assurance.
.

.

.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

34

Granduncle Albert Lodge was also a doctor, his house three
blocks away from Grandfather Land's. He was a big, muscular man.
Mrs. Lindbergh said that Albert occasionally lost his temper,
Charles recalls. "Once he was riding on a Detroit streetcar and the

motorman didn't pay attention when he rang the bell. The same
thing had happened before, too often. Grand-uncle Albert walked to
the front of the car, smashed the glass face of the fare register with
his gloved

fist,

and said— as the astounded motorman jammed on

the brakes— 'Maybe you'll stop the next time I ring.' There was a

note of admiration in

my mother's voice whenever she told the
my grand-uncle to

story; but she usually added that it was wrong of

do it."

The family used to speak with pride of Great-Grandfather Edwin
Lodge, who had also been a doctor, owned a pharmacy, and
published the Homeopathic Observer. He fathered eleven children
by two wives. He could write the Lord's Prayer on a circle the size
of a dime, and was a fundamentalist preacher who baptized his
congregation members in a lake, standing up to his waist in the cold
water.
Yet, in spite of their pride in the man, the younger generation
were committed to following science, though it might lead to a

direct refutation of old Edwin's religious beliefs.

The Lodges and the Lands, like the Lindberghs, made a point of
putting principle ahead of sentiment, and reason over
neither family was totally consistent about

it.

The

all.

But

presence of a

child could melt their rigidity.

C. A. Lindbergh's taciturnity seemed unbroken to strangers who
saw him only as a stern man who gave no ground and asked no
quarter. But to his daughters, and to his mother, and occasionally to
an old friend, he revealed that his lone fights were sometimes
depressing. His eldest daughter, Lillian, died

midway in his ten

years in Congress, of tuberculosis, and he never got over her death.

In

letters

to his family,

he constantly referred

to

his

loss

and

apologized for inflicting his sorrow on others.

He once wrote, "The trouble with me is that I do not tell people
when I am pleased."
Like other lone fighters, C. A. Lindbergh kept strangers at arm's
he had to rely more than most men on his

length. Consequently

BOYHOOD

35

children for warmth and support. Being so alone in everything, he

seemed to require their physical presence. He always tried to take at
least one of them wherever he went— Eva, or Lillian, or Charles;
particularly Charles, his first and only son.
From the time the boy was three (and he forty-six), the Congressman used to take him swimming in the Mississippi. C.A. would
swim the quarter mile to the other side with Charles on his back,
both of them naked, and then he would swim back. As Charles got
bigger, his father urged him to swim himself.
The boy was bathing with his father when he waded into the
water alone and suddenly slipped into a deep hole. The water was
over his head. When he surfaced, he saw that his father was making
no move to help him, but was just standing on shore, laughing.
Without knowing it, Charles had started to swim. He was eight
years old.

When he was only six, one of his Detroit uncles had given him a
rifle

and taught him to shoot it in the basement of the Land house.

C.A. thought the boy a bit young to have a gun, but, recalling his

own gun-toting boyhood, he allowed Charles to carry the rifle when
they went into the woods. Charles pointed the gun in every direction, carried it

cocked and loaded through brush, and behaved in

other reckless ways. But C.A.'s principle was to offer no advice or

help unless asked.

Sooner or later something would happen— and it did. A twig
caught the trigger, and the gun fired. The bullet just grazed the
boy's toe.

C.A. said nothing until they were near the house; then he stopped
and appeared disturbed. Charles wanted to know what was troubling him.

"I'm sorry your

gun went off that way," C.A. said. "It maybe
your mother will not let you go

will spoil our hunting. I'm afraid

out with the gun any more."
Said Charles, "If you don't say anything about it, I wont either."

The incident ended there.
"Father thought six was young for a rifle," Charles Lindbergh
reported later, "but the next year he gave me a Savage repeater; and
the year after that, a Winchester 12-gauge automatic shotgun; and

he loaned me the Smith & Wesson revolver that he'd shot a burglar
with. He'd let me walk behind him with a loaded gun at seven."

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

36

Charles became his father's constant companion in walking and
hunting expeditions. As soon as he was strong enough to swing an
axe, C.A. let him use one.

When he was eleven, Charles learned to

drive the family car— a Ford— on the Lindbergh land, although he

was so small he had to stand up to reach the pedals. By the time he
was twelve, he was permitted to drive the car elsewhere.
"Age seemed to make no difference to [Father]," Lindbergh has
since written. "My freedom was complete. All he asked for was
responsibility in return.

."
.

.

him at his office. A visiting
newspaperman remarked having to step over a yellow-haired boy
who was lying on the floor, reading a book. Another visitor rememC.A. loved to have Charles with

bered

how Charles kept jumping on his father's back during a
between the two men, and how he was not

serious conversation

reprimanded for it.

One of C.A.'s secretaries recalled an incident when the boy was
helping address

office mail.

Charles was sitting at a long table

stacked higher than his head with books and envelopes, writing
as fast as he could in his sprawling script.

The secretary suggested a more efficient way of handling packages. The boy turned and said with disgust, "You can't tell me what

to do. You're just a secretary working for

my father."

Lindbergh, Sr., was at his desk, apparently busy, but he overheard this bit of dialogue and turned his chair. "There isn't anyone
in this office working for anyone else," he said. "We are all working

together. Don't forget that, son."

In 1914, when Charles was twelve, C. A. Lindbergh got a leave of

absence from the House of Representatives and took him on a
camping trip in north central Minnesota— a trip that was also a
survey by the elder Lindbergh of the operation of the reservoir
system at the headwaters of the Mississippi River. They portaged
their boat to the small stream that would become the Mississippi,
then floated down the river in their rowboat until they reached the
family farm in Minnesota. The trip took two weeks. They cooked
their own meals over an open fire— meals that were made on game
they shot or fish they caught. They slept out of doors, although it
rained a good deal of the time and there were swarms of black flies
and mosquitoes.
"That trip with Charles was one of the happiest times in my

BOYHOOD

37

whole life," the father told a friend. "I found the man in him. He
has good stuff, and will stick. He stood up under the discomforts of
that trip as I never expected he would. A good experience that was
for both of us."

On that trip, C.A. spoke to his son about his political and
economic concerns for the future, as to another man. Charles did
not answer, for he didn't understand many of these things; also, it
disturbed him to discuss a future in which his father frankly
acknowledged that he himself would not take part because he would
be dead.
His father talked about the "money trust," and high interest rates
on farm mortgages. The boy felt that perhaps the elder Lindbergh
made these things sound more desperate than they were. C.A. said
that the country belonged to the people, but they hadn't learned to
run it, and he was worried about all the foreign loans we were
making to a Europe at war. "The trouble with war is that it kills the
best and youngest men," the father told his son.
Charles took other trips with his father, sometimes went hunting
with him and other men. One of the hunters remembers how
Charles would wake up in the morning, watch his father closely to
see if he was asleep, then begin a pillow fight, which would end
only when the father said, "That's enough, son."
However, this was only one aspect. The elder Lindbergh once
told a friend that he found Charles unusually serious for his age.
"I seem to be more of a kid than he does sometimes," the Congressman said.
Charles was brought up with machinery and showed a real
affinity for things mechanical from

an early age. The family traded

up from the Ford to a Saxon car, and in the summer of 1916, when
Charles was only fourteen, he was asked to drive his mother and his
Uncle Charles in the Saxon from Little Falls to California. The trip
had been calculated to take a couple of weeks. In thirty days they
had gone only as far as Winslow, Arizona, after being held up by
various mechanical difficulties and breakdowns. They had been
forced to wait for repairs and, on occasion, for dry roads. It was
quite a test for a fourteen-year-old, but Charles met it head on with
the traditional family stoicism and resourcefulness. They arrived in
Los Angeles after nearly six weeks on the road, and Charles wrote
his father a letter describing the various automobiles he had seen en

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

38

route and evaluating their good and bad features. He addressed the
letter to "C. A. Lindbergh" and signed it "C. A. Lindbergh."

Charles' upbringing, like his father's, inculcated a strong sense of
responsibility

in

practical

things.

He was

capable with

guns,

machinery, and in matters where good reflexes and sound judgment
were important. But school was something else. When he was eight,
his parents decided he ought to start his studies. His mother tutored

him up to his age level, then entered him in the second grade of
Force School, in Washington. It was the first of eleven different
schools he would attend during the next ten years, in places as
widely separated as Washington and Redondo Beach, California.

He records with a touch of bitterness that he never completed a full
academic year in any of them before entering college— and that he
never enjoyed any of them, either. He describes himself as not a
good student, but puts this down partly to the errant nature of his
education. Too, his physical being dominated his mind; he could
study for just so long and then he had to get out and do something.
He had never been able to learn abstractly; he had no use for
learning for its own sake.

Charles was graduated from the Little Falls high school in 1918
at the age of sixteen, but characteristically managed to do it without

much studying. In 1918 it was possible for a student in that school
toward graduation by working on a farm to raise
food for the war effort. Charles left school and used the fields and
woods owned by his father for this purpose. He would have
preferred to join the Army Air Force or the Lafayette Flying Corps,
but he was too young to enlist without parental permission, and he
certainly couldn't get that from his anti-war father.
He took his schoolbooks with him, but did not expect to study
much while working the farm. He would have to pass examinations
to gain credits

but they would not be difficult. He raised heifers and sheep. He
actually ran the enterprise at the age of sixteen, with a hired hand,
for his father had a law office in Minneapolis (he was out of
Congress by then) and had business interests that often took him
East. Charles built a house for the pigs, fixed the barn for the cows,
milked, acted as midwife for the animals, fought off the murderous

midwinter cold of central Minnesota.
Once, he was nearly killed while plowing a field with a tractor.

He had tripped the lift, preparing to turn at the end of a furrow,

BOYHOOD

39

when the steel plow flashed by his head and smacked into the
ground. The lift mechanism had jammed, upsetting the entire
gangplow. If he hadn't turned his tractor at the moment he pulled
the lever, he would have been crushed in his seat. The flying
plowshare missed his head by less than six inches.
This experience, like several others later in life, Lindbergh ab-

sorbed and transmuted into his theory about risk and life. Farm life
wasn't as safe as people thought, and there were risks in almost
everything that was interesting or worth while. In fact, he figured

out that "danger was a part of life not always to be shunned.

.

.

.

dangerous to climb a tree, to swim down rapids in the river,
to go hunting with a gun.
You could be killed as quickly on a
farm as in an airplane."
It was

.

.

.

The next year, 1919, he had another brush with death on the
farm. That year, at seventeen, he had taken on in addition to the

running of the farm a dealership in milking machines and farm
engines. Early one winter day he saddled up his pony in the five-

degree cold and rode to the nearby town of Pierz. He spent the day
talking

to

farmers

about

the

best

methods

for

milking cows

mechanically, and finally left for home.

By evening he was still nearly thirty miles from his farm. Snow
began to fall. He buttoned himself up, pulled his hat down, and
nearly slept in the saddle as the pony plodded homeward. Suddenly
he was jolted awake by the realization that the pony was staggering, and as he dismounted, it stopped.
He began to walk, leading the pony, for about fifteen miles. The
blizzard got worse; then the snow ended and the cold became more
biting. Stumbling along hour after hour, young Lindbergh finally
had to He down for a few minutes in a snowbank to ease his
cramped muscles. But he and the animal made it back to the farm.
In 1920 he had had two years of raising sheep and cows and
could see that he wasn't getting anywhere. He actually liked
farming, loved the farmer's life, and did it well— but it wasn't fully
satisfying. What he really wanted to do was to go to Alaska and to
fly an airplane. These were not sudden whims. The Alaska idea
came from Vilhjalmur Stefansson, the Minnesotan who had become
a famous arctic explorer. Stefansson told Charles that Alaska was
the last frontier, the last chance he'd have to prove himself a man
the way his father had done on the American frontier.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

40

And as for flying— that idea started when, as a small boy, Charles
would lie on his back, completely hidden in the tall grass in Little
Falls. Then he could look directly overhead and see the clouds
sailing by, and nobody could see him. "How wonderful it would
be," he thought, "if I had an airplane— wings with which I could fly
up to the clouds and explore their caves and canyons— wings like
that hawk circling above me." With an airplane, he could ride the
wind.

One summer day—he's not sure of the year—he recalls hearing an
engine. Nothing unusual in that, since a number of automobiles had

passed by on the road that summer.

He went on playing in his

upstairs room with the river stones he and his mother had collected.

Then he realized that the sound was coming not from the road
but from the other side of the house. He climbed out the window
onto the roof.
"Flying upriver below higher branches of trees, a biplane was less
than two hundred yards away— a frail, complicated structure, with
the pilot sitting out in front between struts and wires." It was one of
his first looks at an airplane, one of the "pusher" types with the
propeller behind, pushing the plane.
Charles watched it fly out of sight and then ran down to tell his
mother the breathtaking news. His mother knew about it; she'd read
in the Transcript that a pilot was coming to the town, but she'd
forgotten to tell Charles about it. The pilot was taking people up for
rides at a dollar a minute, she said. Not only was this terribly
expensive; it was terribly dangerous. A wing could fall off— the
engine could stop— you could be killed.

Impressed by his mother's anti-airplane arguments, Charles did
not ask to fly. But the sight of a plane had buttressed his dreams
of flight with the substance of the real thing. And as for the dangers

of flying— he'd heard

grownups talking about such living pilots as

Orville and Wilbur Wright, Glenn H. Curtiss, and Lincoln Beachey.

Dangerous and expensive flying might be, but if it was done with
skill, one could survive.
One time when he was quite young, in Washington, Charles'
mother took him to nearby Fort Myer, Virginia, to see an air show.
There were six planes and a small grandstand to watch from while
the planes took off and raced a motorcar around a track. In another

BOYHOOD

41

event the pilots flew over a chalked outline of a battleship and
"bombed" it with oranges thrown by hand. The pilots sat out in
front of the planes, with their caps turned backward. Like the plane

Charles had seen in Little Falls, these were biplanes with the propeller mounted behind.

At this meet a plane was seen to falter and to descend behind
some trees to make a forced landing. Charles never learned whether
or not the pilot had been hurt.
It is not possible to determine whether these planes or the one at
Little Falls were the first Charles had seen, but there is no doubt
that Fort Myer was his first look at an organized exhibition of
flying.

All these experiences coalesced with his identification of freedom

with flying, his interest in things mechanical, and his theory of the
relativity of risks and his belief that the only real achievements were
physical; i.e., conquering fear and fatigue. He had to be a flier.

But the urge to vanquish the Alaskan frontier and the desire to fly
were countered by the more prosaic notions of his parents. Both
were graduates of the University of Michigan; both thought he
ought to have a college degree. Since he was a dutiful son, he
determined to try to do what they wanted.

He decided to study mechanical engineering at the University of
Wisconsin in the fall of 1920. He would have preferred aeronautical
engineering, but most of the courses he wanted to take were given
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His grades were not
good enough for him to get into the Institute.
Before leaving the farm he decided he should find tenants to take
over the livestock and the land. He interviewed several people and
selected a married couple; then he was ready to leave.
From the time he learned to drive, Charles always had some
means of transportation— each one faster than the last. His first
personal vehicle was an Excelsior motorcycle, which he got in his
late teens.

He rode it much too quickly for the comfort of the Little

Falls citizenry, but he had been given "independence with responsibility" by his father and he continued to exercise them both.

When fall came, he rode to Madison, Wisconsin, on his motorcycle and entered the University. One schoolmate says he kept the

machine in his room, constantly tinkering with the engine when he

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

42

wasn't riding it, interfering with sleep in the dormitory. But this

may be apocryphal, because Lindbergh was living with his mother,
who had taken a job teaching in Madison to be with her son.
There was a hill in Madison which he liked to speed down on
the machine. He told a friend that it should be possible to descend
the hill at full throttle and make the turn at the bottom without
braking, if one calculated the centripetal and centrifugal forces
properly and leaned at the proper angle. He tried it once and fell
off.

Since he was going so fast, he might have been seriously hurt,

but he broke no bones, merely scraped himself badly. He got up
and went back a second time, and made it.

He also had the idea of testing how far he could leap the machine
into the lake bordering the campus, but was dissuaded by his two

from trying this experiment. With one of his
friends he designed and built a motor- driven iceboat. It was
equipped with a small gasoline engine and an airplane propeller,
and attained some very high speeds before it cracked up.
He still hated school and studying and spent most of his time out
of doors on the motorcycle, or in rifle and pistol shooting. He had
joined the University R.O.T.C. and had become a member of both
the rifle and the pistol teams. He practiced in the shooting gallery or
on the range, and was an excellent shot. He and the captain of the
rifle team had a little game between them. They used to shoot
twenty-five-cent pieces out of each others fingers from a distance of
fifty feet. This further implemented Lindbergh's theory about risks
being relative— particularly when the same boy tried to talk him out
of flying because it was too dangerous.
Lindbergh knew that progress depended on education, that he
wouldn't have his motorcycle if someone hadn't studied and invented it, but he couldn't understand why study couldn't be better
balanced with the more interesting pursuits of life.
He knew one thing for sure: studies or no, diploma or no, he had
no intention of following his father into the law or into politics. He'd
seen enough of politics to know he hated the life in Washington,
and of the law his father had told him, "A lawyer's tied to his office
and his desk. It isn't the kind of work you'd like."
At the end of his freshman year, Lindbergh went to R.O.T.C.
artillery school at Camp Knox, Kentucky, for six weeks. He had the
motorcycle with him, and when the artillery course was finished he
friends (both male)

BOYHOOD

43

rode alone to Florida, at the age of nineteen, with forty-eight dollars
in his pocket. This was a time when any kind of motor travel was

and unreliable. At one point he had to walk his machine
through ten miles of wet sand— there was just no road. But he made
it to Jacksonville, and back to Little Falls, fighting his battles with
weather and machinery, stopping only when he was too worn out to

risky

move. He returned with nine dollars.
He went back to the University of Wisconsin in the fall with the
renewed resolve to do well in engineering. But he was still the poor
student whose body was master of his mind. His mathematics was
only passable.

His English composition was marked

down for

punctuation and spelling.

Lindbergh was repelled by the idea of spending his youth on
"formulae, semicolons, and our crazy English spelling. I don't
believe God made man to fiddle with pencil marks on paper. He
."
gave him earth and air to feel. And now even wings to fly.
He thought that if he were studying something related to his
concerns, like aeronautics, he might do much better. "I would work
hard to understand the magic contours of a wing." But there weren't
many aeronautics courses at Wisconsin, and with his marks M.I.T.
was ever more remote and impossible.
Lindbergh could see no future for himself at Wisconsin. He
talked things over with his two friends in Madison— one was
Richard Plummer, who shared Lindbergh's cycling enthusiasms, the
other Delos Dudley, the son of the University's assistant librarian.
Dudley wrote to several flying schools for literature ( he himself was
much interested in aviation ) and gave it to Lindbergh. One of these
places was the Nebraska Aircraft Corporation, which was producing
the Lincoln Standard Turnabout Airplane— and giving flying lessons
as a promotional device to help sell their product and to carry
.

.

part of the firm's overhead.

During the second half of his sophomore year at Wisconsin,
Charles told his parents he wanted to quit school and learn to fly.
C. A. Lindbergh was dead set against the idea. He said, "Flying
is too dangerous and you're my only son." He offered him a choice
of careers in business or farming. He even got his friends to try to
reason with Charles. But in the end C. A. Lindbergh capitulated
and later even helped the boy borrow some money at the bank to

buy his first airplane.

44

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH
Mrs. Lindbergh, when she heard the news, showed concern in her

face, but not in her words. "All right," she said. "If you really want

to fly, that's what you should do."

"You must go," she told him later. "You must lead your own life. I
I can't see the time when we'll be
together much again." She was right; they did not spend very much
time together after that, although they were always in close touch.
At the end of March, 1922, Lindbergh left the University of
Wisconsin. He had not completed his sophomore year. On his
Excelsior, he headed for Lincoln, Nebraska. There he enrolled as a
student flier with the Nebraska Aircraft Corporation.
mustn't hold you back. Only

After Lindbergh became committed to a flying career, Mrs.
Lindbergh moved back to Detroit. She got a job teaching science
there in the Cass Technical High School.

EARLY FLIGHT

IN APRIL, 1922, WHEN LINDBERGH STARTED LEARNING TO
commercial aviation in the United States was far behind that of
Europe. Airplanes designed and built in Europe had dominated
most of the air war of 1914-1918. It was in Europe that regular
airlines had begun to carry passengers. (KLM started in 1919
between Amsterdam and London.) There were one or two local
scheduled airlines in the United States.
At that time there were 1,200 civilian airplanes in the U.S. (as
compared with more than 106,707 today). Almost all were former
warplanes, sold off as government surplus. Most of these wood-andfabric crates could hold only one or two passengers or a pilot and a
small bit of cargo. Passengers were weighed; a man over two
hundred pounds might be refused a ride or forced to pay extra.
Half the planes were operated by established companies, which
means they were based on fields where they could be serviced and
would carry passengers over a short radius to nearby points. There
was no up-to-date weather information. There was a single government-operated airway system to permit the mail to be flown from
California to New York, with frequent stops for refueling and
change of pilots.

fly,

The aircraft industry, built so swiftly during the war, was floundering. There was no government regulation of planes or pilots. If
you had $300 or so, you could pick up a surplus warplane and fly it.

When Lindbergh reached Lincoln, Nebraska, in April, 1922, he
to touch one. He

had never been near enough to an airplane

approached the plant at Nebraska Aircraft Corporation as an
acolyte approaches an altar. "I can still smell the odor of dope
45

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

46

[cellulose

acetate

or nitrate]

that

permeated each breath," he

reported thirty years later, "like ether in a hospital's corridors. I can
still see the brightly painted fuselages

on the floor, still marvel at the

compactness of the Hispano-Suiza engine."

The Hispano-Suiza was a water-cooled V-8 engine which turned
out 150 horsepower. By comparison, the V-8s in today's automobiles
are often more than twice as powerful.

The Nebraska Aircraft Corporations plant was not a large one.
The company's main business was buying up old Army training
planes and converting them to civilian use. These Lincoln Standard
Turnabouts were, like other Army ships, biplanes— two wings gave
more strength and lift in combat— and were powered with the
Hispano-Suiza engine.
The Lincoln Standard Turnabout had an open cockpit aft for its
pilot and a second open cockpit forward in which two passengers
could be carried. Unlike the earlier planes of Lindbergh's childhood, this one had its propeller mounted forward, which made it a
"tractor," pulling rather than pushing. Its top speed was ninety
miles an hour.
The Nebraska Aircraft Corporation president, Ray Page, looked
over the gangling six-foot-three-inch Lindbergh and took him on as
a student in his "school." Lindbergh paid $500 tuition in advance.
Actually, there were no other paying students. Nevertheless there
were pilots and mechanics who could teach flying and maintenance.
About a week later, on April 8, one of the company's planes was
hauled out to the nearby airfield by truck. The wings were lashed
parallel to the fuselage. Lindbergh stood by and watched every
detail of how the plane was assembled and made ready for flight.
The wings were taken carefully out of the tow truck and attached
to

the fuselage,

and the wires operating

ailerons,

flippers,

and

rudder were hooked up. The fuel was strained into the tank (an
impurity could cause a crash), and the engine was tuned up.
Lindbergh noted how the engineer tested the tautness of cables
with his fingers. He had been warned that a pilot had to know
about all these things and more; he had to be able to repair his
plane in the field where he might be alone, far from any expert
assistance. The fragile wings, wooden spars and ribs covered with
fabric stretched tight with dope (that first smell of the factory)
often needed mending, spark plugs had to be cleaned regularly,

EARLY FLIGHT

47

valves ground or changed. "You had to know how to lockstitch, how
to bind the ends of rubber rope, how to lap a propeller hub to its
shaft," Lindbergh recalls.

The next day, April 9, 1922, Lindbergh made his first airplane
Standard, sitting alongside a farm
boy named Bud Gurney, who worked in the factory to earn his
lessons. The pilot's name was Otto Timm. First the engine was
started by hand; a mechanic pulled strongly on the propeller and
then dodged out of the way when the eight cylinders began firing.
The pilot was watching his instruments as Lindbergh twisted in his
seat to look at him; Timm taxied the plane to the end of the sod
field and turned the tail to the wind. Again he studied his instruments as he revved up the engine. This flying was serious business,
Lindbergh thought. Then Timm let the motor throttle down and
nodded to the mechanics. They pulled the wheel chocks out.
The plane bumped down the field and turned into the wind whose
direction was shown by the wind sock. Again Timm stopped to
study his instruments and check the field. Then he began his run
and takeoff. Suddenly the bumpy ride became smooth as the plane

flight in the front cockpit of the

left the ground.

A novice has a poet's eye, Lindbergh noted. "I lose all conscious
connection with the past ... in this strange, unmortal space,

crowded with beauty, pierced with danger," he wrote many years
later about his first flight. Now he sees things with a professional
eye— he has learned to look downward for a mile the same way a
man on the ground learns to judge things a mile away horizontally.
Now he can read the contour of a hillside that to his novice's eye
would have looked flat, but never has he "seen the earth below so
clearly, as in those early days of flight."

Lindbergh's regular instructor was Ira Biffle, a hard-bitten, toughtalking man who'd taught many pilots to fly during the war.

But

Biffle had lost his taste for flying after one of his close friends had

died in a crash. Lindbergh would be at the field every day on his
motorcycle, but Biffle might not come. Then, later, at the factory, he
would tell Lindbergh— who had by now acquired the nickname of
"Slim"— that the air was too turbulent that day, to meet him in the
late afternoon at the field when the wind had died down. Sometimes—not often—he would keep the appointment, and there would
be time for a few takeoffs and landings in the dual-control plane

48

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

before it got too dark. But most of the time Biffle never showed up
at all.

Lindbergh doesn't comment on this, but the fact that he reveals
Biffle's dereliction is a comment in itself. However, he obviously had
sympathy for Biffle's problems; more than a dozen years later, when
Biffle was dying in a Chicago hospital, Lindbergh sent a $50 check
with a personal note expressing hope for his recovery.
Biffle's negligent attitude restricted Lindbergh's flying to only
about eight hours in the first five or six weeks he spent at Lincoln.
Then, in May, Lindbergh learned from Bud Gurney that Ray Page
was going to sell the training plane to a barnstorming pilot named

Erold Bahl. If Lindbergh wanted to solo, he would have to do so
immediately. Lindbergh spoke to Biffle about it, but Biffle said he
had to leave Lincoln for another job. Lindbergh went to Ray Page
and asked permission to solo. Page said there was no question that
Lindbergh had shown ability as a flier, but planes were expensive,
and if he wanted to solo he would have to put up a bond of $500 to
cover damage in a possible crack-up.
Lindbergh didn't have the money. He had already invested $650,
including his expenses, to get eight precious hours of flying instruc-

Anyhow, he knew that one solo wouldn't make him a pilot.
What he needed was more experience. He asked Erold Bahl if he
could go along with him as helper on the barnstorming trip. He
even offered to pay his own expenses. Bahl hesitated, then said he
could come. They left in May on a month's tour.
Lindbergh kept the plane clean, pulled through the propeller, and
tion.

got passengers, from the crowds that gathered, at $5 a ride. After a

few days, Bahl said he would pay Lindbergh's expenses because he
was doing such a good job.
Later, Lindbergh suggested that Bahl might draw bigger crowds
if he (Lindbergh) stood on a wing as they flew over the town
preparatory to landing. Bahl was an extremely conservative flier
who flew in a business suit and thought that flying ought to be
safe— although he sometimes took off in weather that other, more
colorful pilots would not brave. It was all a matter of judgment, he
said. He told Lindbergh to climb out on the wing, if he wished,
"but watch how you step on the spars." (The space between the
wooden spars— the long horizontal beams that supported the wing

—was covered only with thin fabric.) "Don't go farther than the

EARLY FLIGHT

49

inner-bay strut" The strut was the brace between the upper and

lower wings. These were all the instructions Lindbergh got the first
time he stepped out of the cockpit while the plane was in the air.

He wore no parachute. Most pilots didn't own them then.
After the trip with Bahl, Lindbergh

came back to work in the

factory at Lincoln for fifteen dollars a week. He had a small amount
of money in the bank but was determined to live on what he could
earn.

That was June, 1922. That same month a parachute maker named
Charles Hardin came to Lincoln to demonstrate his product. He did
it in the most convincing way. Lindbergh watched Hardin strap on
his harness, climb into a plane, and a few minutes later dive into
space, a dot in the sky at an altitude of 2,000 feet. As Lindbergh
watched tensely, the white chute blossomed in the air and Hardin
drifted down, his life hanging from fragile threads beneath the
delicate white canopy. Hardin landed safely, collapsed the fabric,
and strolled off. Lindbergh was much impressed.
A day or two later he knew he had to jump. Suddenly he was
exhilarated. "I had a feeling of anticipation mixed with dread, of
confidence restrained by caution, of courage salted through with
fear.
What gain was there for such a risk? I would have no pay
in money for hurling my body into space. There would be no crowd
to watch and applaud my landing. Nor was there any scientific objective to be gained. No, there was a deeper reason for wanting to
jump, a desire I could not explain. It was the quality that led me into
aviation in the first place, when safer and more profitable occupations were at hand. ... It was a love of the air and sky and flying,
the lure of adventure, the appreciation of beauty. It lay beyond the
descriptive words of men where immortality is touched through
danger, where life meets death on equal plane; where man is more
than man, and existence both supreme and valueless at the same
.

.

.

instant."

He asked Ray Page's permission to make a jump, and then
approached Hardin and his wife. "I'd like to make a double jump,"
he said.
A double jump is a parachute jump in which the jumper uses two
chutes, one after the other. He cuts himself away from the first after
it has opened, and then opens the second and comes to earth.
When Lindbergh broached the idea of doing this kind of jump to

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

50

the Hardins, they were taken aback. Lindbergh had to give a good
reason for wanting to try this stunt. "I might want to buy a
parachute/' he said. He even asked the price, to lend verisimilitude
to his request.

He told Hardin he had read that Hardin had used as many as ten
chutes on one drop, and he asked with a feigned innocence, "It isn't

more dangerous with two chutes than with one, is it?"
Hardin was on the spot. His sales story had been that all his
parachutes were equally safe. If that was true, it followed that a
double drop was no more risky than a single one. He had to agree
to lend Lindbergh two of his chutes for the double drop. He also
made Lindbergh a price of a hundred dollars for one parachute.
Lindbergh and Hardin took great care to see that everything
went well. Together they packed the parachutes, laying the cloth
out on the grass, methodically folding it accordion style, and laying
the lines out straight, to run free between sheets of paper. The vent
(a small opening at the top) of the second chute was tied to the
shroud ring of the first chute, so that the second chute would string
out full length as the first chute was cut away from the jumper.
Then the chutes were packed in a canvas bag tied to the plane
near the end of the wing, to make sure the jumper cleared the tail
surfaces of the ship.

Lindbergh strapped on his jumping harness and climbed into the
front cockpit. Suddenly the cockpit which had seemed such a flimsy

spot became as safe as a bank vault by comparison with the wing
tip and that faraway canvas bag of parachutes.

When the plane reached an altitude of 1,800 feet, the pilot
banked toward the field. This was the signal for Lindbergh to begin
along the wing to the bag at the end. He put a leg
over the side of the cockpit as he had often done before, but now he
would have to walk far out, carefully stepping on the fragile spar.
There was nothing but thin wires to hold onto. At last he reached
the end and sat down on the wing to snap the ends of the
parachutes to his harness. Then, as the plane throttled down, he let
himself fall under the wing. At this point he was being held aloft by
a bowknot on the mouth of the parachute bag, a knot he had tied
himself. Once he untied that knot, he would be falling, with only a
his long walk

parachute to brake his descent.

He had no choice now, second thoughts or no. He pulled the knot

EARLY FLIGHT

51

and fell free. There was a jerk. The first parachute blossomed open
quickly. After a few seconds he cut the rope holding the first chute
to the second. It drifted off. Not being an experienced jumper, he
did not realize that he should feel a second tug indicating the
opening of the chute. There was no tug. He was falling free,
dangerously near the ground. Instead of stringing out as it was
meant to do, the second chute was a useless wad of folded fabric.
He knew nothing of this at the time. Fortunately, there was enough
altitude so that the speed of his descent forced air into the second

parachute and it opened by itself. Lindbergh swung in the shrouds,
content with his achievement, ignorant of his close call. He took a
small camera from his pocket and began photographing the chute

over his head.

Hardin came over to apologize for using the wrong string to tie
the two chutes together; he normally used twine but had forgotten
to bring it with him. The string had broken before freeing the
second chute; that was why it hadn't opened.
"Slim, that was just grocery string," Bud Gurney told Lindbergh
later. "It was so rotten you could pull it apart with your finger. I cut
off a piece to try." But Lindbergh was unworried. He had done
what he had set out to do.
"How soundly I slept that night— as I always have after a jump! I
simply passed out of mortal existence a few seconds after my head
hit its pillow; and when I became conscious again the sun had risen.
There wasn't a dream in memory."
With that jump, Lindbergh had apparently exorcised his childhood dream phobia of falling. "Strangely enough, I've never fallen
in my dreams since I actually fell through air."
A very skillful pilot named H. J. ("Shorty") Lynch came to
Lincoln that June to pick up a Lincoln Standard plane— the last one
in the plant— which he was taking to Kansas. Ray Page paid Lynch
to give Lindbergh a few more flying lessons. Lynch told Lindbergh
that he was ready to solo but that he couldn't get Page to risk a
plane.

With Lynch taking the last plane from the factory and with no
available, there was nothing to hold Lindbergh in
Lincoln. Lynch mentioned that he just might be doing some barnstorming in Kansas, and might be able to use an assistant— especially one who could wing-walk and make parachute drops.

instructor

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

52

"Don't count on it," he said. When he got to Kansas, he might
send Lindbergh a wire.
Meanwhile, Lindbergh settled his finances with Ray Page and
Hardin; he traded his claim to the right to solo, the wages due for
several weeks' work in the factory, and twenty-five dollars in cash
for a new Hardin muslin parachute.

At that time the lifespan of an aviator was about 900 flying hours.
Lindbergh knew the vocation was risky, but he felt it was possible
to surmount the risk, and that in any case it put him on a higher
level of existence. "In flying, I tasted a wine of the gods. ... I
decided that if I could fly for ten years before I was killed in a
crash, it would be a worthwhile trade for an ordinary lifetime."

Also there was Wilbur Wright, who had flown actively for more
than fifteen years and was still very much alive. And there were

others— some of them men who flew at Lincoln.

The same thing was true of parachutes. Lindbergh was the only
jumper at the Lincoln field, and was regarded by nonjumpers as
being something like a man in a condemned cell in prison. But he
knew that most parachute deaths were caused by avoidable errors;
that if one packed one's chute carefully,
start with

(

and it was well made to

Hardin's chutes were well made, as Hardin himself had

proved countless times), then the risk was negligible. There were
dangers in landing but these, too, could be canceled by careful

management of the terrain.
At Lincoln, Lindbergh studied the tricks of exhibition flying. A
young mechanic named Pete, in exchange for free rides on Lindbergh's motorcycle out to the flying field, gave him the trick of
"hanging by the teeth." In reality, the man who hung was securely
held by a harness and a wire cable invisible to the crowd below.
Lindbergh knew that men had been killed wing-walking, but that
was the result of disregarding foreseeable failure. "The day I stood
on the top wing of an airplane while it looped, I was tied on as
safely as though I'd been strapped in my cockpit." He wore a
harness he had made himself. There were heel cups to snug his feet
and four wire cables from a heavy leather belt around his waist that
held him to strong points on the wing.
The biggest safety ( or danger ) factor for the stunt man was the
pilot. Lindbergh studied and analyzed the style of every flier who
passed through Lincoln. Lynch was one with whom he felt he'd

EARLY FLIGHT

53

be safe. So when he got the hoped-for telegram from Lynch in
July, 1922, asking him to come on the barnstorming tour, he took
his parachute and left by train for Bird City, Kansas.
He was met there by Lynch, who was flying the plane he'd picked
up in Nebraska. The next day Lindbergh made his first jump for
Lynch. After that, they barnstormed through Kansas, Nebraska,
Wyoming, and Montana. They took with them a dog who loved to
fly and would stand strapped to the outside on the plane's after
cowling.

Lindbergh was still "Slim" to his pals but to the public he was
"daredevil Lindbergh" on the promotion posters. Wherever he
went, he was an object of awe— on a small scale, already a local
hero. Of course there was danger, but in all that year of flying,
jumping, and wing-walking Lindbergh says he was never as close to
being killed as he had been the day on the farm when the plow
zipped by his ear.
After the barnstorming tour ended, in October, 1922, Lindbergh
decided to run the Yellowstone River alone in a boat he bought for
two dollars. He made twenty miles the first day, but the rapids
knocked the calking from between the planks and soon he was
bailing more than he was sailing. At the end of the second day he
gave up, traded the boat for a ride to the railroad, and took the
train back to Lincoln, where he'd left his motorcycle.
He had jammed a piston on the cycle racing a car, so had to
repair the machine before he rode to Detroit ( a three-day trip ) to
see his mother. After a visit with her he spent the rest of the winter
with his father, on the farm and in Minneapolis.
Lindbergh still had not soloed when he decided to buy an
airplane. He'd heard they were selling war-surplus "Jennies" cheap
in Georgia. The Jenny got its name from its initials; its full name
was the Curtiss JN-4D. It was a biplane which had been used for
training pilots in World War I. It was very slow— top speed seventyfive miles an hour.
Lindbergh had a little money saved from his stunting career the
summer and fall of 1922, and his father signed a note at the bank so
that he could borrow more. He went to Souther Field, Georgia, in
April, 1923, with cash and checks in his pocket. There, from the
large stock of surplus Army trainers on the deserted airfield, he
selected a Jenny. He paid five hundred dollars, more than he'd

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

54

expected but only half the price asked for the plane. For this sum he
got a complete airplane, a new Curtiss OX-5 engine (90 horsepower, V-8, water-cooled ) a fresh coat of olive-drab dope on all the
,

plane's fabric surfaces,

and an extra twenty-gallon gasoline tank

installed in the fuselage.

To save money, he lived alone on the field while the plane was
being assembled and painted. Everyone there just assumed that
Lindbergh was a pilot— why else would he buy a plane? So when
the plane was ready to fly, no one asked any questions. You didn't
need a license to fly a plane in 1923. Souther Field was big and
smooth. Lindbergh thought he could get the plane into the air and
down again without cracking up. So he just said to the chief
mechanic, "Let's push her out on the line."

He wrote later, "How I wished I'd had my training in Jennies
I'd flown in a Jenny for only thirty-five
minutes at the flying school." Enough to realize that it landed
differently from a Standard. It was a problem in the air; it didn't
have enough power.
Lindbergh thought he'd try out the plane on the ground by
taxiing back and forth across the huge field. He taxied downwind to

instead of Standards!

the opposite corner of the field. So far, so good. Then he headed
back, into the wind. This time the Jenny began acting strangely. He
tried to straighten it out, and before he knew it, he was airborne. He

cut the throttle, came down too fast, gunned the engine, went up

with one wing low, closed the throttle, yanked back on the stick,
and luckily hit the ground on one wheel and a wing skid.
It was a hard bounce, but somehow he didn't break anything in
that frail wooden craft. He didn't know what had happened;
perhaps a puff of wind had pushed him higher than he'd intended.
He decided to wait for a calmer time of day before risking his plane
a second time.

Meanwhile a young man dressed in the usual pilot's boots and
breeches had been watching. He came over and introduced himself

Henderson. Unasked, he offered to get into the front cockpit to
help Lindbergh iron out the kinks, and asked if the Jenny's dual
as

training controls were still hooked up. They were.

Lindbergh, embarrassed by his obvious ineptitude, made excuses
for the poor performance. Henderson waved them off, saying lots of
pilots

got rusty over the winter.

He climbed into the forward

EARLY FLIGHT

55

and Lindbergh flew the plane. He made a half-dozen
takeoff s and landings, and at last Henderson told him he could solo.
But he suggested that Lindbergh wait for the late afternoon when
the breeze had died.
That afternoon, just before dark, Lindbergh got into the plane
alone and took off. He climbed to 4,500 feet, seeing the field get
smaller and smaller, exulting in the freedom of flight. He finally
landed because the sun was going down. It wasn't a good landing
cockpit,

but a safe one. He had, at last, soloed.
He spent another week at Souther practicing takeoffs and landings, gaining confidence. But his cash was running low and he felt
he had to start earning some money by taking up passengers. He
decided to work his way through the South to Texas, then wind up
in Minnesota.
A pilot warned him that he was taking a dangerous route across
the country, that he'd be safer following the Gulf Coast. "But my
engine was new; and my inexperience great. I'd not be bluffed by a
few swamps and hills.' With four hours of fuel in his tanks, he was
sure he could find an emergency landing field if necessary.
He sent his suitcase home by railway express. "Then I rolled up
an extra shirt, a pair of breeches, a toothbrush, some socks, spark
plugs, tools, and other spare equipment in a blanket, and strapped
the bundle down in the front cockpit with the seat belt." Also in the
roll was an aged compass he'd bought the day before but hadn't
bothered to install in the plane. He would fly by following railroads,
>

rivers, and the sun— and install the compass when he was grounded

by bad weather. He also bought and left behind two extra wooden
propellers (price $20) as replacements for those he might damage in
landing.

On the morning of May 17, 1923, he took off and headed for
Montgomery, Alabama.
The first day he made Meridian, Mississippi, easily. The next day
he headed west. Running into storms, he lost his bearings and the
ground below looked forbidding; at last he selected a pasture that
seemed ideal. He landed safely. Wanting to get his plane to the
trees at the edge of the field, to tie it down against the storm, he
taxied into a hidden ditch, almost turned over, and splintered his
propeller.

He thought he was in Louisiana, but was still in Mississippi, near

56

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

Maben, having flown north instead of west. He settled into a nearby
wired Souther Field for one of his new propellers, and
meanwhile installed the compass he had bought in Georgia. When
the propeller arrived, he lapped it to the shaft, then made a test

hotel,

flight.

He needed passengers to earn his way. At first the citizens of
Maben were reluctant, but when he persuaded one passenger to
ride, others followed. He made expenses, including the price of the
propeller, the first day.

He stayed in Maben for two weeks, during which time he carried
nearly sixty passengers. He was learning more about flying all the
time, including the fact that he couldn't loop the Jenny— it was so

low-powered it tended to stall before he could get it over. When he
had $250 more than when he had arrived.
His father was running in Minnesota for the United States Senate
in a special election to fill the seat of Knute Nelson, who had died in

left, he

office.

After flying across country, Charles picked up his father in

Marshall, Minnesota, in June, 1923, and gave him his first airplane
ride. C. A. Lindbergh

may have been scared; Charles hints that his

mouth was set a little tighter than usual, but he would not admit
fear to his son. Charles took the ship over the town,

and C.A.

dropped a few hundred handbills from the air. Quigley says C.A.
told him, "I don't like this flying business. See if you cant get
Charles to study law."

However, this was to be the beginning of a political campaign by
But two days later the scheme ended in a crash. Lindbergh had
taken off with his father from Glencoe for a flight to Litchfield, and
the plane was barely fifty feet in the air when it nosed down,
breaking a wing and a propeller. Some attributed the crash to
sabotage (a cut wire), but Lindbergh makes no mention of it in his
autobiography. C.A., according to an old friend with whom he
stayed, had his glasses broken and "blood washed from his face."
By the time the plane was repaired, the campaign was over. C.A.
had lost another election, in this one deserted by even his own
Farmer-Labor supporters. It was the last time he was to run for
air.

office.

"That was the summer [1923] I landed at our Minnesota farm,"
Lindbergh writes. "I'd looked forward to bringing my own airplane
home ever since I began flying."

EARLY FLIGHT

57

He'd never before seen the farm from the air— seen it entirely.

Now he could recognize the landmarks in an over-all pattern, could
see

how he'd misjudged the size of fields and woods from the

ground. He studied the wind by the blowing poplar leaves, stalled
in over a fence, and landed in a soft meadow. The neighbors were
as impressed as he'd hoped they would be. Already, at twenty-one,

he had made something of a mark in the world.
Later that month Charles A. Lindbergh met his mother in JanesMinnesota, and gave her her first flight. Although she had
been unenthusiastic about his going into aviation, she proved an
eager passenger. She liked flying so much that Lindbergh took her
with him on a ten-day barnstorming tour. Later in his career, when
he became an air-mail pilot, she would often ride with him, sitting
on the mail sacks in the front cockpit.
ville.

The Jenny was so underpowered that every pound of weight
made a difference in its performance. On short local flights with
passengers, Lindbergh would keep his fuel tank only partially filled
to save a few pounds. Once, with a very heavy passenger, he barely

cleared the tops of trees on takeoff.

The plane's range was short even when carrying its full load of
gas. And there was no system of airfields and no beacon lights at all
for flying at night ( except between Chicago and Cheyenne, for the
new experimental air mail ) Lindbergh was his own pilot, navigator,
ground crew, field personnel. He would sometimes run into bad
weather. Then he would have a limited time to decide where to
land, and he had to pick a field from the air that was safe enough to
land on— not an airfield, just a field.
He learned the strengths and weaknesses of every strut and spar;
he knew the insides of the engine so well he could almost work on it
in the dark. He might damage his ship, but never beyond repair; he
.

fixed it and flew it again, usually without any help.

Once, trapped by a storm, he was forced to choose between a
rocky hillside and a swamp. He stalled into the swamp; the plane's
wheels sank into the ooze before its forward momentum had halted,

and it nosed down and flipped over. Lindbergh was left hanging
upside down in the cockpit, held in only by his safety belt. The
position seemed ludicrous, but it was also dangerous. Pilots had
broken their necks by unleashing themselves too quickly from this

58

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

position ami (ailing on their heads. To complicate his problem, his
safety-belt release had

jammed; he had to work his way out of the

topsy-turvv cockpit by loosing the ends of the belt where thev were

attached io the plane and turning himself over carefully by main

Meanwhile a couple of local children claimed that they
had seen him dead in the cockpit.
This was when he made his first headline: "airplane crashes
mah SAVAGE* (Minnesota), The story said, inaccurately, that he
had H08e-dived the plane from three hundred and fifty feet in the
air into the swamp and landed it on its propeller. Only the propeller
hail been damaged. He sent for a new propeller, and got some
(aimers to push the plane to hard ground, where he could make his
repairs and take oil.
The lack oi power in the Jenny meant that it rarely flew high and
never fast, so a crash was not apt to be fatal. Still, pilots— older,
more experienced pilots— were being killed frequently in such slow
ships. The fact that Lindbergh suryiyed his crashes unhurt must be
more a tribute to his fast thinking, quick reflexes, and skill than to
his eood luck.
strength.

5

ARMY

BARNfTORMDfG WAf A naBCAHOVf U

fW

'

were dom
sometimes fly
would
Hie market was becoming glutted; Lindbergh
into a town only to learn that it had already been barnstormed out
by other pilot'.. Al'.o, the unwritten price: of $5 a ride per p;
being 'Ni Ky some money-hungry pilot-, to f£50. Lindbergh
cause of

flying

fh<

ri-.k*.

but ber ;mse so rn;iny

pilot',

i

.

refuted to lower hii price bui

good ride tot the
money. II one wanted to gel ahead in flying* commercial aviation
leemed to be the answer, But to bridge thai gap Lindbergh would
need rnorc: training and more prestige as a pilot.
layi be gave

a

A itranger who paw Lindbergh working on hie plane one lummer
day m L023, m louthern Minnesota, luggested dial he foin the Army
Air Corps. Tliey train pilots on DHi with Liberty engines," the man

The dm was the De Havilland (\>n 4by, the Arnr/sobsei
World W;o l, and die Liberty was its 400 borsepo
engine. The piano bad a top meed ol a hundred and twenty five
laid.

tion plane of

miles an

me Ii.i/ih
full

hour.
i

to take i are ol

year, hut

and you

Besides

Ihis,

the

man

laid,

die

Army gave you

your plane. 'I he Army flying

when you graduated you wer

i

ourse took a

0OOIld lieutenant

have to stay In die Army for the full three
You oould resign on two weeks' notice and join the

didn't

enlistment.
iteserve.

Lindbergh had
mentation

ol

to

Army

balance
his

Us current freedom against
future

barnstormei

the n
,t

Ins

future as pilot after he was entitled tO wear an officer's WingS.

Me

life,

really was as free as a bird

i

,

any plaOS hi. fancy
took him. Hut he OOttld see that time was running out for barnliterally able; to fly

59

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

60

stormers.

The Army course was by far the best flying school in

the country; when you graduated from it, there was no doubt that

you were a thoroughly qualified pilot. So he opted for the Army, got
recommendations from two of his father's friends, and wrote his
letter of application. He was interviewed at Fort Snelling that fall.
That same fall, 1923, Lindbergh was in the air one day when he
got the idea that it might be interesting to attend the air races in
St. Louis; they were being held that week at Lambert Field.
After he got there, he was sorry he'd given in to the impulse. He
found Lambert crowded with high-powered planes. Small civilian
craft like his Jenny had to be parked on a hillside a mile away. This
was a shock to a lone barnstormer who had become used to being
greeted in small towns as a kind of demigod from the skies. In most
places where he flew, the people had never seen a pilot before, but
in St. Louis he was surrounded by pilots— men with national
reputations, like Captain Frank Hawks with his red racing plane.
Lindbergh was extremely conscious of his second-class status at
Lambert Field. His plane was the slowest; he himself looked
disreputable, for, as he says, a barnstorming pilot didn't have much
baggage allowance in his low-powered plane.
He wandered around looking over the fast aircraft, judging their
designs with his eye. For no good reason, he decided to fly his
Jenny during the open hours. (Civilians could fly into Lambert in
the late afternoons when the races were over. ) He went through the
usual maneuvers of unlashing wings, pulling through the propeller,
and giving the engine three minutes of idling to check temperature
and pressure. Then he opened the throttle. "I heard shouts of rage
behind me. I looked back to discover a great cloud of dust thrown

up by my slipstream. In it I could see, vaguely, gesticulating
pilots. ... I'd been used to flying from sod-covered pastures,
not from a crowded and newly graded airport, baked dry by
Missouri's sun."

One of the race officials ran over and chewed Lindbergh out.
Where
"Where did you learn to fly? Don't you know enough
do you come from? What's your name?" And so on. Lindbergh says
he felt like a forty-acre farmer stumbling through a state fair, and
decided to leave St. Louis the next day. Certainly there was no joy
in flying around Lambert Field.
.

.

.

ARMY

61

Then, by chance, he bumped into his former fellow-student, Bud
Gurney. Gurney had won a parachute-jumping contest, and come in
second in another. He needed someone to take him up for the
double-drop contest. Would Lindbergh? Lindbergh would.

Gurney told him that Jennies had been marked up in price as the
interest in aviation was rising. Lindbergh might sell his plane at a
profit, particularly if he would instruct the buyer how to fly it.
Lindbergh set a price on his plane and sold it for more than he
had paid for it. Lessons to the buyer were included. At the same
time, he got another pupil, a man who'd bought a Hisso-Standard
and didn't know how to fly.
At this time Lindbergh had had two hundred and fifty hours of
seat-of-the-pants flying. He'd learned something from a half-dozen
pilots— things to emulate, things to avoid. He had developed ideas
about flying that he could put into practice. He learned more by
having to codify his experience for novices. In order to instruct, you
had to know the exact limits of your plane— if you stopped a
student making a mistake too soon, he would lose his confidence; if
you let him go too long, there would be a crash.
Late that fall he soloed his student in the Jenny and flew with
him to his home in Iowa, as a final check. Lindbergh took the boy's
promissory note for the balance due on the airplane, and gave as his
last instruction "Don't fly below a thousand feet when you don't
have to; and when you go over [a] town, always stay high enough
to glide to a field if your engine fails." He wondered, after that, how

much experience you could really transmit. The last time he saw his
it was flying two hundred feet over the railroad station
where he was waiting for his train to St. Louis.
Lindbergh supported himself during the late fall and early winter
by various piloting jobs at Lambert Field while waiting to take his
Army entrance examination. He took the exams at Chanute Field, in
Illinois, on January 1, 1924. He would get the results— whether or
not he was to be admitted to the Army flying school— sometime
later. The school would not open until late in March, so he had
nearly three months to wait if he was admitted.
He had made friends in St. Louis with a man named Leon Klink,
who had bought a plane known as a "Canuck." The Canuck was

Jenny,

similar to the Jenny, but with slightly better performance. Klink

62

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

wanted to learn to fly, and Lindbergh felt that he could teach him
and make expenses at the same time by barnstorming in a warmer
part of the country.
It was bitter cold when they left St. Louis late in January, 1924.
They flew south in the Canuck, stopping in Kentucky, Tennessee,

Mississippi,

Alabama. Pickings were

thin;

they were just barely

covering expenses. They decided to head for the Atlantic Coast and

then cross the country to the Pacific. In February at the post office
in Pensacola, Florida, Lindbergh got the long-hoped-for acceptance

into the Army flying school. He was told to report to Brooks Field,

San Antonio, Texas, on March 15, 1924.
That was still a month away, enough time for him and Klink to
get to California. Lindbergh could enlist on the Coast and take a
train back to Texas.
Lindbergh had promised to give a ride to the sister of a friend
before leaving. So the next morning he took the Canuck up for a
quick check, his usual procedure before carrying any passengers.
Over the water, at only two hundred feet of altitude, the motor cut
out for no ascertainable reason. Lindbergh banked for shore. If he
had been a few feet higher, he could have reached the field safely.
Instead, he crashed into some sand hillocks, crushing the landing
gear, splintering the propeller, and driving the left wheel up
through a spar of the lower wing.
On his previous mishaps he'd had few witnesses. This time he got
the full Navy treatment— sirens, fire trucks, etc.— and felt humiliated. But the base commander gave him and Klink help in moving
the plane into a hangar and even spare parts to repair it.
Lindbergh and Klink fixed the plane and were ready to take off
by February 20. This would make the trip to California and back to
Texas by March 15 a rather near thing. But by carrying extra fuel to
increase the plane's range, they thought they would make it. Two
five-gallon cans of gasoline were lashed to the wing next to the
fuselage. "It was quite a job leaning out of my cockpit, into the
slipstream, and unlashing one of those cans; and then, empty,
lashing it back again. But with the aid of a steamhose slipped over
the nozzle, I hardly spilled a drop," Lindbergh writes. They made
San Antonio in five flights. At their next stop, in Camp Wood, Texas,
they found no decent landing field, so they blithely put down in the
town square.

ARMY

63

Of course, the town went wild with curiosity and excitement.
There was nothing extraordinary to Lindbergh about landing in a
large square. But the wind shifted, and the planned takeoff the next
morning had to be redirected, down one of the town streets. It was
a possible runway, but had one dangerous point between two
telegraph poles. They were only two or three feet farther apart than
the wingspan of the Canuck. Lindbergh thought about it. "After all,
one drove a car regularly between objects with only a few inches
clearance. Why shouldn't one do it with an airplane?"
He would mark the exact center of the street and keep the plane
headed perfectly straight; this would give him at least a foot
clearance on each side. But something went wrong. Three inches of
the right wing failed to clear the pole; the plane spun around and
crashed into a hardware store.
There was a splintered propeller and a damaged wing tip. To
repair these, they would need a new propeller and a can of dope.
The store owner refused payment for the damage done to his shop
by the Canuck; it had been an interesting experience and good
advertising, he said.
Waiting for the materials from Houston and making the repairs
took another three days. Then the wind was right and they could
take off from the town square with a full load of gas.

The next day there was more trouble— a dagger-plant cactus
ripped a wing. This time they were far out in the country and it
took eight days to get materials and fix the wing. By then it was too
late to fly to California, so

Klink took the train to California and

Lindbergh flew what was left of the Canuck to Brooks Field, San
Antonio.
It was a rather mutilated airplane. Part of the fabric had ripped
away from one wing, the splices showed as ungainly bulges, the
homemade stitching was coming loose, and one wheel was minus a
tire. The crewmen couldn't believe a plane could fly in that condition, but Lindbergh assured them that it would— and he had a
chance to demonstrate it when he was told by a corporal (under
orders from the major) to get the damned thing off the field. He
flew it to Stinson, a nearby commercial airfield, and returned to
enlist in the Army on March 19, 1924, at the age of twenty-two, one
of a hundred and four cadets.
The training was as rigid and detailed as any in the world. The

64

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

plane used was the same kind Lindbergh had owned (and had
sold), the Jenny, but the Army Jenny had the powerful 150-

horsepower Hispano-Suiza engine instead of the 90-horsepower
OX-5 in Lindbergh's former plane. The Army, since the war, had
installed left-hand throttles in all their planes. Lindbergh had flown
only ships with right-hand throttles.
Flight training started in April. The new controls seemed strange
to Lindbergh, and his first landing was not a three-point one as he'd
expected. But after three rounds of the field, his master sergeant
turned him loose for solo and, what's more, in the sergeant's own
plane. There was no doubt Lindbergh could fly.

But Lindbergh had never learned to discipline himself to classrooms and textbooks. His first grades at the Army school came in at
72 per cent— just two points above passing.
This scared Lindbergh. For the first time he was in a school from
which he wanted to graduate, and he forced himself to become the
good student his college instructors had said he could be. "Photography, motors, map-making, field service regulations, ratio theory,
military

law— twenty-five courses we took in our first half-year of

training. I spent as much as seven hours writing an examination."

During this time he lived a bit of a dual life. On base it was all
regulation and regimentation. A couple of miles away was Stinson,
the field where he'd parked the Canuck. Leon Klink had returned
from California and wanted to take the Canuck back to St. Louis—
but first he had to learn to fly it.
So Lindbergh would spend his morning flying Army acrobatics,
go to ground school in the afternoon, and then in the evening
instruct Klink in solo flying, sideslips, landings, and all the things
necessary to a cross-country pilot. At night he would study.
And study effectively. By the end of June nearly half the class of
hand-picked cadets who had started with Lindbergh had been
washed out of school—but he had moved up to second place in the
class. His grades were averaging better than 90 per cent.
It was difficult for him to force himself into Army button polishing, bedmaking, and all the other rigidities and formalism. Lindbergh was only a surface conformist; the more he was pushed into
a mold, the more his inner drive toward personal freedom asserted
itself. One manifestation of his galled spirit was in practical jokes.
Physical humor had always been a part of Army life, and Lindbergh

ARMY

65

added to it his own wild originality. For example, a sergeant who
had made his life unpleasant had the habit of getting drunk, rolling
into the barracks, and snoring all night loud enough to keep everybody awake. Lindbergh took this as long as he could. Then, one
night when the sergeant barreled in stoked with whiskey, ready to
sleep it off, his bed wasn't there. Lindbergh had put it up on the
roof.

This same cadet sergeant had been the victim of a previous
practical joke. When the man was off in San Antonio, a dead skunk

was put in his pillow. By the time he returned, the odor was so
pervasive that everyone was sleeping out of doors. For the next two
weeks the sergeant had to keep his bed outside while the others
slept peacefully in the barracks.

By September, only thirty- three of the hundred and four elite
young men remained

in

Lindbergh's

class.

This hard core of

superior students moved to Kelly Field, ten miles from Brooks, for

the second six months of training in the De Havillands Lindbergh
had heard so much about.
He was warned about the DHs. They had more power than the
Jennies, but once they stalled they needed a lot of altitude to
recover flying speed. And they couldn't be stunted like the stouter
Jennies. "Their wings aren't tied on that strong," the instructor
warned. "If you pull the stick back too hard, they're liable to leave
you." The standards of flying were more precise at Kelly than at the
other bases. Procedures were rigidly standardized. There was training in formation flying, bombing, strafing, gunnery, photographyjust about everything a pilot would need to know. Six weeks before
graduation, the cadets were divided into four groups representing
pursuit, bombardment, observation, and attack. Lindbergh had
been trying hard for pursuit, the most difficult and rewarding of the
four. He got it.

In February, 1924, at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota,
the doctors diagnosed the brain tumor in C. A. Lindbergh.

"He will sink into a coma within a few days and never come out
of it," a neurosurgeon told C.A.'s law partner Quigley. He suggested

that the family be sent for.

Charles got leave to come up from San Antonio, but the furlough
was necessarily brief considering the concentrated nature of Army

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

66

training.

When Charles had to go back, he rode to Minneapolis with

Quigley, who reported, "I could see that he was deeply moved over
his father's condition, but outwardly he was stoical."

He had never lost the desire to fly off on his own. One day when
the ceiling was low and the visibility poor— the kind of day a cadet

could safely disobey air regulations because no instructor could see

him—from his plane he spotted another DH in the air. He chased
the other plane, and the two did a series of complicated maneuvers
in a mock dogfight.

Then Lindbergh got close enough to see that

there were two men in the other ship, which meant that one of them

must be an instructor. He would be washed out of the school for
stunting

if

the instructor reported him.

He waited in agonized

uncertainty for days, but nothing happened.

At Galveston, where the cadets took gunnery practice, Lindbergh
had his first real Army emergency. He was part of a nine-plane
formation, flying in three groups of three planes each. Lindbergh

was left wingman in the top unit, with Cadet Phil Love leading and
a Lieutenant McAllister on the right. Love mock-attacked a

DH

flying below them at an altitude of 5,000 feet, with Lindbergh and

McAllister flying in to confirm the "kill." Lindbergh dived a bit more
and then turned left at the same time that he pulled his plane into
a climb toward the empty space above the DH.
In his official report at the time he wrote, "I saw no other ship
nearby. I passed above the DH and a moment later felt a slight jolt
followed by a crash. My head was thrown forward against the
cowling and my plane seemed to turn around and hang nearly
motionless for an instant. I closed the throttle and saw an SE-5 [a
scouting plane of the type Lindbergh was flying that day] with
Lieutenant McAllister in the cockpit, a few feet on my left. He was
apparently unhurt and getting ready to jump.
"Our ships were locked together with the fuselages approximately
parallel. My right wing was damaged and had folded back slightly,
covering the forward right-hand corner of the cockpit. Then the
ships started to mill around and the wires began whistling. The
right wing commenced vibrating and striking my head at the
bottom of each oscillation. I removed the rubber band safetying the
belt, unbuckled it, climbed out past the trailing edge of the dam-

ARMY

67

aged wing, and with my feet on the cowling on the right side of the
cockpit, which was then in a nearly vertical position, I jumped
backwards as far from the ship as possible."
The locked ships spun almost straight down and threatened to
strike Lindbergh, but they didn't. He recorded seeing McAllister
floating down. Lindbergh landed safely in a plowed field, and noted
that he lost his goggles, a vest-pocket camera, and the rip cord of his
parachute.

His report, the earliest example of Lindbergh's published prose
was published both in the Army newsletter and in the New York

( it

World), is written so clearly and simply that one wonders why he
had so much difficulty with English composition in college. It is
interesting to contrast this account with his telling of the same
incident in The Spirit of St. Louis thirty years later.
The crash: "Then it happened. I heard the snap of parting metal
and the jerking crunch of wood, as my forehead bumped the
cockpit's cowling and my plane cartwheeled through the air. I
yanked the throttle shut.
For an instant, after that first crashing bump, both planes seemed to hang motionless in space.
"A trailing edge of the broken top wing folded back over my
cockpit and vibrated against my helmet, shaking sight from my eyes
and thought from my brain.
Our planes were revolving like a
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

windmill."

He jumped. "How safe the rushing air had seemed when I
cleared those planes— like a feather bolster supporting me. My hand

was on the rip cord but I didn't dare pull it, for the planes were
right above me, spinning, and spewing out a trail of fragments to
the sky.
My parachute had no more than flowered out when
I was below the cloud layer."
He also recorded in his book something he had not included in
the Army account. When the other pilots saw the two ships collide,
they broke formation; all of them, including instructors, headed out
of the mist toward the two parachutists. "Every few seconds, a pair
of wings saluted by— too close for comfort," Lindbergh wrote.
Also, he told how he got razzed for losing his rip cord, usually the
.

.

.

accident of a novice jumper.

For this emergency jump he and McAllister became members No.
12 and No. 13 in the Caterpillar Club, the organization of men who

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

68

had had to jump from airplanes to save their lives. ( Caterpillar after
the insect which manufactured the silk from which parachutes were

then made.

An hour after the jump, two fresh SEhad been made ready for Lindbergh and McAllister and they
were flying again.
But it was sheer chance that had saved them. The parachute was
such a new idea in 1925 that Lindbergh's class was the first to be
It was all treated as a joke.

5s

issued chutes.

The incident took place only nine days before graduation. Lindman in his class, which had narrowed down to
eighteen at the end. He was commissioned Second Lieutenant
bergh was top

Charles A. Lindbergh in the Army Air Service Reserve in March,
1925.

6

AIR MAIL

THE END OF THAT MONTH FOUND LINDBERGH ON THE
way back to St. Louis. He had applied to the Army for a commission in the Regular Air Service after his graduation, but hadn't

received an answer.

He was free to take a civilian job, and had

already been offered one dusting crops in Georgia for two hundred
dollars a month. He'd turned that down because it was not enough

money.
He went to St. Louis because it was the most hospitable place he
had found in all his travels. From the time he flew in to the air races
in the fall of 1923 until the day he left with Leon Klink in the
Canuck in January, 1924, he had been made welcome and had
become, as he says, "an accepted member of the city's little group of
pilots."

At twenty-three, Lindbergh was a veteran flier. He didn't look it.
He was six feet three inches tall and almost skinny (although in
those days he was known for having an enormous appetite), and

had a baby face. He did not drink or smoke; he had tasted liquor
and didn't like it, and considered smoking a form of stimulation that
might interfere with the steadiness of his nerves and the speed of
his reflexes. For a similar reason he had given up coffee in college;
at that time he felt that caffein might induce a tremor in his hands
that would make him a less efficient marksman in rifle and pistol
shooting. Yet among the chain-smoking, hard-drinking, hard-nosed
pilots, Lindbergh was given respect and admiration.

Jobs were open to him that he could not have had a year before.
Air mail, for instance. The federal government had started an air-

mail route in 1918 and had been flying mail between New York and
69

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

70

California since 1920. Now feeder lines from other areas were going
to be added to that single cross-country line, and the pressure from

Congress and business was to get the government out of the
business.

The new lines were

to

be

let

by contract

to private

bidders. Two brothers named Robertson, both ex- war pilots, had set

up the Robertson Aircraft Corporation in St. Louis and had entered
a bid to fly the mail between St. Louis and Chicago. ( Chicago was
one of the coast-to-coast stops. ) Major Bill Robertson offered Lindbergh, whom he had been watching carefully, the job of chief pilot

and when the Robertson company got the contract.
Lindbergh accepted the proposition; this was what he wanted—
permanent, responsible job in aviation. But meanwhile there would
be a long wait. He could find plenty of students to teach at
Lambert; he transported passengers (on shares in other men's
planes ) and did stunt flying with an aerial circus which included his
if

old friend Bud Gurney.

He also tested planes. In St. Louis at the end of May, 1925, after
the aerial circus had run its course, he found a new plane, designed

and built by an engineer at Lambert Field, that needed testing.
Powered with an OXX-6 (100-horsepower) engine, the plane had a
wide fuselage to make passengers comfortable. It was a stubby ship
covered with plywood. Lindbergh flew it and found that it answered well to certain maneuvers, but in stalls it was "mushy" and it
had other undesirable characteristics.
The last trial was the tail spin. He couldn't get it to spin right at
all, so he tried the left. That went well; the plane came out of the
spin promptly. Then he tried it again, and suddenly his controls
didn't respond. They were blanketed by the wings and fuselage.
The plane was spinning and falling as Lindbergh tried every last
desperate maneuver to bring it out. He rode it down for nearly two
thousand feet, trying to save the ship, and then he looked below
and knew he had to jump or crash. He was barely three hundred
and fifty feet from the ground.
He made a fast roll out of the cockpit and pulled his rip cord as
soon as he cleared the plane. "The ground was right there, leaping
at me. Trees and houses looked tremendous. There seemed scarcely
enough room for a parachute to string out."
The chute did open, but no sooner was Lindbergh swinging

AIR MAIL

71

under it than he saw the plane head straight for him. It was less
than a hundred feet away.

He was "braced for death.
Every muscle, every nerve, was
tensed for the tearing blow on flesh/' The shrouds of the parachute
.

.

.

were twisted, and as Lindbergh swung around, somehow the plane
skinned by without touching him or the chute.
"If the hand of death ever cracks the door that lets life's senses
peek beyond life's walls, it should have cracked it then," he wrote.
"Danger had swept all unessential detail from my mind— it was
clear as a pane of glass.
You couldn't come much closer to
death than that." He got no glimpse of the hereafter then. But on
later occasions he had the notion there was something just beyond:
"I've felt the presence of another realm ... a realm my mind has
.

.

.

tried to penetrate since childhood."

To fulfill his Reserve training requirement, Lindbergh spent two
weeks instructing on military aircraft at Richards Field, near Kansas
City. He made his third parachute emergency jump at this time,
dislocating his shoulder in landing. In August, 1925, while carrying

passengers at the National Guard camp near Nevada, Missouri, he
got a letter from Captain Wray Vaughn, president of the Mil-Hi

Airways & Flying Circus at Denver, Colorado, offering him a pilot's
job at four hundred dollars a month. This would enable him to

make some money while waiting for the Robertsons' contract to
come through, and also, said Lindbergh, it would give him a chance
to fly around among the deep canyons and high mountains and
study, by the behavior of his own plane, the action of downdrafts

and other air currents and turbulences on aircraft. The fact that he
might be killed in the pursuit of this knowledge fitted in with his
ideas about personal risk and the value of life, and added some salt
to the idea.
"I've

never chosen the safer branches of aviation. I've followed

adventure, not safety. I've flown for the love of flying, done the

Why should man want to fly at
What justifies the risk of life? ... I believe the risks I

things I wanted most to do.
all?

.

.

.

.

.

.

take are justified by the sheer love of the life I lead."

He took a train to Denver and was met by Vaughn, who could
hardly believe that this gangling boy was the veteran flier they had
hired.

Lindbergh in turn was not overjoyed to find at Humphrey's

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

72

where his new employers were located, that the company's
and that this was the very
same Lincoln Standard he had barnstormed in with Lynch three
years before. Its age was not really concealed by a coat of fresh

Field,

assets consisted of exactly one airplane,

paint.

When Lindbergh took the ancient crate into the air and put it
through its paces, any doubts that Vaughn might have had about
his new pilot vanished. "There was never another like him," he
said later.

The Mil-Hi company made contracts for Lindbergh to fly this
ship to small country fairs in Colorado and provide entertainment in

the way of acrobatics during the day—he had a wing-walker who
did stunts as well— and fireworks by night. With their barkers,
carrousels, and Ferris wheels, these itinerant fairs were one of the
few touches of glamour in the lives of country people, and Lindbergh's stunts and fireworks were the high point of the proceedings.
The towns where fairs were held seldom had decent landing
fields, and none had lights for night landing. At best there would be
a large area of level sod. Since the fireworks were to be shot off from
the plane at night, there had to be some means of lighting the fields
for takeoff and landing. It would have been impossible for Lindbergh to fly at night if he hadn't been able to persuade people with
automobiles to park them at the airfield and turn on their headlights
when he took off and relight them when they heard the engine of
his plane returning to land.

There were countless close calls in this hit-or-miss kind of flying,
but the worst was over a Colorado town that Lindbergh had never
seen before. He was flying with Vaughn as his passenger. They had
a contract to shoot off fireworks to close the local fair; the contract
called for

the performance to take place in the air sometime

between darkness and midnight.
They were delayed in arriving because some passengers had
come late for a ride. Vaughn and Lindbergh had waited for these
people because it meant another twenty dollars for the Mil-Hi
company. Then a further complication, lack of oil in the plane,
delayed them still longer. By the time they got their oil, the sun had
set and Lindbergh wanted to stay where he was for the night.
Vaughn said they would lose two hundred and fifty dollars if they
didn't shoot off the fireworks. He said he knew where the field was;

AIR MAIL

73

was only fifteen minutes away, and there would still be a little
light left. Lindbergh could always be counted on to rise to a

it

challenge.

He took off with Vaughn in the front cockpit.

Reaching the town, whose

lights

were already

on,

Vaughn

couldn't locate the landing field. "By that time, ditches and fences

had merged with darkness," Lindbergh wrote. "I'd done just what
been warned against as a student. I'd let night catch me in
the air. ... I had to land. And I couldn't see what was below."
He headed away from town. The last touch of reflected light in
the sky gave him a hint of what was on the ground, but only a hint.
He headed toward a large, dark spot which he thought might be a
stubble field, warning Vaughn to brace himself for a crash. He set
the plane down. Amazingly, there was no sound of rending fabric,
just a bumpy landing. It was after nine-thirty.
Vaughn got a car to take him to town to get the fireworks. He told
Lindbergh to buy boards and hardware and make a platform for
the plane from which the fireworks could be touched off. Two
I'd

automobiles furnished illumination for this work. When everything

was organized and constructed, it was half past eleven.
Vaughn insisted on going through with the show, even though
Lindbergh said that everyone would be in bed. "Our contract doesn't
expire

till

midnight,"

Vaughn said.

There was only one car left at the field and its lights failed.
Without some light, a takeoff was impossible. In desperation,
Lindbergh asked Vaughn to use his flashlight to illuminate a
strawstack on the field. With only this feeble dot of light, he took off
into the night sky.

He climbed to 1,800 feet— he wanted to go higher but it was
already ten minutes to midnight. First he began throwing over the
fire bombs. He would pick one up, pull off the cap, rub the igniter,
and toss it over the side. There were seven seconds between ignition
and explosion, but it was safer to allow only five. If a bomb went off
in the cockpit, he could be badly burned, blinded, and would

almost certainly crash.
After the bombs it was time to ignite the Roman candles. Four
were attached to each upper wing. Lindbergh nosed down and
closed the switch. The flames streamed behind the plane. So bright
was the light that Lindbergh lost his bearings. Only the city lights
could tell him which way was down. At last he set off his flares,

74

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

almost as bright as the sun. Then, when his eyes got readjusted to
the darkness, he took out his watch. It was eleven-fifty-seven; the
contract had been fulfilled with three minutes to spare. He headed

back for the field and found it nearly impossible to see the feeble
light of the flashlight on the ground. He circled and circled, and
finally committed himself to a risky landing. Again he made it.
Thank God, he thought, for the huge size of Colorado fields.
That winter he was back in St. Louis, instructing, test-flying and
laying out the air-mail route from St. Louis to Chicago. The
Robertsons had won their contract and, as promised, appointed
Lindbergh chief pilot. He hired two other men, ex-Army buddies,
Phil Love and Thomas Nelson, as pilots. Like Lindbergh, they had
had their share of close calls. Love had just survived the crash of a
crop-dusting plane that hit the earth so hard his teeth bit into an
iron bar in the cockpit. He carried the bar with the impress of his
teeth with him to prove it.
Along the 285-mile route between St. Louis and Chicago, Lindbergh selected nine landing fields, one about every thirty miles.
These were not really airfields— just fields one could land in, with a
small cache of gasoline and a telephone and someone nearby to
help the pilot. They were not lighted; nor did the planes— rebuilt
Army salvage DHs with Liberty engines— carry landing lights for
the first few months. If a pilot had to land at night, he dropped a
parachute flare from the plane. Each plane carried only one flare.
Like just about everything else connected with civilian flying in
1926, the Robertson operation was a shoestring affair.
Organizing the airline was a major part of Lindbergh's life, but
just as important to him was the fact that he could involve himself
in a steady commitment to the Army. He enlisted in the Missouri
National Guard, where he instructed wartime pilots in the newest
techniques of flying and attended armory drill one night a week. He
also lectured on navigation, aerodynamics, and other things he had
learned in the Army and from personal experience. He was promoted to First Lieutenant in the Guard.
In April, 1926, Lindbergh flew the first air mail from St. Louis to
Chicago, the sacks piled into the front cockpit of the plane. The
contract called for five round trips a week, and during the spring
and summer the Robertson line fulfilled it with 99-plus per cent
efficiency. A letter which arrived at the St. Louis post office before

AIR MAIL

75

three-thirty in the afternoon could, by a series of close connections,

reach the New York City post office in time for the next morning's
delivery, a saving of one day over train mail.

Nevertheless, the Robertson company's mail sacks were often

almost empty, since businessmen seemed to figure that the less than
1 per cent

chance of delay, plus the extra expense of air-mail

postage, overbalanced the sa\-ing of a day in mail delivery. But

Lindbergh and his pilots kept flying doggedly through night and
storm; they were convinced that if they proved their efficiency long

enough they could break down the prejudice against air mail.
The lack of weather information and ground lights was a
serious handicap, sometimes bordering on tragedy. One night Lindbergh was flying north toward Chicago when he ran into fog. He
tripped his single flare, but it did not ignite. Not being able to see
the ground, he flew on toward Chicago, where the airfield had
lights. But the Chicago field was so blanketed by fog that even
though the ground lights were turned on (as he was told later) he
could not see to land. He left the metropolitan area, hoping to pick
up one of the transcontinental beacons along the government's airway, but the fog was too thick to find a beacon. By this time he had
located the reason his flare hadn't lit— a slack release cable.

He

headed for open country with die hope of seeing a pasture at the
edge of the fog where he could land. He saw a light on the ground
which might indicate a break in die fog and he dropped his flare by
pulling on the cable. It ignited and drifted earthward, but its light
showed only the enveloping mist.
Now the engine began missing; he was running low on fuel. He
turned on the emergency tank, which gave him another twenty
minutes of flying time. He still couldn't find a landing place. Then,
when the engine died, he jumped and pulled the rip cord of his
parachute. It opened.

Thinking the plane completely out of fuel, he hadn't bothered to
tilt of the descending
craft evidently drained a last reserve of gasoline into the carburetor.
The turning propeller started the engine again while Lindbergh was
dangling in his parachute, and the pilotless ship began flying in
cut the ignition switches. But the forward

circles. Again, for a breathless minute, he thought he was going to be

The wheeling plane dived toward him— and missed him by
a hundred yards. Then it came back and made five spirals, each one
hit.

76

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

a little farther away than the last, before he lost track of it. When he

reached for his flashlight to see what he was dropping toward, he
found it had fallen from his pocket.
Lindbergh was lucky again. He hit a cornfield and was unhurt.
Soon he was picked up by a farmer who had heard the plane crash.
Lindbergh introduced himself as the pilot to the goggle-eyed
farmer. They tried to find the wreck, but it was impossible to locate
in the dark.*

On the farmer's party line, Lindbergh called St. Louis and
Chicago to report the interruption in mail service, and he asked
anyone listening to give news of the plane if it was found. A few
minutes later a call came in; the plane had crashed two miles away.
The farmer drove Lindbergh there and he found the mail sacks
intact in the smashed cockpit. He took them to the nearest post
office to have them put aboard a train.
In September of 1926, five months after he began flying the mail,
Lindbergh was in the air on his way to Chicago, having just left
Peoria. It had been a perfect day— too perfect for him. "There's
nothing to match yourself against," Lindbergh mused. "On such an
evening you might better be training students ... no tricks of
wind, no false horizons."
He welcomed night with its moon. It made him feel even more
detached from earth. "Why return to that moss; why submerge
myself in brick-walled human problems when all the crystal universe is mine?"
.

.

.

He let his mind rove, wondering why he couldn't float like the
moon, wondering how much fuel a plane could carry if it was
loaded with gasoline. Then he became annoyed at the immediacy of
his problem— he would have to land in Chicago in less than two
hours. Why didn't he have a plane that could fly directly to New
York?
Such a plane had been built, he knew— the Wright-Bellanca. It
was of a new type, single-winged— a monoplane. With only one
wing, it had less drag and more speed than the biplanes Lindbergh
had been flying. It could carry a great load. Of course, it was
terribly expensive; it cost at least $10,000 as against only about
* This and another emergency jump Lindbergh made while flying the mail
cost the Robertsons half their fleet. They did not blame him, as neither was his
fault.

"

AIR MAIL

77

$1,000 for the Army biplanes the Robertsons used. Still, with a Bellanca one might really run a commercial airline between, say, St.

Louis and New York.

Again his mind began to wander between the fantasies of flight
and the realities of aviation. If he had a Bellanca and filled it with
tanks instead of passengers and freight, how far would it fly? With
the engine at low speed, it might stay aloft for days, like the moon.
And then the practicality. "Judging from the accounts I've read,"
Lindbergh wrote in his autobiography, "[the Bellanca] is the most
efficient plane ever built. It could break the world's endurance
record, and the transcontinental, and set a dozen marks for range
and speed and weight. Possibly— my mind is startled at its thought
—I could fly nonstop between New York and Paris.

THE SPIRIT OF ST. LOUIS

THERE WAS A REMARKABLY SHORT DISTANCE IN LINDbergh's mind between the desirable and the possible. No sooner did

the

New York-to-Paris idea strike him than he began testing the

limits of reality against the boundaries of his purpose.

First there

was Lindbergh himself. "Why shouldn't I fly from

New York to Paris? I have more than four years of aviation behind
me, and close to two thousand hours in the air. I've barnstormed
over half of the forty-eight states. I've flown my mail through the
worst of nights."

And the things he'd done. Four years before, he had been a
college dropout, dreaming about flying a plane.

That dream had

And so with his other dreams— the parachute
jumping, the Army flying school, and now, at twenty-four, chief
become

reality.

pilot of an air-mail line

and a captain in the Reserve, training and

lecturing men older than himself.

A man who could do all those things in four brief years could do
just about anything he had to in the air.

He decided then, that night

in his mailplane, to start organizing a flight to Paris.

There was a good reason for selecting New York to Paris as the
challenge— rather than, say, Los Angles to Flawaii. When the war

ended

in

1918,

the Atlantic

Ocean was regarded by

pilots

as

aviation's major obstacle— probably because European alliances and

trade focused so much of America's attention in that direction and
vice versa.
First to organize a flight across the Atlantic was the United States
Navy, in May, 1919. They had four huge flying boats known as
"NC" ships. These large biplanes were powered by four Liberty
78

THE SPIRIT OF ST. LOUIS

79

engines apiece, and carried crews of five men. They were designed
to take off from and land on water.

The Navy used three of these boat-hulled craft, each weighing
more than fourteen tons loaded, to try to fly from Newfoundland to
the Azores. Twenty-one destroyers were stationed at intervals of
sixty miles across the Atlantic, shooting up star shells and sending
out radio signals to guide the airplanes.

The chief mechanic at the Lincoln plant where Lindbergh learned
to fly had been a member of the expedition. He had told Lindbergh

about the countless emergencies,

forced

landings,

and engine

trouble the lumbering craft had encountered. The weather reports

proved inaccurate; they ran into fog and many other problems.
Although no lives were lost, only one of the three boats reached the
Azores, 1,380 miles away, and then made another hop on to Lisbon.
That was the first halting transatlantic flight, and it had taken
millions of dollars and the efforts of thousands of men to make it
possible.

The London Daily Mail offered a prize of $50,000 for the first
nonstop heavier-than-air flight across the Atlantic. Two British fliers,
Captain John Alcock and Lieutenant Arthur Brown, decided to try
for it in a Vickers-Vimy biplane powered with two 350-horsepower
Rolls-Royce engines. In June, 1919, five weeks after the Navy's NC
ships crossed the ocean, Alcock and Brown took off in their plane

from St. John's, Newfoundland, the closest point on the North
American continent to Europe. Flying most of the way by dead
reckoning through fog, the two men reached Clifden, Ireland, in
sixteen hours and twelve minutes— a distance of 1,936 miles. Their
plane landed in a bog and nosed over. It was somewhat damaged,
but neither man was hurt.

Alcock and Brown thus made the first successful nonstop trans-

an airplane, and won the Daily Mail prize.
However, their triumph was dimmed by the fact that Alcock, a
veteran pilot with more than 4,500 flying hours, was fatally injured
a week later on another flight.
Perhaps inspired by the Daily Mail prize, Raymond Orteig, a
New York hotel owner who was born in France, offered a prize of
$25,000 for a nonstop flight between New York and France in either
direction. His offer was first made before the Alcock and Brown
flight in 1919, and was renewed five years later, in 1924.

atlantic crossing in

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

80

The reason the Orteig prize lay unclaimed for so long was simply
that there was no plane capable of making a nonstop flight between

New York and France, a distance of 3,315 miles, until the midThe nonstop distance record in those days was
just over 2,500 miles, from New York to San Diego. This was set in

nineteen- twenties.

1923.

But, as Lindbergh

had noted, in 1926 there was the Bellanca

plane, and there were now others which could be calculated to fly

nonstop from

New York all the way to Paris. Several aircraft

designers and builders were working on other long-range planes.

The same month that Lindbergh got his idea about the flight,
September, 1926, the papers were full of an actual attempt of a
famous French war ace, Rene Fonck, to make the flight. The
glamorous Fonck, a dashing figure, had a big airplane designed by
the famous Igor Sikorsky and built in Long Island, New York. It
was a biplane carrying three powerful air-cooled radial engines.
(Air cooling and radial design produced higher power at lower
weight than the earlier water-cooled aircraft engines. ) On September 21, 1926, Fonck's big plane started its run for takeoff from
Roosevelt Field. It never got off the ground. At the end of the
runway it crashed and burst into flame. Fonck and his co-pilot
Lawrence Curtin escaped without serious injury, but the mechanic
and the radio operator in the same plane were burned to death.
Lindbergh thought a lot about that accident. Why hadn't Fonck
cut his switches before the crash? But he also thought, "Who am I
to judge his crisis-action?
Fonck had to decide in seconds what
his critics had had days to talk about. And what pilot is immune to
errors? We all commit them, as every honest man will say."
Still, there were things he didn't understand. Instead of being
.

.

.

stripped of useless weight, Fonck's plane had been upholstered in
leather, and even carried a bed. It had two radios, four men in the

crew ( you didn't need four men to fly to Paris, certainly ) and even
a hot dinner for the celebration in Paris. At the last minute a bag of
croissants had been put aboard. It was all faintly ridiculous; more
than that, it had contributed to tragedy. If Lindbergh could get the
right plane to fly to Paris, he would fly alone, strip the plane of
,

useless accoutrements, take only the barest necessities to cover the
trip and emergencies.

But where would he get the plane?

He had a few thousand

THE SPIRIT OF ST. LOUIS

81

dollars in a Detroit bank, carefully saved against a bad season or a

crash—not nearly enough to buy a plane like the Bellanca. How
would he get the rest of the money? He would need some kind of
business organization to back him. What would attract businessmen
to help him? Well, if he could bring off the flight, it would help put
St. Louis on the map in a big way. And as a financial proposition— if
he won the Orteig prize of $25,000, that would cover the investment
necessary to buy the plane. The backers would own the plane, free
and clear, and have all their money repaid. So the venture could
even be profitable.

He thought of the St. Louis businessmen who flew, like Harold
Bixby, a banker who owned a brand-new plane; Harry Knight, a
broker who was taking flying lessons; and Earl Thompson, to whom
Lindbergh had given flying instructions in Thompson's gold-painted
He determined to see Thompson first, since he knew him
best. Meanwhile he drew up a plan of attack.

Laird.

He divided it into seven categories: "Action, Advantages, Results,
Cooperation, Equipment, Maps, and Landmarks." Under the first

he had eight subcategories: 1) Plan, 2) Propaganda, 3)
4) Equipment, 5) Cooperation of manufacturers, 6)
Accessory information, 7) Point of departure, and 8) Advertising.
Under "results" he had only two: "1) Successful completion, winning $25,000 prize to cover expense," and "2 ) Complete failure."
The thirty-seven points he covered all had pertinence; there was
no pipe dream in the lot. Everything showed a firm grasp of the
realities of the world around him as well as of the practicalities of
the flight. For example, under "Equipment" four of the five items he
listed he was eventually to take with him— raft, rockets, clothing
(waterproof), condensed food, and still (water). Only waterproof
clothing was omitted by reason of its weight, and because he later
figured that if he was forced down he could cut strips of the doped
fabric from his plane and use them for protection.
step

Backers,

He drew up a prospectus to make his project attractive to St.
Louisans. "St. Louis is ideally situated to become an aviation city.

We have one of the finest commercial airports in the United States,
and we will undoubtedly become a hub of the national airways of
the future."
It

was only two or three days after he began to dream of Paris
Thompson. He

that Lindbergh got an appointment to see Earl

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

82

opened the interview by saying he had come to ask Thompsons
advice about an idea. He explained about the Orteig prize. He said
that he thought a modern plane could make the flight and he would
like to try it— to

advance aviation, and advertise St. Louis. But he

said he was too young and inexperienced to undertake the venture
alone. Besides, he didn't have the money. "I can furnish two
thousand dollars myself," Lindbergh said, "but the right kind of
plane will probably cost at least ten thousand. I think the WrightBellanca could probably make it," Lindbergh added.
Thompson's voice sounded disturbed as he began asking questions.

The Bellanca was a single-engined plane, wasn't it? And

designed to fly over land?
It was

true the Bellanca was a land plane but a land plane of a

new type, Lindbergh said. And that single engine was a new kind of
engine— the Wright "Whirlwind"— a radial engine of nine cylinders,
air cooled, which weighed only 500 pounds, developed 220 horsepower, and ran for an average of 9,000 hours between failures. This
made it about 9,000 per cent more dependable than the engines
Lindbergh had been flying. The Wright-Bellanca had been designed
by the famous airplane designer Giuseppe Bellanca precisely to
show off the best characteristics of the Whirlwind engine.
Lindbergh told Thompson that a one-engine plane would be
much cheaper than one with three engines. A three-engine plane
might cost around thirty thousand dollars. Besides, three engines
only increased the chance of engine failure. If one failed over the
ocean, you couldn't expect to return on the other two. And, went
Lindbergh's clinching argument, Rene Fonck's plane had had three
engines, hadn't it? And it never got into the air.
Thompson was interested in Lindbergh's plan, but with reservations. He still thought Lindbergh ought to have the security of three
engines, perhaps a plane like the Fokker.
A salesman for the Fokker company, plane builders whose chief
designer was the brilliant Dutchman Anthony Fokker, happened to
be at Lambert Field, and Lindbergh questioned him about a
transatlantic plane. The man said the Fokker people had made a
study of the New York-to-Paris flight, and could build a threeengine plane for spring, 1927, delivery to make the flight. The cost?

Ninety thousand dollars. Before Lindbergh could gulp, the man
went on smoothly to say that of course they would have to be

THE SPIRIT OF ST. LOUIS
satisfied

83

with the operating personnel. They wouldn't

sell

a

tri-

motored Fokker to just anyone, he said, eying the baby-faced Lindbergh. And he made it plain that under no conditions would they
sell a single-engine plane for a flight across the Atlantic.

Nevertheless, Lindbergh kept on with his plan.

He got a pledge

of a thousand dollars from Major Lambert, after

whom the St.

Louis airfield was named, to help buy the Wright-Bellanca. Lindbergh's boss, Major Bill Robertson, also helped; he gave Lindbergh

encouragement and allowed him occasional time off from the mail
route to arrange his personal business.

The St. Louis Post-Dispatch had carried front-page stories of both
of Lindbergh's emergency jumps from his mailplanes, so Lindbergh

was well known to Roy Alexander, a young aviation reporter on the
One day in the fall of 1926, Lindbergh telephoned Alexander and asked if he planned to be at Lambert Field that

paper.*

afternoon.

Alexander, a flier himself, said yes, and Lindbergh asked him to
stop

by the Robertson office. Alexander met Lindbergh with Bill

Robertson, and Lindbergh immediately said he proposed to

fly

across the Atlantic ("as though he were talking about going to the

grocery store," Alexander recalled recently) and win the Orteig
prize. Alexander asked why Lindbergh thought he could do it, and

Lindbergh explained that the new Wright J-5 engine had changed
everything. At that point, Alexander says, Lindbergh

was talking

in terms of a three-engine ship.

He said he would need thirty-five thousand dollars to make the
flight,

a lot of money in those days. Alexander offered to set up an

interview with his managing editor and the chief of the editorial

page, with the idea that the Post-Dispatch might back the flight. He

made an appointment for Lindbergh to come to the paper at noon
the following Tuesday.
"I said, Tor God's sake, wear your uniform,' " Alexander recalled.

"Slim looked about thirty in his captain's uniform and he looked

nineteen in that shiny blue serge suit."

But Lindbergh showed up at the interview in the blue suit with a
cloth cap. "I said, Tor Christ's sake, Slim, why didn't you wear your

uniform?'
* Later editor of Time magazine.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

84

"He said, 1 didn't think it would be the right thing. I didn't want
to go under false pretenses/ And that was the guy— a man of rocklike, sometimes senseless, integrity."

The managing editor turned Lindbergh down cold. "We have our
reputation to consider," he said. "We couldn't possibly be associated

with such a venture!" He thought Lindbergh was too young and
couldn't

know enough

navigation.

He seemed to take it as a

personal affront that Lindbergh was willing to risk his

life

on so

hazardous an enterprise.
Similar reactions by other mature people were bound to force
Lindbergh to question his own premises, but he still thought he
could make the flight if he could get the right plane and the
necessary backing. He began to consider how an unknown pilot
could approach the Wright people about buying the Bellanca, and
finally decided on the dramatic impact of a long-distance telephone
call. Such a call was a rarity in 1926; a man who made one certainly
meant business. It would surely gain him the ear of the man he
wanted to reach. Lindbergh made his call to a Wright executive in
Paterson, New Jersey, and he was more than cordially received. His
judgment had paid off. He made an appointment to visit the plant.
Before starting on the trip to Paterson, Lindbergh decided he had
to look like a businessman. The only decent suit he owned was the
captain's uniform. With the advice of a well-dressed National
Guard officer, Lindbergh ordered a custom-tailored civilian suit. He
also bought an overcoat and a felt hat, to look like the successful
businessmen he'd seen, and a scarf, gloves, and so on. It all came to
more than a hundred dollars. Wasting money on such window
dressing galled him, but he figured it might be just as important to
his purpose as it would be to buy the plane later. He took the train
east in November, 1926.
The Wright company was interested in selling the Bellanca, but
they were thinking of selling it to a manufacturer— Huff Daland—
and thought that Lindbergh had better talk to them. He saw
Giuseppe Bellanca, who said he thought the plane would fly to Paris
but suggested an endurance flight test beforehand to make sure. If
the Wright company would not sell his plane to Lindbergh, he said,
he could design and build another, but it would take time.
The Wright people tried to talk Lindbergh into a three-engine
ship. "We didn't want to put our reliance on a single engine

THE SPIRIT OF ST. LOUIS

85

Ken Boedecker, one of the old-time Wright
mechanics recalled.
But Lindbergh said, "I fly single-engine mailplanes. If my engine
quits on takeoff, I'm just as much out of luck as I would be if it quit

over the ocean"

over the ocean/'

As it turned out, the Wright-Bellanca was not for sale to Lindbergh for a transatlantic flight. It wound up in the hands of a man

named Charles A. Levine, who owned the Columbia Aircraft Corporation.

There were weeks of such setbacks. Lindbergh had garnered
some backing, but not nearly enough. Meanwhile he kept on flying
the mail through the bitterly cold winter of 1926-27. He spent more
than one night alone on one of the small fields between St. Louis
and Chicago, grounded by snow or fog. Every so often during such
nights, he would put all his strength into turning over the coldstiffened engine to keep it from freezing altogether. ( There were no
self-starters on airplanes in those days.) When he was at Lambert
Field, he would take long walks and make plans to raise money.
Meanwhile, in Europe and America, airplanes to fly from New
York to Paris were actually being made and tested. Lindbergh was
falling so far behind that his project seemed hopeless.

He decided to make one last-ditch effort to raise the money. He
asked his two air-mail pilots to take over the mail schedule for a few
days while he braced the businessmen of St. Louis.
He went to

see

president of the

St.

Harry Knight, the young broker, who was
Louis Flying Club. Instead of being turned

down summarily, as he had expected, Lindbergh was surprised to
find Knight taking a real interest. What's more, Knight called up his

friend Harold Bixby at the State National Bank and asked him to
come over and listen. The two men asked Lindbergh the usual

questions about single-engine versus multiple-engine planes.

He

went through his arguments, which by now were well rehearsed.
Finally, Bixby said he wanted to think over the proposition for a
few days. He made an appointment with Lindbergh for the following Wednesday at his office.
Elated, Lindbergh went back to Lambert and his mail route, an

hour-by-hour battle against blizzards and engine trouble. The next

day he was grounded for a while in Springfield by clouds, then after
taking off had to turn back to that field to repair his engine. Later,

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

86

the Chicago airport was supposed to be socked in by clouds, but
Lindbergh found a five-hundred-foot ceiling there and landed
safely. No one expected him; Phil Love, a very good pilot, hadn't
even been able to take off that day from Chicago.
It was Tuesday night and Lindbergh had his appointment with
Bixby the following morning. He had to get back to St. Louis. He
decided to take off into a night that the other pilots considered too
hazardous to fly in. Once more, he made it back to St. Louis.
The next morning Bixby kept him waiting for a few minutes at
the bank. Then he came out to usher him into his office. He said,
"Slim, you've sold us on this proposition of yours. It's a tough job
you're taking on, but weVe talked it over and we're with you. From
now on you'd better leave the financial end to us." He said that if
Lindbergh could stick to a reasonable budget and would put in his
two thousand dollars, they and Lindbergh's other backers would

take care of the rest.

Now Lindbergh could prospect for a plane. There were two good
possibilities. The Travel Air Company, in Kansas, was turning out a

monoplane very much like the Wright-Bellanca that might suit his
purpose. There was another company farther away, on the Pacific

Coast— Ryan Airlines— that was manufacturing a high-wing monoplane reported to give good performance. Travel Air being nearer,
Lindbergh wired them first.
They wired back refusing to accept his order.
Lindbergh decided to try Ryan. Signing the telegram with the
name of the Robertson Aircraft Corporation— Lindbergh's boss had
given him permission to use the company name— Lindbergh wired
Ryan on February 3, 1927, asking if they could produce a plane
capable of flying nonstop between New York and Paris and, if so, to
"please state cost and delivery date."
Lindbergh was used to waiting weeks for replies. He got an
answer the next day. Ryan telegraphed that a plane similar to their
Ryan M-l monoplane could be built in three months for about six
thousand dollars, plus engine.
Lindbergh wired again asking if they could cut the time to two
months, because of the mounting competition, and also asking for

he could get a reliable plane by April, when the
weather would start to become good enough for a transatlantic
flight, he might still be the first.
specifications. If

THE SPIRIT OF ST. LOUIS

87

The flight to Paris was becoming a race with various entrants
announcing themselves. In the United States, Commander Richard
E. Byrd, backed by

four-man crew to

Rodman Wanamaker, was getting together a

a three-engine ship designed and built by
Anthony Fokker. The Wright-Bellanca became another contender in
the hands of its new owner, Levine, who had hired several top
American pilots, headed by Clarence Chamberlin. The Army Air
Corps had several bombers on order from the Huff-Daland company. They authorized the company to sell one of these, stripped
down, to Lieutenant Commander Noel Davis of the U.S. Navy, who,
with Lieutenant Stanton H. Wooster, was planning to make the
fly

flight to France.

On February 6, 1927, Lindbergh got an unexpected wire from
Giuseppe Bellanca: "willing to make attractive proposition on
THE BELLANCA AIRPLANE FOR PARIS FLIGHT." He Suggested that
Lindbergh come to New York. Lindbergh had the utmost confidence in Bellanca as an aircraft designer and as a man. Although he
was preparing to visit the Ryan people in California, he quickly
changed his plans and went to see Bellanca.
Bellanca presented him to Charles Levine and Clarence Chamberlin. Levine offered to sell the Wright-Bellanca for fifteen thousand
dollars. This was more than Lindbergh had expected to pay. He said
he would have to go back to St. Louis and ask his backers.
The backers approved the purchase. Harold Bixby handed Lindbergh a check for fifteen thousand dollars. And at that time he
asked, "What would you think of naming it the Spirit of St. Louis?'
With the check in his hand (made out to him personally),
Lindbergh was slightly agog at the trust his partners put in him.
"All right, let's call it the Spirit of St. Louis," he said.
He took another train back to New York to see Levine. "We will
sell our plane," Levine told him, "but of course we reserve the right
to select the crew that flies it."
Lindbergh was "dumfounded
more chagrined than angry."
There was no use talking about that, he said. What Levine was
offering was no longer an outright sale but just the chance to paint
"Spirit of St. Louis" on the plane's nose.
Lindbergh picked up his check and started to go. But Levine
wasn't that sure; he might change his mind. He asked Lindbergh to
.

call him the next morning.

.

.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

88

When he got Levine on the telephone the next day, Lindbergh
heard him say, "Good morning. Well, have you changed your mind?"
Lindbergh hung up, too angry to reply. He is still angry in retrospect at having his hopes lifted, being asked to make two round
trips to New York, and losing precious time, only to wind up emptyhanded. He wasn't the only one who reacted that way to Levine.
Levine had a talent for rubbing people the wrong way.
Lindbergh returned to St. Louis discouraged, thinking that time
was so against him in winning the transatlantic race he might better
forget it and think about flying the Pacific instead. But Knight and
Bixby told him to stick to his original plan, to go and see the Ryan
people.

On February 23, 1927, he arrived by train in San Diego, Caliwhere the Ryan Airlines had their factory near the waterfront. The odors of the airplane plant mingled with those of dead
fish from a nearby cannery. It was obviously not a rich or successful
company. Lindbergh met the executives and factory personnel,
most of them very young men. He discussed the price of a plane
with B. F. Mahoney, the president. The airframe would be six
thousand dollars. The engine and instruments would be extra;
Mahoney said he would resell them to Lindbergh at cost.
Then came the key question. "Will you guarantee to give us a
plane with range enough to fly from New York to Paris?" Lindbergh
fornia,

asked.

Mahoney hesitated. "The risks are too high," he said. "It isn't as
though we were a big company with a lot of money in the bank." At
six thousand dollars, Ryan would be making no profit; there was no
margin for a guarantee.
Lindbergh had to decide whether or not to risk his partners'

money without a guarantee. He decided to rest his decision on his
assessment of the chief engineer, Donald Hall.

He

liked

Hall

instantly. They spoke the same language; their minds worked in the

same direction.
Hall asked about where he was going to put the cockpits for the
pilot and the navigator.

Lindbergh told him he would need only a

single cockpit. "You don't plan on making that flight alone, do you?"

Hall asked.

Lindbergh explained that he would be better
gasoline than with an extra man.

off

with extra

THE SPIRIT OF ST. LOUIS

89

Hall instantly grasped the advantages of solo flight. The fuselage

could be shorter and lighter; the plane could carry another three

hundred and fifty pounds of gasoline.
Suddenly both Lindbergh and Hall realized they were talking
about a New York-Paris flight without knowing the exact distance.
They piled into Hall's old Buick roadster and headed for the public
library. There, with a bit of string, they measured the mileage on a
globe— about 3,600 statute miles. Then the plane should be able to
fly at least four thousand miles, Hall figured, perhaps more. But
Lindbergh said those four hundred extra miles would be plenty of
margin. He expected to fly with a tail wind.

Back at the plant, Lindbergh got from Mahoney a firm price of
$10,580 for the plane with a Wright J-5 engine. Special equipment,
such as an earth inductor compass which Lindbergh wanted, would
be extra, at cost.
Lindbergh wired Knight on February 24 saying he thought they
should go ahead with Ryan. The next day Knight wired approval,
Lindbergh placed the order, and Hall and Lindbergh began working out the design together.

The idea of flying alone which so unnerved other people was
almost a congenital necessity with Lindbergh. It had been
drummed into him by his father that "one boy's a boy. Two boys are
half a boy. Three boys are no boy at all," a saying that grew out of
the old Indian war days in Minnesota. But it turned out to be true
in the air, too. Lindbergh had to consult his associates on certain
earthbound details; otherwise he was on his own. He had no flying
partner to convince; he had no responsibility for another man's life.
His movements were not tailored to somebody else's limitations.
When his experience and his senses told him something ought to be
done, he was in a position to make the decision and carry it out.
The airplane was going to be designed and built around Lindbergh and nobody else. This would take a bit more time than
adapting a tested design, but had the advantage of creating a ship
just for

Lindbergh's purpose. The allowance for the pilot was his

own weight, one hundred and seventy pounds, and there would be
a specially hollowed place over his head in the cabin to allow for his
folded six feet three inches. The pilot's seat was a cut-down wicker
chair.

The first thing to be decided was where to put the cockpit.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

90

Lindbergh wanted it enclosed— and he wanted it behind the gas
tank. Experience had shown that men who sat in front of gas tanks

usually died in crashes while those behind the tanks

The tanks would block his forward view

in flight

had lived.

(the engine

blocked it on the ground), but it gave him a safety and efficiency
factor. He could see ahead by banking the plane. He would
dispense with night-flying equipment— he couldn't afford the
weight— and also with a parachute, which weighed twenty pounds.
He would manage without gauges on the gas tanks, too, since they
were heavy and rarely worked. He would figure fuel consumption
by the revolutions per minute (r.p.m. ) and his grandfather's nickelplated watch.

He decided to fly the great-circle route— the shortest route between two points on a curved surface— rather than follow the longer
ship lanes where he might be picked up if he were forced to land.
He needed ships' charts, and would have to figure out how to lay
out the course. He could have got help from the naval officers at San
Diego, but decided not to ask; it would betray his ignorance and
make people question his flight even more than they were already
doing. He tried to buy the charts he needed in a local ship
chandler's store, and found that the nearest supply was in San
Pedro. He borrowed one of the Ryan monoplanes and flew up to get
his charts; he was flying monoplanes at every chance, since his
flying experience had been almost exclusively in biplanes. In San
Pedro he found Mercator's projections of the Atlantic, extending
far enough inland to show both New York and Paris. He also found
charts of time zones, magnetic variations (invaluable for compass
readings), and prevailing winds. To fly from San Diego to New
York, he would rely, as he always had, on Rand McNally railroad
maps of the states. You could buy them in a drugstore for fifty
cents each.

Working from instructions printed on the charts, Lindbergh laid
out his great circle from New York, curving northward through
New England, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, arcing eastward across
the Atlantic, and then southward past Ireland, England, and on to
Paris.

"What freedom lies in flying!" he exulted as he looked at his
handiwork. "What godlike power it gives to man! I'm independent of
the seaman's coast lines or the landsman's roads; I could as well

THE SPIRIT OF ST. LOUIS

91

westward over the
Amazon. I'm like a
magician concocting magic formulae. The symbols I pluck from
paper, applied to the card of a compass, held straight by rudder and
stick, will take me to any acre on the earth where I choose to go."
Since the plane was calculated to cruise at about a hundred miles
an hour, he marked off intervals of a hundred miles on the great
have drawn that line north
Pacific,

circle,

to the Arctic, or

or southeast to the jungles of the

deciding to adjust his course each hour to allow for winds,

and other variables. Every day required some basic decisions,
but these nearly always boiled down to the same choices in Lindbergh's mind: "Safety at the start of my flight means holding down
weight for the take-off. Safety during my flight requires plenty of
emergency equipment. Safety at the end of my flight demands an
drift,

ample reserve of fuel. It's impossible to increase safety at one point
without detracting from it at another."

A stamp collector offered him a thousand dollars to carry a pound
of mail to Paris— a truly tempting chance, since his finances were
tight and the weight small. Still, with the kind of ruthless logic that
guided his decisions, Lindbergh— after consulting his partnersrefused. If he was going to take an extra pound, it had to contribute
more toward the flight than money.
It may not seem to the casual air traveler of today that taking a
pound of letters might affect the flight, but Lindbergh calculated
every controllable ounce that went into the plane. He took no radio,
because naval radios were too heavy and inaccurate when they were
needed most— near the coast. He traded the radio for an extra
ninety pounds of gasoline. He took no sextant to help him plot his
deviation from course, because he wouldn't be able to work it while
flying. He ripped spare pages out of his notebook to save weight.
He cut holes in the charts he carried of areas over which he did not
expect to fly. He even designed special lightweight flight boots with
soft soles to save a few ounces. For food on the flight, he would take
only five sandwiches and a quart of water. (There was another
gallon of water and emergency rations for a forced landing.) He
said, logically, "If I get to Paris, I won't need any more, and if I don't
get to Paris I won't need any more either."
He left nothing to chance that could be estimated. When the
Wright engine arrived and was being installed in the plane, a
mechanic dropped a wrench on one of the fins that provided air

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

92

cooling and cracked it. It was only one fin; it had nothing to do with

the moving parts of the engine; still Lindbergh demanded that the
jacket be replaced. The mechanic wanted to know why, and Lind-

bergh said, "I don't swim so well."

was a race against time and weight; the entire Ryan factory
staff worked day and night on Lindbergh's plane. Donald Hall
stayed at his desk for as long as thirty-six hours at a stretch. At
last the wing— of wood and canvas— was finished and ready to join
to the fuselage, which was made of metal tubing. And then, for
one ridiculous hour, it seemed that they would not be able to get
the wing out of the upper floor of the plant; it was too long. But
they managed by edging it out of a pair of upper doors onto the top
of a railroad box car.
In March, 1927, news stories chronicled the progress of the Byrd
flight; Sikorsky announced that a new plane was being built for
Rene Fonck; the American Legion was backing Commander Noel
Davis to the tune of a hundred thousand dollars in his bid for the
Orteig prize ( his ship would be called American Legion ) From the
other side of the Atlantic, Captain Charles Nungesser and Lieutenant Coli announced that they would definitely compete for the
prize in a biplane with a single 450-horsepower engine. They would
take off from France.
Clarence Chamberlin and Bert Acosta stayed up in the WrightBellanca for more than fifty-one hours— a new world's-endurance
record flight, which Bellanca had predicted for his plane. And
Lindbergh's name began appearing in the news. His application for
the Orteig prize was accepted on March 28 by the National Aeronautic Association, which was charged with administering the prize.
Actually, Lindbergh had mailed his application in more than a
month earlier, as soon as he could furnish the necessary information
about his plane. But the committee had waited until now to ask for
further data about the plane and his flight plan. According to the
rules, Lindbergh would not become eligible for the prize for sixty
days from the date of his filing-which meant May 27, 1927.
Major Clarence M. Young, commander of Captain Lindbergh's
Reserve squadron, came to visit him at San Diego. Young was the
new chief of the recently formed Air Regulation Division of the
United States Department of Commerce. He offered encouragement
and some advice about the new government air licenses. The Spirit
It

.

THE SPIRIT OF ST. LOUIS

93

of St. Louis would need more than a name; it would now need a
number, Young said. He would issue an "N-X" number (211) for
the plane—"N" was the international identification code letter for
the United States, and "X" meant "experimental," which gave
Lindbergh latitude in changing the design of his craft without
seeking government approval.* He would also see that Lindbergh
got one of the new pilot's licenses that were now being issued.
As the time approached for the flight tests of the new airplane,
Lindbergh began for the first time to be annoyed by reporters.
Publicity was an essential part of his plan; it was on the basis of
publicity that he had sold his backers on the flight. But at the end of
April, 1927, he noted, "What started as a pleasant relationship with
local journalists now involves elements of tension." He didn't want

the press around when he was making his flight tests in the Spirit of
St. Louis for several reasons. He had to concentrate on the tests.

The accuracy of data recorded might make the difference between
life and death for him. A slight error could mean a crash, and "One
makes errors more easily when onlookers get in the way, and ask
questions, and smoke cigarettes near fumes of gasoline. Also, plans
often go wrong; and the less said about them in advance, the
better."

On April 28, 1927, the Spirit of St. Louis was finished. It stood in
front of the hangar, sleek, silver, the most beautiful airplane Lindbergh had ever seen. He would test it himself. He climbed in. He

looked

over

the

instruments,

tried

the

controls.

He

told

the

mechanic to go ahead and spin the propeller. The motor caught,
and Lindbergh tested the dual ignition, cutting out first the left and
then the right magneto. The motor fired smoothly, powerfully, with
either one. Then he signaled for the wheel chocks to be pulled
(Douglas Corrigan was the young mechanic who pulled them—
later to become famous as "Wrong- Way" Corrigan). Unrestrained,
Spirit accelerated faster than any plane Lindbergh had ever flown.
The plane, lightly loaded, took off in a hundred and sixty-five feet,
in just over six seconds. It flew very well, although it was not too
stable. While Lindbergh was in the air, a Navy Hawk fighter flew
over to take a close look at this new bird. Instinctively, Lindbergh

banked his plane for combat position, and the two went into a mock
* It was also called "Ryan NYP." The initials stood for "New York-Paris."

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

94

dogfight for several minutes.

Then he controlled his playful ten-

dencies and turned back to the Ryan field. The story that appeared
in the papers next day added to his

growing mistrust of the press.
involved
in
a
"near
crash" and had "narrowly
been
He had, it seems,
escaped disaster" when his plane nearly collided with a Navy
fighter.

He ran more tests in the next days. He got the plane's speed up to
a hundred and thirty miles an hour over the Army's speed course.
He found that it would take off with three hundred gallons of
gasoline ( a hundred and twenty-five less than planned for the Paris

about a thousand feet. He didn't dare try out the plane
with a full load of gas. The surface of the airfield at Camp Kearney,
where the tests were made, was rough and stony; he might blow a

flight) in

tire.

Too, although the plane was designed to take off and lift the

load, it was not meant to be landed with so much weight. And he

had to figure that he was working at an altitude of nearly six
hundred feet in his Pacific Coast tests; in New York he expected to
take off almost at sea level, where the air would be much heavier
and more buoyant. So, balancing one thing against another, he
decided 'to let the tests stop at three hundred gallons. He was now
ready, except for weather, to fly the Spirit of St. Louis eastward.

April was a month of accident and tragedy for Lindbergh's rivals
for the Orteig prize.

The Bellanca,

after setting the

endurance

record, cracked up when one of its wheels came off during a later

Commander Byrd's huge three-engine Fokker, with designer
Anthony Fokker piloting the ship, crashed after a test flight. Everyone in the crew was injured, except Fokker. Commander Davis and
his co-pilot, Lieutenant Stanton H. Wooster, were killed when their
multi-engine ship, the American Legion, crashed in Virginia.
This spate of disasters dismayed Lindbergh. "My God! Every one

flight.

of the big multi-engine planes built for the New York-to-Paris flight

has crashed."
cockpit

aft,

And he felt confirmed in his decision to have the

for

if

the fuselage wasn't crushed and the gasoline

didn't catch fire, the pilot would probably not be injured in a crash.

In France there were now at least three planes being readied for

New York. It was predicted that Nungesser and Coli
would soon be ready to take off.

the flight to

On May 4, Lindbergh completed the flight tests of the Spirit of St,
Louis. As far as he could tell, the ship was satisfactory for the New

THE SPIRIT OF ST. LOUIS
York-to-Paris flight.

95

He wired his partners he would fly into St.

Louis in forty-eight hours.

But he was held back for four days by bad weather. Meanwhile,
on May 8, 1927, Nungesser and Coli took off in their heavily loaded
biplane from Le Bourget Field north of Paris. Reading about it in
San Diego, Lindbergh was certain they would make New York. He
began to study the charts he had assembled for the transpacific
flight.

For the next two days the Nungesser-Coli flight could be charted
from the newspaper stories. Their plane, White Bird, was sighted at
various points along the route. There were even those who swore
they had seen White Bird over Boston, but nobody claimed to see it
after that. The sightings may have been illusory. White Bird just
disappeared. After it left France, its fate was never learned.
Hearing that Lindbergh was ready to fly east, Guy Vaughan, of
the Wright Aeronautical Corporation, telephoned him offering the
services of the company's press representatives, Bruno & Blythe, in
New York. The Wright people had a legitimate interest in the flight,
since Lindbergh was using their engine. He accepted their offer of
help.

On May 9 Lindbergh was still grounded in San Diego, wondering
why a flier had to be so dependent on his eyes that he couldn't fly
through storms and fogs and night; why better instruments couldn't
be invented to help him see his way through bad weather. Another obstacle was being raised; with Nungesser and Coli presumably down at sea, the American Ambassador to France, Myron
Herrick, wasn't sure if it would be good for Franco-American
relations if an American flier took off for Paris at this moment.
Might not the French feel insulted? Particularly if the American
made a successful flight? Also, some humanitarians were afraid that
Lindbergh might be needlessly sacrificing himself; there were
attempts by outsiders to get his partners to persuade him to give up
the scheme. He had run into this kind of fearful opposition from the
time he tried to sell the Post-Dispatch on his flight. He felt there
was only one way to dissipate this fear: to prove his plane and
himself worthy by making a successful nonstop, overnight flight
from San Diego to St. Louis.
At last the weather broke, and Lindbergh was ready to take off.

He allowed himself to carry a small suitcase of personal belongings

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

96

because he was taking only enough gas for the fifteen-hundred-mile
flight to St. Louis— little more than half the plane's capacity.
As usual, he had planned everything long in advance of takeoff,
as far ahead as he could see. In his notebook he had written such
messages to himself as "Stop mail: leave address. Wire day of
arrival to Knight." And he did not forget to add, when he had
arrived at St. Louis, to wire Ryan Airlines performance data on their
ship. They had put everything into it; they would want to know. At
each stop, there was always the notation "Notify papers." And
under "Paris Arrival," his list started with "Arrange for care of
ship." Third on the Paris list were cables to St. Louis, Ryan, Wright,
Mother, Standard Oil, Union Oil— everyone who had helped with
the plane, engine, fuel, or had a legitimate personal interest in the
pilot.

He left San Diego at 3:55 p.m. on May 10, 1927. The time was
selected to give him three hours of daylight to locate any trouble
with the ship and to bring him over the flat plains of Kansas at

dawn. It would be the first time he would fly through an entire
night. He was stopping at St. Louis because the flight to Paris was a
St. Louis project.

The Spirit of St. Louis took off well; then the planes that flew
with him as an escort— witnessed by the press ( "It looks as though I
wont have to bother much about adequate publicity from now on,"
Lindbergh noted)— dropped off as night approached. He began
climbing for the flight over the Rockies. At 8,000 feet over Arizona it

was cold, and he was still climbing to avoid the peaks. At this
altitude, for the first time, the motor began missing. He was over
mountains in the dark, without any idea just where he was. Suddenly all the months of work were threatened. He was faced with a
forced landing in a situation that would almost certainly destroy the
ship and probably himself. He began scanning the night-shrouded
valley for a smooth place where he might land upwind and mitigate
the damage.

He circled desperately, trying to penetrate the darkness with his
eyes. The motor was still rough, but the ship was staying aloft. He

couldn't figure out the trouble; there was no sign from the instruments of what it might be. And then miraculously, as he flew at a

lower altitude, the motor smoothed out and began firing rhythmically.

He cautiously adjusted the fuel mixture, and it continued to

THE SPIRIT OF ST. LOUIS
function well.

97

Now he had to choose between going forward and

trying again to climb over the mountains or turning around

and

heading for San Diego, nearly five hours behind, and chancing a
crash landing on the desert or in the sea.
He chose St. Louis, began climbing, and headed east. He thought
the trouble was probably in the engine temperature; he would use
more power—he had plenty of reserve fuel— and watch his mixture
more carefully. And when he got to New York, he would have an
intake heater installed.

As he gained

altitude, the

motor began missing intermittently

again, but he found he could handle it. The main thing was to be

He would take advantage of
smooth running to climb, then nurse the ship
through a coughing spell while he clung to his altitude. Almost
foot by foot he crawled up to 13,000 feet, high enough to cross the
able to

fly

over the highest peaks.

several minutes of

mountains.

Once on the other side, he was able to fly at a lower altitude
better suited to the engine, and he had no more trouble. He reached
St.

Louis a little after six in the morning— about three hours ahead

of schedule.

He had flown only fifty miles off course and without

the benefit of his new earth inductor compass, which had stopped

working and could not be fixed until he reached New York. Below
was Lambert Field. Like a kid showing off his new bike, he buzzed
the field, then climbed over the town and gave himself a joy ride
before touching down at 6:20 a.m. The trip had set a new speed
record from the Coast of fourteen hours and twenty-five minutes—
an average of better than a hundred miles an hour!
Lindbergh's pilot's license was waiting for him; his partners were
brimming with plans for dinners and other festivities. But he
explained that although he would stay if they insisted, he thought
he ought to get along to New York while there was still a chance to
be first to Paris. They agreed; he stopped in St. Louis overnight, had
his plane serviced, and took off the next morning for New York. He
didn't tell them about the engine trouble over the Rockies.

8

NEW YORK -PARIS

LINDBERGH LEFT ST. LOUIS A LITTLE AFTER 8:00 A.M. ON
May 12, and arrived at Curtiss Field, Long Island, near New York
City, in just over seven hours. Added to the first leg from San Diego
to St. Louis, he had an elapsed flying time across the United States
of less than twenty- two hours, a new record.
Men with cameras were scattered all over the field, some of them
just where Lindbergh wanted to touch down. They crowded around
before his engine stopped, putting themselves in real danger from
the whirling propeller. This was a hazard that had always worried
Lindbergh. He noticed from his earliest flying days that people on
the ground seemed irresistibly drawn to the turning propeller
without knowing how much damage it could inflict. He had always
been afraid that one day he might injure someone who ventured too
close. Now he was being crowded by newsmen who seemed to feel
it their professional privilege to go anywhere.
Why couldn't they wait? he thought. He'd be glad to pose himself
and the ship where they wanted, and no one would get hurt.
One of the first people to introduce himself to Lindbergh was
Dick Blythe, of the firm of Bruno & Blythe, who handled press
relations for the Wright company. But even as Blythe was shaking
Lindbergh's hand, the photographers were crowding around from
all sides, cursing, shoving, taking pictures from every conceivable
angle with movie and still cameras. Each moment Lindbergh felt
less comfortable with these newsmen; they were much different
from the easygoing Pacific Coast types.
Tve got a hangar for you," Blythe said above the noise.
"How much is it going to cost?" Lindbergh asked. He had fifty

NEW YORK-PARIS

99

dollars in cash in his pocket; there was only about $2,000 or so left

of the $15,000 put up by the Spirit of St. Louis organization.

After his plane was safely stowed, Lindbergh gave performance

data on the Wright engine to Joe Hartson, of the Wright company.
Then Hartson, Blythe, and Lindbergh drove to the Garden City
Hotel, in nearby Garden City, where Lindbergh would stay while
his

plane was being serviced.

He wanted to live at the field, but

there was no place to sleep.

On the way, Lindbergh asked who Blythe and Bruno were.
"They're your buffers," Hartson told him. "Both

fliers.

They're

O.K." Lindbergh nodded and agreed to retain Bruno and Blythe as
his press and business representatives.

At the hotel, Hartson suggested that Lindbergh take a double

room with Blythe as his roommate. Lindbergh nodded again. He
said nothing.

That night, according to Dick Blythe, "We bedded down like two
strange wildcats, each in his own hole."
The next day Lindbergh was back at Curtiss Field. Wright was
giving him all the mechanical aid he needed. ( His mechanic was Ed
Mulligan.)

They

couldn't

afford

to

play

favorites,

since

their

engines were in the three planes gathered at Curtiss and nearby

Roosevelt Field, all preparing to take off for Paris. The planes were
the Bellanca, Byrd's tri-motored Fokker America, and the Spirit of
Louis. Also at the field were representatives of all the companies
whose products Lindbergh was using. Brice Goldsborough, of the
Pioneer Instrument Company, was ready to install a new earth
inductor compass and any other instrument he needed. A man from
the Vacuum Oil Company was there to sell him oil and gasoline
when he wanted it.
Flying into New York, Lindbergh could see that Curtiss Field
was too small for his takeoff with a loaded plane. The best place
would be Roosevelt Field, with a runway almost a mile long.
Admiral Byrd had this field under lease, and had put a lot of money
into building the long runway. Still, Byrd offered to let Lindbergh
use the field when the America wasn't using it. Byrd even offered
Lindbergh his weather information. There was a lot of camaraderie
of that sort among the pilots, even though they were engaged in a
St.

highly competitive race.

Bernt Balchen, the famous pilot and navigator who was flying

100

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

with Byrd, and Brice Goldsborough checked Lindbergh's charts.
They laid out the route, "a flattened great circle, Balchen says,
allowing for the winds at that time of year. "You just follow the
coast to Newfoundland," he told Lindbergh, "then follow 107
straight across and you'll find Europe."
But why hadn't the Bellanca left? What was holding Byrd back?
,>

The Bellanca was repaired, but there was dissension about who
would pilot it. There was even the threat of a lawsuit by one pilot,
who said he had been hired to make the trip and then dropped.
As for Byrd, one member of his crew was still hospitalized, and he
was still testing the America.
The delays only focused more attention on the race. Blythe told
Lindbergh that newspaper interest was becoming more intense with
every day. Who knew what might happen next? There had already
been four men killed trying to fly nonstop to Paris— Davis, Wooster,
and the two in Fonck's crew the year before. Two men were
missing— Nungesser and Coli were still the objects of a Navy search
at sea— and three men in the Americas crew had been injured.
Death and danger were the reasons for all those crowding, cursing
photographers, and the prying reporters who asked Lindbergh such
silly questions as "Do you carry a rabbit's foot?" "What's your
favorite pie?" "How do you feel about girls?"
The reporters were hungry for color. They nicknamed Lindbergh
"the Flyin' Fool" and "the Flyin' Kid" and reported his conversation
as if it had been written by Zane Grey. "These fellows must think
I'm a cowpuncher," Lindbergh muttered to a friend.
The papers emphasized the dangers of the flight, and retold with
embellishments the stories of the men who had died, and the men
who had been injured, and the men who had been lost at sea trying
to make it. To be sure, the flight was extremely risky. Some of the
businessmen who had refused to back Lindbergh were motivated
by the idea of protecting him. A group of air transport executives
summoned Harry Bruno to a conference, as Lindbergh's representative. "Bruno, why are you mixed up in this suicidal stunt flying?"
one of them asked. "Four men lost in four weeks— you are sending
men to their deaths. You'll ruin aviation in America." Bruno defended the flight as not a stunt but a feasible, well-planned entermany in aviation were convinced that no good could

prise. Still,

come of it.

NEW YORK-PARIS

101

The newspapers continued to emphasize this side of the story.
May 13, they printed so much inaccurate and sensational news about Lindbergh— the accent always on danger and
impending disaster— that they got his mother worried. She had
In one day,

been staying in Detroit, out of the limelight, out of her son's way.

On the night of May 13, while he was at dinner, Lindbergh got an
unexpected telegram from Mrs. Lindbergh saying that she was
arriving in New York the next day.
Lindbergh certainly did not want her in New York while he was
so busy with flight preparations, and also he didn't want her exposed
to the prying press. But it was too late to head her off. She was
already aboard the train when he got the wire.
When she arrived, Lindbergh refused to pose kissing his mother
in front of the camera. He took her with him into the hangar and
they spent some little while alone together. She stayed for only a
few hours. When it came time for Dick Blythe to drive her to the
Garden City station, he stepped back so that she could say goodbye to her son in private.
She patted Charles on the back. She did not kiss him. "Goodbye,
Charles. And luck," she said.

"Goodbye, Mother," Lindbergh replied.

And that was the end of the incident. Mrs. Lindbergh returned
to Detroit. She did not stay to see her son take off because, she
said, she would only be in the way and distract him from his work.

On Saturday, May 14, the day his mother went back to Detroit,
Lindbergh took two Wright experts up for separate flights to check
his engine. He asked each, first Ken Boedecker and then Ed Mulligan, to set his fuel mixture at the most efficient reading. At each setting, he made a pencil mark. The two men had chosen points a sixteenth of an inch apart. Later, Ken Boedecker asked Lindbergh
which he had used on the flight. "Neither," Lindbergh replied. "I
set the mixture directly between the two."
During his second landing, some photographers got in the way
of the plane, and to avoid hitting them Lindbergh damaged his
tail skid. The thing that annoyed him most was that instead of
being penalized for violating the field regulations, the photographers
got a better picture and the reporters turned the accident they had

caused into "news." They said Lindbergh had landed too fast and
had thereby damaged his plane.

102

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

"Accuracy, I've learned,

is

secondary to circulation," Lindbergh

reported bitterly. "A thing to be sacrificed,

when occasion arises,

to a degree depending on the standards of each paper. But accuracy

... is vital to my sense of values.
mechanics are inaccurate,

.

.

.

Every aviator knows that if

aircraft crash. If pilots are inaccurate,

they get lost— sometimes killed. In my profession life itself depends

on accuracy."
Blythe told Lindbergh that all this attention meant he had "taken
the show." The reporters didn't know what to make of Lindbergh;

they had heard little of him, and suddenly he turned up in New

York with a new transcontinental speed record in his pocket and his
plane almost ready to push on to Paris. They were intrigued, and
so was the public.

This meant good publicity for the Spirit of St. Louis, just what
Lindbergh had wanted for his partners. But it was getting out of
hand. The minute Lindbergh showed his face outside the hangar,
he was surrounded by people and police. At the hotel, reporters
watched every entrance, so that he couldn't take a walk without
being followed. The only time he was free was when he was alone
in his room, so he took to eating there. "The attention of the entire
country is centered on the flight to Paris," Lindbergh reported,
"and most of all on me— because I'm going alone, because I'm
young, because I'm a 'dark horse/ Papers in every city and village
Newspaper, radio and motion picture
are headlining my name.
publicity has brought people crowding [around]." On Sunday, thirty
thousand people came out to the flying fields. And he was being
inundated with mail, requests for autographs, money offers from
newspapers to write his story. This last was a new idea. Certainly
E. Ray Lansing, a member of the Spirit organization, ought to have
the story for his St. Louis Globe Democrat. But in other cities it
might be sold separately. So Lindbergh gave the St. Louis rights to
the story to Lansing; then Harry Knight called the New York Times
to sell syndication rights to that paper. Arthur Hays Sulzberger, of
the Times, got on the telephone and dictated an agreement which
Knight accepted for Lindbergh. Then Sulzberger dictated a memorandum in New York for the files. The Times paid $1,000 to bind the
contract and promised to pay an additional $4,000 for world rights
.

.

.

to Lindbergh's story if the flight was successful (a successful flight
was defined as one arriving within fifty miles of France). If the

NEW YORK-PARIS

103

was unsuccessful, the Times promised to pay an additional
$1,000. And if Lindbergh did not make the flight, the initial payment
of $1,000 was to be returned by Knight.
Frederick Birchall, the Times managing editor, cabled his Paris
bureau chief, Edwin James, that world rights had been bought, and
"Lindbergh instructed silence" to all except accredited Times correspondents. In the event of failure and rescue, Lindbergh was to communicate with the Times in any way he could.
"Up to date, our project has been successful beyond my wildest
dreams, Lindbergh wrote. One thing gave him special satisfaction: "My reputation as a pilot has been established." This, according to Harry Bruno, was Lindbergh's main motivation— not fame
with the public, not money, not even when it was hurled at him,
but prestige as a flier. He had never been bawled out by his boss
for losing those two mail ships, but the other pilots had ribbed him
unmercifully. "He knew that he was as good as any pilot in the business," Bruno says. Now, in New York, here he was, "an unknown
kid, swooping out of the sky to challenge the greatest fliers in the
world— and making them admit that perhaps he had the stuff it took
flight

,>

to make his challenge stick."

But Lindbergh's elation over his breakthrough had a dark side.
"The way the tabloid people acted when my mother came, left me
with no respect for them whatever. They didn't care how much they
hurt her feelings or frightened her about my flight, as long as they
got their pictures and their stories. Did she know what a dangerous
trip her son was undertaking? they asked. Did she realize

how many

older and more experienced aviators had been killed in its attempt?"

When Lindbergh and his mother refused to embrace before the
cameras, the tabloids made pictures using photographed heads of
the

Lindberghs pasted on

other

bodies.

This

was a

favorite

journalistic trick of the tabloids— the "composite photograph."

Lindbergh was not only disgusted with this kind of press coverage; he could see that his time was being taken up more and more

by the demands of publicity and promotion, and less and less was
given to his plane and the flight. He had to fly as soon as he could.
His plane was ready. The engine had been serviced, the compasses
installed. But he was grounded, as were all the others, by a bad
weather system that hung over the Atlantic.
There were few outlets for his energy. After a couple of nearly

104

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

totally silent evenings

with Lindbergh, Dick Blythe woke with a

yell one morning at 5 a.m. as he was being doused with the contents

of a pitcher of ice water. Lindbergh stood there holding the pitcher

and grinning. "That'll teach you to wear pajamas ," he said. A day or
two later, Blythe, who wore a mustache, awoke with his nose full of
shaving soap. Lindbergh loomed over him with a razor in his hand.
I've always had an ambition to shave off half a mustache while its
owner was asleep," he told Blythe.
The two men became very close friends. Blythe slipped away one
day with Lindbergh and took him, incognito, to Coney Island. Lindbergh had a good time on the rides, eating hot dogs, and so on,
until a woman spotted him and yelled, "There's Lindbergh!"
"Get me out of here," said Lindbergh, and Blythe immediately
took him back to the hotel.
The weather was still too bad to take off. Lindbergh was introduced to the chief of the New York City weather bureau, Dr. Kimball. Kimball gave him all the help he could, but told Lindbergh
he didn't get much useful information about the weather up north
along the great-circle route.

As Kimball's forecasts showed continuing bad weather, Lindbergh
began accepting invitations to visit people, like Colonel Theodore
Roosevelt, Jr. Roosevelt insisted on giving him letters of introduction to people in Europe, including Ambassador Herrick. Although
he had turned down the pound of mail from the stamp collector,
Lindbergh felt he had to carry Roosevelt's letters after accepting
the Colonel's hospitality. He also took with him, out of friendship,

a letter for the postmaster of Springfield, Illinois, and another for

Gregory Brandewiede, who had helped him lay out the air-mail
route between St. Louis and Chicago. None of Lindbergh's partners

asked him to carry anything for them.

During these days of waiting for fair weather, Lindbergh met

many famous men of aviation; Al Williams, Rene Fonck, Tony
Fokker, Chance Vought, Grover Loening. They had been his idols,

names in the newspapers, and now he was one of them, accepted
as their equal. He also met some reporters who knew their business

and stuck to questions about aviation and his flight, which he was
always glad to answer. He still remembers with respect Lauren D.
( Deac ) Lyman, of the New York Times ( now a consultant to United
Aircraft); Bruce Gould, of the New York Post (later for many years

.

NEW YORK-PARIS

105

editor of the Ladies Home Journal); and C. B. Allen, of the New
York World ( now a consultant to Martin Marietta )
Harry Guggenheim, the aviation enthusiast, was at Roosevelt
Field making test flights with Commander Byrd one day when
he heard that the Spirit of St. Louis was at Curtiss being prepared
for the Paris flight. Guggenheim was a rich man, a former wartime

Navy flier, the catalyst for bringing several millions of dollars of
and civil aviation. The
Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics, of
which Harry was a trustee, was then the only important source of

his father's fortune into aviation education

finance for aviation experimentation.

Harry Guggenheim hurried over to Curtiss Field to see Lindbergh and his plane. He recalls looking inside Spirit and noting that
"very little room had been left in the cockpit for the pilot. I remember saying to myself, 'This fellow will never make it. He's
doomed/" Lindbergh's comment on this was that "the cockpit
probably looked cramped since it was designed to fit me closely.
Actually there was plenty of room for the pilot, more than in most
planes of the time— an essential for long-distance flying."
While Guggenheim was examining the plane in the company
of Charles Lawrance, the designer of the Wright Whirlwind engine, Lindbergh showed up. He was introduced to Guggenheim and
they posed for some pictures together. Then Guggenheim left, saying, "When you get back to the United States, come up to the Fund
and see me." He says there was more optimism in his words than in
his heart.

Lindbergh still had more than a week to go before qualifying
for the Orteig prize. So he phoned Harry Knight in Detroit and
asked him

if

the organization

would permit him to

fly

anyhow

as soon as the weather was good. As usual, he got prompt and positive assurance of support from his partners. "When you're ready to

take off, go ahead," Knight told him.

On May 19, after spending a week in New York, Lindbergh continued to get bad weather reports. So he picked up B. F. Mahoney,

New York, and
Wright engine plant with him, Dick Blythe, and another man, in Paterson. That night Bruno set up a dinner for Lindbergh at the Newspaper Club in New York, and Blythe arranged
for him to see a hit musical, Rio Rita, and visit backstage.

president of Ryan Airlines, who had just come to
visited the

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

106

As Lindbergh was driving the group across Forty-second Street
around six o'clock, it was rainy and dismal. Someone suggested it might be a good idea to check with the weather
bureau. He stopped the car and Blythe telephoned Kimball. Surprisingly, the forecast was for clearing skies over the Atlantic.
Blythe telephoned Bruno at the Newspaper Club, suggesting that
Bruno tell the dinner committee some story that would cover Lindbergh's nonappearance without revealing his plans. But a cartoonist
from the Daily Mirror was in the booth next to Bruno's. Overhearing the conversation, he promptly telephoned his office, and by
nine o'clock that evening the Mirror was out with headlines announcing Lindbergh's departure.
Lindbergh turned the car around and headed for Long Island.
There was a lot to do in a hurry. A recording barograph had to be
in Blythe's car

installed in the plane by the National Aeronautic Association to
make a paper tracing of time and altitude. Without this machine,

the record of the flight would not be officially accepted.

They stopped

for

a

quick dinner in

a

small

restaurant

at

Queensboro Plaza. Around the corner at a drugstore, Blythe bought
five sandwiches "to go" (two ham, two beef, one hard-boiled egg),
wrapped in wax paper for the Paris flight.
At the field, Lindbergh was astonished to find no activity in the
rival groups. Possibly Byrd and Chamberlin didn't believe in the
changed weather forecast, which, to be sure, was somewhat conditional.* Lindbergh applied the same test to his flight that he had
to his air-mail flights; if the reports seemed good enough, "I'll take
[the] responsibility on my shoulders, where it belongs." If he got
things moving now, he would be ready to fly at daybreak and
could make a last-minute weather decision then.
The tanks of Spirit had come out a bit larger than Hall had figured, and would hold an additional twenty-five gallons. This was an
extra hundred and fifty pounds of weight, but it could mean a
hundred and sixty miles of added range for the airplane. On the
other hand, the engine had shown that it needed less oil than had
* Actually, the

Chamberlin plane, Columbia, was grounded by a court in-

junction. Byrd's America was not ready. Byrd came over to bid Lindbergh farewell;

he was, in fact, the last person to say goodbye to him. Both planes later

made the transatlantic crossing. Chamberlin, with Levine as passenger, flew
nearly to Berlin on June 4-6, 1927. Byrd's plane took off on June 29. Flying by
instruments almost all the way, the America was ditched in the sea off Brest.

NEW YORK-PARIS

107

been calculated, so Lindbergh was saving thirty-five pounds on oil.
The original gross weight of the ship had been calculated at 5,135
pounds. With the extra gasoline, minus the oil, it would now weigh
5,250 pounds. The plane had not been designed to lift the extra
hundred and fifteen pounds, but Lindbergh decided to take them
and risk a difficult takeoff in order to add to his flying radius. Mulligan and Boedecker began checking the engine and kept at it all
night.

While he was making his plans, he was besieged by promoters

who offered him huge sums of money for personal appearances, for

He had several times stayed up forty hours at a stretch,
working hard most of the time; now he was facing a thirty-five-hour
flight and he wanted to be fresh for it. So, close to midnight on
May 19, he set a friend as a guard outside his hotel-room door
and tried to get a few hours of sleep. Harry Bruno, driving out to
the field about this time, found the road jammed with about ten
thousand cars. The Daily Mirror headlines had done their work.
Usually, when Lindbergh put his head on the pillow, he went to
sleep. But not this night. A poker game was going on among the
correspondents at the hotel. Excitement mounted when the pot
reached $400. Just at that point, Lindbergh came into the room and
said, "Can't you let me get some sleep? I've got to get up early in
the morning." Sam Schulman, a former International News Service
cameraman recalls that this had little effect on the group.
Lindbergh went back to bed and twisted and turned, thinking of
all the calculations he had made, all the decisions he had weighed.
Had he done right to omit the radio? The parachute? To take on
those extra pounds of gasoline? He had just begun to drift off when—
slam!— his personal guard broke into the room with a completely
irrelevant question. "Slim, what am I going to do when you're gone?"
That murdered sleep.
He finally gave up and got up. He dressed and went downstairs
into the hotel lobby and out on to the stone porch. It was about 2:45
a.m. The New York Times man covering the hotel, Johnny Frogge,
movies.

saw him looking into the darkness at the dripping trees.
"Are you going this morning, Captain?" Frogge asked.
Lindbergh waited a minute. "I don't know," he said.
"When will you know?" Frogge asked, anxious to catch the last
edition.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

108

"I don't know." Lindbergh repeated.

He was, as Deac Lyman said later, not being evasive, only honest.
He really hadn't decided if he was taking off that day or not.
He drove out to Curtiss Field at three o'clock in the morning of
May 20 without having slept. The weather was bad, but getting
better. Nobody would take the plane from the hangar in the drizzle

without Lindbergh's approval. He looked at the skies, smelled the
wind, thought of what the weatherman had said about a highpressure system moving in from the west, figured that if he started
at

dawn he could always turn back if he ran into too much bad

weather.

He ordered the plane hauled out of the hangar. Its tail was tied to
a truck that would tow it the short distance to Roosevelt Field. It
was not a happy occasion. The plane— shrouded against the weather,
tail first through the mud— seemed heavy and lifeless.
Reporters, policemen, mechanics sloshed along on foot through the
squelching ooze. To Lindbergh, it seemed more like a funeral
lurching

procession than the beginning of a joyous adventure in the air.

A light east wind was blowing, so the Spirit of St. Louis was
towed to the west end of the Roosevelt runway. At the other end of
the runway was a steamroller that had been used to pack it down.
Beyond that were telephone wires to clear, and beyond that Merrick
Avenue.

Deac Lyman and C. B. Allen walked down to the steamroller and
crouched near it. "We knew the story would either be there or in
Paris," Allen said recently, "and we wanted to be ready to help if
necessary. The steamroller was plenty of protection for us."

The tanks were filled. Chief Abram Skidmore and Inspector
Frank McCahill, of the Nassau County police, were worried about
the danger. Everybody knew that the plane was loaded to the last
ounce with gasoline. Harry Bruno agreed to follow the takeoff in his
open car. Skidmore and McCahill were with him, holding fire
extinguishers.

Lindbergh climbed into the cabin and closed the door. Ed
Mulligan pulled the propeller, and Ken Boedecker held a booster
coil to give the cold engine a hot spark. Once the engine started, he
cut the wires to the coil, as Lindbergh would not need it again and
did not want to carry the extra weight. The engine kicked over, and

Lindbergh kept opening and closing the throttle. It wasn't revving

NEW YORK-PARIS

109

up as high as expected. "They never rev up on a day like this/'
Boedecker said, but his face looked worried. Lindbergh shut the
engine off. Boedecker and Mulligan made a hasty check of fittings
and connections. Everything was in order— the wires, the valve
springs, the fuel lines.

Again Mulligan pulled the propeller, and once again Lindbergh
( Boedecker
says it was fifty revolutions below optimum performance. But
Lindbergh disputes this. He says it was thirty revolutions low. "If it
was fifty low, I wouldn't have taken off," he told Boedecker many
years later.) Adopting Lindbergh's figure, the Whirlwind was still
about 1.5 per cent below full power. The plane was already
tried to get the engine up to full power. It was still low.

overweight, its greased tires sinking into the rain-soaked clay of the

runway.

Now, to complicate things further, the wind shifted from east to
west, from head to tail. True, it was only the slightest breath of
wind, barely enough to move the wind sock, but it was blowing the
wrong way. It added another tiny element of danger to an already
perilous situation. If Lindbergh decided to take off into the wind,

the ship would have to be towed to the other side of the field. The

engine was too light and would overheat if he taxied the heavy ship
through the soft ground. Taking off westward also meant a hazardous course over hangars and houses, almost certain death if things

went badly. And there would be the loss of vital time— just enough
time, perhaps, to bring him to the Irish coast after dark instead of
before sunset as he hoped.

Everybody was watching him. The decision was his— his alone.
Boedecker said that the engine was functioning as well as possible

The test flights had shown that the plane
had plenty of lift, but now he was asking it to lift a thousand
pounds more than it ever had before—in mist, off a mud runway,
in that kind of weather.

with a tail wind. And with an engine at less than full power, and
with moisture condensing on its lifting surfaces. Of course, Lindbergh could start his takeoff and then cut power at the halfway

mark and hope not to crash by coasting to a stop. There were no
brakes on the wheels, no reversible-pitch propeller such as today's
aircraft have, to slow the plane on the ground.

Wind, weather, power, load— those were the thoughts churning
in his mind. And then the churning stopped. "It's less a decision of

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

110

logic than of feeling," he said later. "The kind of feeling that comes

when you gauge the distance to be jumped between two stones
across a brook." He knew that no one would blame him if he didn't

take

off;

cockpit

.

no one would doubt his courage.
.

.

Still,

"sitting in the

the conviction surges through me that the wheels will

leave the ground, that the wings will rise above the wires, that
it is

time to start the flight."

He pulled down his goggles. Boedecker asked, "Do you want us
Lindbergh nodded. Boedecker and Mulligan
knocked out the blocks. Lindbergh checked his instruments again
and gave the engine full throttle. Eight or ten men pushed against
the wing struts to help lift the plane loose from the gluey earth.
Spirit began to move under its own power, at first agonizingly slow.
It seemed that the overloaded plane could never rise above the
ground; its wheels were cutting furrows in the clay instead of
riding high and quick. At the halfway mark, the controls were
mushy but tightening; he tried to lift the plane and the wheels did
leave the ground for a split second. It was 7:52 a.m.
Bruno was following close behind in his roadster, with the
policemen and the fire extinguishers.
Now Lindbergh was certain; he was committed. He continued to
roar down the runway, picking up speed as he lurched along. He
bounced into the air, still without enough flying speed. ( A couple of
"kangaroo leaps" was Bruno's description.) But at last the plane
broke contact with the ground and Lindbergh nursed it slowly aloft.
There was still a thousand feet to the telephone wires. He climbed
very slowly, attaining speed as he went, and cleared the wires by
twenty feet. Bruno and Skidmore turned toward each other in the
front seat as the car skidded to a halt. "By God, he made it!" they
to kick the blocks?"

shouted in unison.

Lindbergh flew along Long Island, and then, following the first
leg of his great-circle course, he pointed across Long Island Sound

toward Connecticut. He had never flown over so much water in his
life, but he knew that between land and water there was always an
area of turbulence. With his wings and fuselage overstrained, Lindbergh could not afford to add anything to the burden. He trembled
with each shock of turbulence, watched his wing tips bend too much,
waiting for the rending sound that would signal he had pushed
things too far. Those were an uneasy few seconds, but a thousand

NEW YORK-PARIS

111

feet out over the water the air became smooth as glass. The wings

stopped vibrating. Now with each passing moment his ship became
lighter as it consumed fuel, and a less likely prey to turbulence. He
crossed the Sound and flew over Connecticut. At the end of his first
hour he began to fill the hourly log that would tell him what he
needed as he went along, particularly about fuel consumption. He
recorded wind velocity (zero), true course, compass variation. His
altitude was 600 feet, his air speed 102 m.p.h., the tachometer
showed only 1,750 r.p.m., 50 below the normal cruising speed. He
had plenty of reserve power as he cruised across Rhode Island and

Massachusetts.

Between Massachusetts and Nova Scotia there were two hours of
flight over open water. This would really test his navigating skill. If
he could stay on course without familiar landmarks to guide him, he
could be confident of doing the same thing over the North Atlantic.
The drone of the engine seemed to emphasize the fact that he
hadn't slept for more than twenty-four hours. Also, he had been
flying for nearly four hours, a good day's flight. He began to get
sleepy, very sleepy. And there were still thirty hours ahead of him,
part of it at night and most of it over ocean. Overwater flight, he

was learning, had a certain monotony that made sleep ever more
desirable. His eyelids wanted to close. In fact, his eye did blink
closed several times; perhaps he slept for a second or two without
knowing it. During the third hour of flight, the cockpit was suddenly lit by warm sunlight. He looked out and saw a bit of mud on
the wing, thrown up from Roosevelt Field by the wheels. It irritated
him to think he had cut every unneeded ounce from his plane and
was now forced to carry a tiny load of mud all the way to Paris.
Suddenly a green coast leaped at him; it was the shore of Nova
Scotia. Checking his charts against the shape of the shore line, he
found that he had made landfall at the mouth of St. Mary's Bay,
only six miles off his course, only two degrees away from his
calculated objective, well within the five-degree margin for error he
had allowed himself. This was very good navigating indeed. A sixmile error here was the equivalent of a miss of about fifty miles at
Ireland. And his plane had averaged a hundred and two miles an
hour. Already it was about four hundred pounds lighter in fuel than

when he started.
In his mind, Lindbergh had set three checkpoints which would

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

112

determine his flight plan. The first one was halfway down the
runway at Roosevelt. The second was this one, Nova Scotia. If he
found it socked in by fog, or if he was totally lost— showing that
flying by compass would not work— he planned to turn back to
Long Island. His next and last would be halfway across the Atlantic,

the point of no return. Before that,

if

he ran into trouble he

could turn back; after that, he would have no choice but to press on.
Over Nova Scotia and Cape Breton Island he met heavy rain,
fog, turbulent air. He began to worry about his wings again, and his

lack of parachute.

Why had he traded those twenty pounds of
Why hadn't he put dump valves on his

safety for extra gasoline?
fuel tanks so

he might lighten his load, if necessary, and save his

plane? He knew the answers, but doubts began to

gnaw at him.

Had he made the right decisions? If he lived, he would know.
He flew for three hours over Nova Scotia, then headed out over
another two hundred miles of open water toward Newfoundland.

Once more, sleep began to overtake him; his eyes grew heavy, and
he forgot to keep his plane on course. He began to dream of lying in
a snowbank in Minnesota, that winter when he was seventeen and
became snowbound with his pony. Those clouds looked so soft out
there
just like the Minnesota snowbanks. But he wrenched
himself awake to take an interest in the ice fields that appeared
below. He began to make plans for a forced landing on ice. He
.

.

.

adjusted his engine revolutions to allow for the lightened weight of

he was now carrying after nine hours of flight. At last the
mountains of Newfoundland showed themselves, and Lindbergh
had to make a decision. Should he fly off course a bit— only a few
minutes off— to dip his wings to St. Johns, the last settlement he
fuel

would see before Ireland? Or should he stick to his rigid schedule?
No plane had ever flown from St. John's eastward without first
landing there. It was there that Commander Read and his three
flying boats refueled and took off for the Azores on the Navy flight
eight years before, in 1919. It was from St. John's, too, that Alcock
and Brown had flown to Ireland the same year.
It would be fun to dive on St. John's and then continue across the
Atlantic— another joke he could play. But this one had possibly
serious consequences. After having cut everything to the bone to
save fuel, he would be wasting a quarter of an hour's flight for a bit
of fun. No, he couldn't do that. But then he continued to think—

NEW YORK-PARIS
flying over the city would give the inhabitants

113

one last fix on his

plane and his course. They would know he had made it this far,
which would reassure his partners, and they would know where he

was heading and at approximately what speed. If he didn't get to
Europe, they could figure he must be down somewhere along the
route between St. John's and Ireland. This knowledge would narrow the search for him as he waited, floating on his rubber raft.
He altered course toward St. Johns. It took only a moment to
dive down over the edge of the city. Men looked up and saw him.
Then he flew out to sea, nearly two thousand miles of it before him.
As he broke his last tenuous connection with the land, he checked
his fuel and his ignition. He was heading toward night.
"To the pilot of an airplane without flares or landing lights, night
has a meaning that no earthbound mortal can fully understand,"
Lindbergh has written. "Once he has left the lighted airways there
are no wayside shelters open to a flyer of the night. He can't park
his plane on a cloud bank to weather out a storm, or heave over a
sea anchor like the sailor and drag along slowly downwind. He's
unable to control his speed like the driver of a motorcar in fog. He
has to keep his craft hurtling through air no matter how black the
sky or blinding the storm. To land without sight is to crash."

Now he was committed to the night and to the sea. After an hour
he had to climb to get above fog. Then a storm began developing
and he had to climb higher to get over it. He was at 10,500 feet.
Suddenly he noticed how cold it was inside the plane, and this
warned him through the haze of sleep that there was danger
outside. Ice— ice that could deform the airy shape of a wing, that
could overload the plane and force it into the sea— ice was forming.
He could see some of it by the light of his flashlight. He was inside
an ice cloud, one of those terrible, soft things that would not cause a
plane to crash immediately but were an all-embracing threat. "They
enmesh intruders," he wrote. "They're barbaric in their methods.
They toss you in their inner turbulence, lash you with their hailstones, poison you with freezing mist. It would be a slow death, a
death one would have long minutes to struggle against
climbing, stalling, diving, whipping, always downward toward the
.

.

.

sea.

He wanted to panic, to turn and dive, but he kept himself from
moving too precipitately. The Spirit of St. Louis was an extraordi-

114

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

narily sensitive airplane that required careful flying every minute; it

wasn't an old Standard that could be kicked around in the sky. He

maneuvered his way out of the ice clouds and back into clear air.
The ice was not so thick on the plane's wires now.
Lindbergh had had removable glass windows built for the plane,
windows he could insert from inside the cockpit. At one point
during the flight he considered using them to keep out the cold, and
also to add streamlining and extra range to the ship. But they would
cut him off from sensory contact with the passing air; they would
dull the sound of the engine; they would keep the cabin warm— and
that might only make sleep irresistible. He had sacrificed several
miles' worth of gasoline for the windows, which weighed about
three or four pounds, but he never put them in.
Sleep continued to threaten him. He had never known such a
terrible urgency to close his eyes, to drift off. He began to doubt
that he could stay awake to complete the flight; sleep and ice
seemed determined to kill him. He shook himself. He stuck his
mittened hand out the window to deflect cold air into his face. He
slapped himself, hard, and didn't feel a thing. He noticed his head
was hurting; his altitude, still over 10,000 feet, had allowed the air
cushion on which he was sitting to expand just enough to force his
helmet against the top of the cockpit.

By fighting every second— and probably by occasionally falling
asleep for a few seconds, or nearly— Lindbergh thrashed his way in

the twilight zone of sleep. The air became clearer, then warmer. He

could see the moon. Below, he knew, must be the Gulf Stream; if he

was forced down into that body of water, he could live for a long
time.

And then, during the seventeenth hour of flight, he passed the
third of his three checkpoints, the point of no return. Before he had

been flying away from safety; now he was moving toward it with
every passing second.

He had now gone about forty-eight hours without sleep, and the
need to close his eyes became the most demanding thing in his life.
He actually pried his eyes open with his fingers, but they closed
anyhow. His body was in revolt. "Every cell of my being is on strike,
sulking in protest, claiming that nothing, nothing in the world,
could be worth such effort; that man's tissue was never made for

such abuse." He had to stay awake to live; he knew that, and he

a

NEW YORK-PARIS

115

kept telling himself that basic truth over and over. He was still
filling out his log, hour by hour. At the end of eighteen hours he

knew he was approximately halfway to Paris. He had planned on a
and some water— but he wasn't
hungry enough to eat, and he didn't want any more water. ( He had
private celebration— a sandwich

taken a couple of sips since the start of the flight.)
flying like

an automaton,

dull,

spiritless,

He just kept

yet always sensitive to

danger. If his turn indicator or his air-speed indicator showed a

change, he reacted instantly.

For the next five hours he battled sleep and fog; he was so tired
and so often socked in that he couldn't take proper readings, and so
neglected his log. Now he kept a record only of the hours of fuel
consumed from the various tanks. The sun rose, but the usual
morning arousal failed to take place within him. He was flying in a
stupor, wasting fuel

by not properly setting his mixture and by

allowing the engine to turn over faster than necessary. After some

hours he saw the sea and could tell from the direction of the spume
that a strong wind was blowing, a
tail

wind that was helping him—

wind. But sleep still threatened. How could he keep on flying

for another ten hours? How could he navigate to find his landfalls?
"But the alternative is death and failure," he thought. "Death!
For the first time in my life, I doubt my ability to endure."
His body was suffering from lack of oxygen. He thrust his head

out of the window and took great gulps of air. That helped, but he
still

wanted sleep. He fought the fog in his brain, he fought the

plane; he was fighting to stay alive. And then, as though he were
getting over an acute illness, for no discernible reason he began to
feel

alert

again.

His strength returned.

His eyes

stayed

open

without an effort. He could see and feel and smell. He looked at his
watch. It was just about twenty-four hours since he had started out

and he was well into his third sleepless day. Somehow he had flown
past the need for sleep, just as he had slipped through clouds. The
world was suddenly new and bright.
With his head clear, he began planning ahead. He was totally
unsure of his position. He might have drifted hundreds of miles off
course during his hours of drowsiness; if he had, and his error was
to the south, he might have to fly an additional thousand miles over
ocean to reach land. Should he, then, throttle down to save fuel? On
the other hand, if he was headed toward Ireland, as he thought, and

116

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

he slowed down, he might not get there before dark. Once again it
was his philosophy of risk that made the choice. "If security were
my prime motive," he thought, "I'd never have begun this flight at
all." Security demanded that he slow down and conserve fuel;
instead, he speeded up the engine, gave it a richer mixture, and saw
the air-speed indicator rise, by seven miles an hour, to an even
hundred.

During his battle with sleep, he had been the prey of hallucinatory visions. He recalled his childhood, his youth; he thought he saw

dragons; he thought he saw islands in the middle of the sea. Now he

did see something, and it was real— porpoises. He wasn't knowledgeable enough about sea life to know whether this meant he was
close to land or not.

But when during the twenty-sixth hour of flight he sighted a sea
bird, he was reasonably sure he was approaching land. Birds could

Then supposition merged
when he saw some fishing boats down below. This
was the most exciting moment of the flight, he said later.
rest on waves, but they nested on shore.

into certainty

In the past, Lindbergh had been able to talk to people on the
ground by flying low and throttling back on his engine. He tried this
with a fishing boat. But when he circled, shouting, "Which
way is Ireland?" nobody even came out on deck. He had no idea of
how far off course he might be; he had only his compasses to guide
him, and they had not been reliable during the night. He circled
another boat, shouting. This time a man stuck his head out of a
porthole, but he only gawked; he never answered. He didn't even
point.

At last Lindbergh gave up in disgust. He had wasted precious
minutes of fuel and daylight trying to get the uncommunicative
fishermen on deck. He headed eastward.
Within the hour ( the twenty-seventh of the flight ) he thought he

saw land. It had to be Ireland, even though it was much too early to
be this close. As he drew nearer, he could see the high mountains,
too high for Brittany or Cornwall, and the fields; they were much
greener than one would find in Scotland. It had to be Ireland. It
was. He was more than two hours ahead of schedule; that tail wind
had pushed him a couple of hundred miles nearer. He flew over a
village. It was beautiful. Everything was beautiful. People streamed

NEW YORK-PARIS

117

into the streets, waving, waving. He felt he had returned to life, to
earth.

He arrived over the Irish coast at a point only three miles off his
course—Valentia and Dingle Bay. He had figured he might make
it

within fifty miles. That would have been extremely good dead

reckoning. But three miles! "Before I made this flight I would have
said carelessly that it was luck. Now, luck seems far too trivial a
word, a term to be used only by those who've never seen the curtain
drawn or looked on life from far away."
He had kept his watch—his grandfather's nickel-cased watch— set
at New York time. It was now 11:52 a.m. in New York— of May 21,
the day after he took off. In a few hours he would be in Paris, if all
went well. And all was going well. He tried out his switches; both
sets of spark plugs were firing. He decided to use up all the fuel in
the nose tank to give the plane a heavier tail; this would lessen
chances of nosing over on landing.
Four hours from Paris, he again revved his engine and got up to
an air speed of 110 m.p.h. At this speed he would reach the shore of
France while it was still daylight and give himself an edge in the
event of a forced landing.
For a while he wondered if he shouldn't fly farther than Paris. He
had plenty of gasoline left. Without gauges, but by calculating time,
speed, and distance, he assumed that there was at least enough
gasoline in the plane to fly on to Rome. That would be a feat!
Another seven hundred miles beyond the impossible goal of Paris!
But then he remembered how it had been over Cleveland one
night, when his plane wasn't expected.

He had circled and circled,

not finding the lights of the airport, and had just about given up

hope and decided to search for a field on the outskirts of town when
the airport lights went on. The man on the ground said that of
course they turned the lights off at night when they didn't expect a
plane.

Why should they waste all that electricity? Lindbergh was

afraid the same thing might happen to him if he pushed on beyond
Paris to cities where no one expected him.
It was still daylight when he saw the coast of France. Now Paris
was only a little more than an hour away. He was three hours ahead
of schedule. That would surprise the people, all right! He thought
of what he would do after he arrived. He had no visa; that might be

118

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

a problem. He had to buy a suit; he had only the flying clothes he

was wearing. Maybe he could take his plane on a tour of Europeeven fly on around the world. At the very least, he expected to fly it
home. It would demean the Spirit of St. Louis to return to the
United States on board a ship.
As he passed the 3,500-mile mark, he knew he had broken the
world's record for nonstop airplane flight. In a kind of celebration
he ate a sandwich— his first food in more than thirty-five hours. It
didn't taste very good, but he chewed it down, following each
mouthful with a swig of water. He certainly didn't have to conserve
his supply of water any longer. He crumpled the paper wrapping
and started to throw it out the window. Instead, he stuffed it into
the bag. He didn't want his first contact with France to be litter.
As he angled in toward Paris at 4,000 feet, he thought how
wonderful a plane the Spirit of St. Louis was— "Like a living
creature, gliding along smoothly, happily, as though a successful
flight means as much to it as to me.
We have made this flight
.

.

.

across the ocean, not 7 or it."

Soon he picked up the patterned lights of the Paris streets, the
Tower— he circled it, naturally— then headed northeast
toward Le Bourget. He thought he saw the airport, but it seemed
terribly close to the city, so he flew past to make sure there wasn't
another field farther along. He returned to Le Bourget— it was Le
Bourget, all right— and wondered why they had all those floodlights
lit, but no beacons, no approach lights, no warning lights.
He
banked over the field to get an idea what he was landing in, then
circled lower. The wind sock showed a gentle wind.
He came in lower. He could see what seemed like a lot of
automobiles on a road nearby. What were they doing there? The
plane felt funny; he was coming in as slowly as he dared, almost
stalling, yet he might very well overshoot the field. He was flying
out of the lighted area into unknown, unseen hazards. He sideslipped, held the nose up, finally felt his wheels touch. Should he
stay on the ground and possibly run into a building? Or should he
gun the engine and take off again for another landing? He chose the
earth; the plane rolled more slowly, but it was rolling into darkness.
He couldn't see a thing. At last he could turn, and began to taxi over
toward the hangars. It was 10:22 p.m. Paris time, thirty- three and a
half hours after he had left Roosevelt Field.
Eiffel

NEW YORK-PARIS

119

Le Bourget had been empty a moment before. Now, suddenly, out
of the darkness burst an avalanche, a flood, a torrent of running
figures. People.

They were spreading all over the field; they would

engulf the plane; they might get hurt by the propeller. He cut the
engine, hoping the propeller would not be turning over when they

reached him. The Spirit of St. Louis was resting in the center of
Le Bourget Airport.

9

PARIS AND RETURN

LINDBERGH HAD BEEN AWARE IN NEW YORK THAT HE
had become a celebrity. But he had no idea that his new status
would continue to enlarge.
He did not know how much was being written about him in
Europe, and saw very little of it in the United States. He could not
know that already the hero-making process was irreversibly under way.

When he was sighted over New England or Nova Scotia or over
St. John's,

each incident made a headline and a fresh edition of the

newspapers. The same bits were pouring over the radio, too. Many
recall

how Lindbergh was in everybody's mind, and how they

talked about little else that day.

Then, for eighteen hours, between St. John's and Ireland, because

he took no radio and did not fly over shipping lanes, there was a
total

blackout of news. The world's interest became the world's

concern; almost literally did the inhabitants of America and Europe

hold their breath.
In Yankee Stadium, New York City, the night of May 20, the first
night Lindbergh was in the air, two heavyweights, Jim Maloney
and Jack Sharkey, fought before a crowd of 40,000. "J oe Humphreys, a little announcer with a bow tie and voice of brass," wrote
John Lardner, "arose in the pool of light in the center of the
darkness and called for silence and prayer." Humphreys said
Lindbergh was now 300 miles at sea, past Newfoundland. The
entire place went silent and everybody stood with bared heads.
All along his route and in countries far beyond, men prayed for

Lindbergh.
120

PARIS AND RETURN

121

He was completely unaware of this. In his mind he was still a
kind of tourist, an American without a visa. He had the letters of
introduction from Colonel Roosevelt— taken out of courtesy, to be
sure, but he had the intention of using them. In his pocket was a

$500 bank check to pay his expenses.
When his plane burst out of the sky over Ireland, its sighting
was reported immediately around the world. And each subsequent
sighting, over Plymouth, England, and over Cherbourg, France,

added to what was now a fire of world frenzy.
Lindbergh flew on, occupied with his piloting problems. But on
the ground, in France, people were streaming toward Le B our get
Airport. A young French boy who lived in Maisons-Lafitte, a village
about twenty miles from the airport, took his push-bike and with his
friends started toward Le Bourget. As they moved along the roads,
they ran into increasingly heavy traffic. "Cars, trucks, carts, horses,
bicycles, people walking. It was like during the war," he said. For
the last few miles, there was no use trying to ride the bike. He just
got off and pushed. Outside the airport he put it on the ground with
all the other bikes and went to join the mob, which had by now
become so large nobody could count it— or control it.
'When I circled the aerodrome it did not occur to me that any
connection existed between my arrival and the cars stalled in traffic
on the roads," Lindbergh reported. "When my wheels touched
earth, I had no way of knowing that tens of thousands of men and
women were breaking down fences and flooding past guards."
The French had made elaborate preparations to receive and
protect him. There were many civil police at the airport and then, as
the mob began to gather, a regiment of soldiers was detailed to
Le Bourget. They affixed bayonets to their rifles. But it would have
needed much more of the French Army, better armed than these
soldiers, to restrain the

pent-up emotion of the people. Nobody

knows how many there were— perhaps a hundred thousand, perhaps many more. There is no photograph of the event, for the good
reason that the crowd swept over everything— steel fences, police,
soldiers, and newsmen— in an irresistible surge toward the Spirit of
St. Louis.

When the Times bought Lindbergh's story, Birchall had cabled
Edwin James to "prepare to isolate [Lindbergh]," and had wired
all

ships at sea for any sightings of Lindbergh.

On May 21, James

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

122

deployed his staff around Le Bourget and got off a story telling how
( Later, James
elevated the number to 150,000 "gone insane with joy."
James had thought he had everything organized. There were a

"25,000 pairs of eyes" had watched the plane landing.

car and a chauffeur, a telephone line to New York, stenographers,

photographers.

J.

Carlisle

MacDonald was one of the Times men

assigned to isolate Lindbergh.

As soon as Spirit landed, MacDonald and James lunged across the
MacDonald was six feet from the ship when the propeller
stopped. He waved at Lindbergh, but could not attract his attention.
Immediately, he was hit in the back by a bicycle and knocked down;
he crawled under the plane with James to escape being crushed to
death. They came out under the tail. MacDonald remarked, "I wish
the editor who sent that message had been here to isolate him."
Before Lindbergh could open the plane door, he was surrounded.
He could feel parts of the plane crack; he could hear the fabric
ripping. The machine that had become for him a living creature,
bearing him toward life, was being rent by the mob. "Are there
any mechanics here?" he shouted. Nobody answered. "Does anyone here speak English?"
He opened the door to climb out, but he did not set foot on the
ground. Hands reached and pulled him out; he was spread-eagled
on top of the crowd like a helpless tortoise on its back. His stiff
muscles did not help him. There was real danger that he would be
dropped and crushed to death in his hour of triumph.
He wrote that after finding he was powerless to put his feet on
the ground, "It seemed wisest to relax ... [it became evident
that] the men under me were determined that no matter what
happened to them, I would not fall."
He felt his soft leather helmet being snatched from his head. That
was the work of a couple of French pilots, Detroyat and Delage.
They took the helmet and put it on the head of another American, a
tall man. Someone shouted to the crowd that the other man was
Lindbergh. Then, for the first time in the half hour since he had
landed, Lindbergh was put on the ground. In the darkness, his
flying suit blended inconspicuously with the crowd, and the two
French fliers were able to hustle him into a small Renault automobile. They drove to a hangar and put him in a side room,
dimming the lights so that he could not be readily seen.
field.

PARIS AND RETURN

123

Now that the noise of the crowd was shut out and Lindbergh's
ears had stopped ringing from the incessant exhaust of the engine,

he could hear Detroyat and Delage ask him if he needed a doctor,
or a bed, or anything else. No, he said, but he was worried about
the Spirit of St. Louis. They refused to permit him to go out and
look after the ship, but assured him it would be protected. Then
Lindbergh asked about customs and immigration— he was still a
little uneasy about his lack of a visa. The men only laughed and
joked about that.
Major Pierre Weiss, of the French Air Forces, whose nonstop
distance record (to Persia) Lindbergh had just broken, appeared
and ordered that Lindbergh be taken to the military part of the
airport, about a mile away. The official reception committee, including Ambassador Herrick, was cut off by the mob on the other side
of the field.
It was two hours before Lindbergh met Herrick.

He was immedi-

impressed with the old Ambassador's perceptiveness and
kindness. Herrick welcomed Lindbergh, made sure he was all right,
and then said he was taking him back to the Embassy.

ately

Lindbergh accepted gladly, but insisted on making sure first that
his plane was in a hangar, under guard. The sight of it was almost
enough to make him cry. There were gaping holes in the fabric of
the fuselage, torn out by souvenir hunters; someone had actually
ripped a grease reservoir off the engine. What was worse, the log
that Lindbergh had kept so faithfully had disappeared. It was never

found.

The Ambassador could not be located again

in

the surging

throng, so Lindbergh was taken to Paris by Delage, Detroyat, and

Weiss in the little Renault. Entering the city by some side roads,
they passed the Opera and then drove (possibly up the Champs
Elysees; Lindbergh remembers a "long avenue") to the Etoile. They
stopped near the inner ring of the spacious circle and got out of the
car. Then they walked under the Arc de Triomphe, and Lindbergh
found himself standing with the French pilots, the flame of the
tomb of the Unknown Soldier burning at his feet. The Frenchmen
said they wanted this to be his first stop in Paris.
They reached the American Embassy at 2, Avenue d'lena before

Ambassador Herrick arrived. The official limousine had got stuck in
the huge traffic jam between Le Bourget and the center of the city.

124

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

Someone thoughtfully provided Lindbergh with food. When
Herrick arrived at 2:00 a.m. he went to see Lindbergh immediately,
and asked if he was too tired to see the reporters. Lindbergh said
that he was not too tired, but that he had a contract to tell his story
exclusively to the New York Times.

MacDonald of the Times was still trying to reach Lindbergh; he
never got close to him again at Le Bourget. He drove in to Paris, the
twelve-mile trip taking three hours. He had no idea where Lindbergh might be, and was worried that another paper might reach
him first. He tried the American Embassy.
The building seemed quiet; only a few lights were on. But the
Ambassadors son Parmely Herrick said, "Come on in, Mac. He's
upstairs talking to Father." There were no other reporters in the
Embassy.
In the Ambassador's bedroom, MacDonald saw "a boy of a man"
swathed in the Ambassador's pajamas, much too large for him,
seated on the edge of the bed with a huge sandwich in one hand
and a glass of milk in the other. It was hard to believe that this
youth was the conqueror of the Atlantic.
Edwin James wrote later that when MacDonald told Lindbergh
"we intended to isolate him, [Lindbergh] answered: 'There seem to
have been a million other people with the same idea.'
Lindbergh gave MacDonald a half-hour exclusive interview. It
was two-thirty in the morning, yet MacDonald found Lindbergh
"wide-awake, coherent and most cooperative." When the other reporters arrived, Lindbergh was not going to see them. He said to
MacDonald, "You [the Times] had the faith to back me when not
many others would, so I have faith in you."
"I could barely believe he was true," MacDonald wrote. "In
deference to the world importance of the story, I took it upon
myself to release him from the contract and let the other correspondents talk to him. I never regretted it. Through all the giddy weeks
afterward, when syndicates and movie moguls bid millions for his
story, he remained true to the Times'*
When Lindbergh was asked how much farther he could have
flown, he said, "A thousand, or at least five hundred miles." Some
enterprising reporters got a mechanic at the airfield to drain the

tanks of the Spirit of St. Louis to see how much longer the plane

might have gone on. The mechanic did not know the system for

PARIS AND RETURN

125

draining the plane's five tanks, and found only twenty gallons of
gas. This made a dramatic but inaccurate story. "Actually," Lindbergh says, "eighty-five gallons of gasoline and fourteen and a half
gallons of lubricating oil remained on board after the flight from
New York— enough to have carried the Spirit of St. Louis more than
a thousand miles farther eastward, under existing wind conditions."
"What about you?" the reporters asked. "Could you have flown
on? Weren't you too tired?"
"I could have flown half as far again," Lindbergh said. And he
added, "You know, flying a good airplane doesn't require nearly as

much attention as a motorcar."
Lindbergh's

first

Paris interview

was a remarkable display of

poise, politeness, and good taste, particularly for one in his state of
fatigue. It was 4:15 a.m. before the reporters left him alone and he

could go to sleep. It had been sixty-three hours since he had last
slept.

Thoughtful Ambassador Herrick wired Lindbergh's mother
and well, and sleeping "under Uncle Sam's

that her son was safe
roof."

(The young boy who came to see Lindbergh at Le Bourget left
with the crowd. When he went to get his bicycle, he found it was
stolen. "So I did what anyone else would do— I took somebody
else's," he said. Many years later, he told Lindbergh this story and
Lindbergh grinned and said, "I hope you got a better one.")
There were headlines on the front pages of special editions of the
important newspapers of Europe, such as Aftonbladet, Le Figaro,

and La Prensa. Newspapers all over America bannered Lindbergh's
flight and sold more copies than they ever had before. The staid
New York Times used its three-bank, eight-column, front-page
headline, usually reserved for only the largest international events
like wars and revolutions, to announce Lindbergh's arrival.

Most of

the paper's front page and a good part of its first five inside pages

were devoted to him and his flight.
The Times* reporting was reasonably accurate. But the farther
away from Paris one went, the more fictional were the newspaper
accounts of Lindbergh's arrival. The Chicago Tribune quoted him
as asking, on arrival, "Am I here?" The Denver Post gave it as
"Well, here we are." And the Post said Lindbergh referred to his
cockpit as a "death chamber." "If I had believed that, I would never

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

126

have started on the

flight,"

Lindbergh comments. Since the

re-

porters were all swept away by the mob before they could see him,

they could only have surmised what his first words had been.

Lindbergh woke in Paris about noon on May 22. The courtyard
and the ground floor of the Embassy were filled with nearly three
hundred reporters, photographers, and newsreel cameramen. A
crowd in the street that had started gathering the night before was
chanting "Vive Lindbergh!" It filled the Avenue d'lena. It was so
large, in fact, that Herrick demanded police protection for the
Embassy and got it. Lindbergh breakfasted on grapefruit, oatmeal,
bacon and eggs, toast— and this menu became important news. He
borrowed a blue serge suit from the Ambassadors son, and was
interviewed by Carlisle MacDonald and Edwin L. James, of the
Times, for his by-line story. Then, to satisfy the crowd, he went out
onto the front balcony of the Embassy with Herrick and waved and
smiled. It was his first formal appearance before a large audience.
An unnamed diplomat who witnessed this was later interviewed
by writer Fitzhugh Green. ( Captain Green was asked by Lindbergh
to write up the receptions given to him for Lindbergh's first book,
We.) The diplomat told Green that the people kept on cheering
long after one would have expected their interest to subside. "I
suddenly had a feeling they were applauding mechanically, as if

their attention were rooted on something that fascinated them," the

man said.
"I

glanced up at Lindbergh to see if he was doing anything he

shouldn't do. No, he was just smiling and his ruddy face was alight

with appreciation.
"I looked from Lindbergh to the crowd. Then I realized that
something was going on right before my eyes that I couldn't see.
Lindbergh's personality was reaching out and winning the French
just as surely as his flight had reached out and found their city."
Lindbergh hadn't quite completed all the reminders on his list,
like wiring Ryan, the Vacuum Oil Company, the Wright people,
and the Champion spark-plug manufacturers how well their products had performed. So he sent the wires. He had the idea of flying
to England to use the new transatlantic telephone to call his mother;
however, a special wire had been run to Paris just so that he could

make the call. He spoke to Mrs. Lindbergh from the Embassy
before meeting the press. The call was another infallibly right

PARIS AND RETURN

127

gesture to reassure the world that the boy they were idolizing was
all that he should be.

Probably he was guided by Ambassador Herrick to do some of
the things he did in Paris, like visiting the mother of Nungesser, one

who had been lost. But the way he handled
Mme. Nungesser he
thought her son would be found. And he told French aviators at a
lunch that what Nungesser and Coli had tried to do was much more
of the French pilots

these situations was his own. Lindbergh told

difficult than what he had done; flying from east to west meant buck-

ing head winds all the way. Wherever he went, he won the crowd

with his quick, ready smile, his boyish appearance. Although he was
called Captain Lindbergh, he never

wore anything but

civilian

clothes.

He was often called on to speak. He had only English, but he
used it well. There were a few simple themes; often a speech would
be only a hundred words long. He would talk about FrancoAmerican friendship. He would talk about the future of aviation. If
he mentioned himself, it was usually as "we," which Jimmy Walker,
Mayor of New York, characterized later as an "aeronautical we,"
including the plane. He didn't get much chance to fly, except very
early one morning when he took up a French Army Nieuport and
stunted it over Paris, to the delight of his French colleagues.
There was one medal after another, starting with the Chevalier
Cross of the Legion of Honor, personally given by the President of
France. He lunched with Bleriot, the first man to fly the English
Channel. He visited French heroes of the war, Marshal Foch,
Marshal Joffre.
Ambassador Herrick was a shrewd man, and a man of good will. It
was his intention to try to rebuild the good Franco-American
relations that had been dissipated since the Versailles Treaty and
the Kellogg-Briand Pact. In Lindbergh he found the perfect instrument. At lunch with the French Aero Club Herrick said, "This young
man from out of the west
shows you that the heart of the
United States beats for France."
Lindbergh, the symbol of American good will, was also used by
his government as an unofficial ambassador to Belgium and England.
On Saturday, May 28, Lindbergh went to Le Bourget at 8 a.m.
and spent several hours checking over the Spirit of St. Louis. The
.

.

.

fabric covering of the fuselage, which had been so badly damaged

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

128

by the crowd, had been replaced, and the fuselage itself repaired.

He took off about one o'clock, circled the Eiffel Tower, and dropped
a note of thanks to the French people in the Place de la Concorde.

Then he headed for Brussels. He circled Senlis and Valenciennes en
route. The flight to Evere Aerodrome, Brussels, took two hours and
fifteen minutes. There was a tremendous crowd at the airport.
But Albert, King of Belgium, had given firm orders that Lindbergh must not be mobbed. The reception was warm, but the crowd
was kept under control. Lindbergh was greeted by the Prime Minister of Belgium and taken to the American Embassy, where his host

was the Charge
States).

d'Affaires

(the

Ambassador was

in the

United

He visited with the King and Queen, inspected airplanes,

and the next day (Sunday) was welcomed by the Burgomaster of
M. Max, in the town square.
Later that day, May 29, Lindbergh flew to Croydon Aerodrome in
London in two hours and thirty-five minutes. A crowd nearly as
large as the one that had greeted him at Le Bourget eight days
earlier was gathered. And the crowd was, if anything, less controllable than the Le Bourget mob. No sooner had the Spirit of St.
Brussels,

Louis touched down than they broke through the police barricades

and rushed the plane. Lindbergh was certain that people would be
hurt by the moving ship, or the propeller, so he quickly took off
again. He circled the airport for five minutes while police pushed
and hauled at the mass to try to clear a place where he could land
safely. On the second touchdown, he was able to halt the propeller
just before the mob pelted up to him. Officials of the Royal Air Club
in an automobile managed to reach the Spirit of St. Louis a second

or two ahead of the pack and got Lindbergh safely away before the
first

clutching hands could touch him. But the plane could not be

totally protected; a stabilizer was damaged by the crush and had to

be repaired before Lindbergh could fly the ship again.

As in Paris, the official welcome was canceled by the crowd. Sir
Samuel Hoare, British Secretary for Air, and the American Ambassador, Alanson B. Houghton, were prevented from carrying through
the prepared ceremony. Instead, Lindbergh mounted a control
tower for safety, and snouted a few words to the crowd. Then the
Ambassadors limousine pushed through the crowd and Lindbergh
jumped into it, and they got him away with only one window
broken.

,.

PARIS AND RETURN

129

There was another huge mob outside the American Embassy,
where Lindbergh stayed. That night he dined there with the
Ambassador and some of Herrick's friends. Lindbergh revealed to
the Ambassador his plans after London. He wanted to return to the
United States by air, flying the Spirit of St. Louis eastward across
Europe and Asia to the Bering Strait, thence via Alaska and Canada
back to his starting place at Roosevelt Field. He had been studying
maps and was convinced that the flight was feasible.
However, the Ambassador explained that the United States government had other ideas. President Calvin Coolidge had decided to
send the cruiser Memphis, flagship of the U.S. European Fleet, to
take Lindbergh and his plane back to the United States. Lindbergh
at first objected. It would insult his plane, he said, to carry it back
in a box across the ocean it had so gallantly spanned. The Ambassador reminded Lindbergh that he was a captain in the Reserve, and
that Coolidge was his Commander in Chief— but, of course, returning by ship was not an order, merely advice. Lindbergh got the
point, and gave up his plans to fly around the rest of the world. On
May 31, Spirit was flown to Gosport, England, there to be disassembled, crated, and put aboard the Memphis.
Lindbergh stayed in England until Friday, June 3. During that
time he was constantly feted, met Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin,
the Prince of Wales ( later to be King, and now Duke of Windsor )
King George, and Queen Mary. King George V decorated Lindbergh with the Royal Air Force Cross, given only once before
to Americans ( the crew of the NC ship that first flew the Atlantic )
Sir Samuel Hoare hailed Lindbergh at a luncheon of the Air
Council. The Prince of Wales asked Lindbergh what he was going
to do after he returned to America. "I'm going to keep on flying,"
Lindbergh told him. He was still under contract to the Robertson

company to fly the air mail. He also met Lord and Lady Astor,
attended a Derby, placed a wreath on the tomb of Britain's Un-

known Soldier.
The British Royal Air Force lent him a plane to fly to Paris. He
was grounded by fog for a while at Lympne, England, then
followed a British mailplane to Paris. He stayed there one day, flew
back to Cherbourg on June 4, and boarded the Memphis.

Aboard ship, just as at Pensacola at the time of his crash in the
Canuck, and at San Diego where the Spirit of St. Louis was built,

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

130

Captain Lindbergh got along very well with Navy personnel. Perhaps too well for the Army's comfort. They may have felt that the
Navy was stealing their hero by transporting him home. The
Secretary of War, Dwight F. Davis, jumped Captain Lindbergh
two ranks and made him a full colonel in the United States
Officers' Reserve Corps.
Awaiting Lindbergh, President Coolidge invited Mrs. Evangeline
Lindbergh to come to Washington, D.C., for the reception scheduled on the Memphis s arrival, June 11. Mrs. Lindbergh was asked
to wire the time of her arrival so that she could be met at the train.
But she left Detroit without replying. Instead of going to Washington on Thursday, June 9, she got off the train in Baltimore and spent
the night in a hotel.

It

was only on the next day that she got to

Washington. The President finally located her and had her brought
to the executive mansion. (It was not the White House, which was
being repaired at the time, but a temporary official residence at
Dupont Circle.) Mrs. Lindbergh dined there Friday evening, June
10, with President and Mrs. Coolidge. Also present was Dwight W.
Morrow, at that time a partner in J. P. Morgan & Company. Two
years before, Morrow, a former college classmate of Coolidge's, had
been head of a special Air Board, appointed by Coolidge to
investigate the charges and countercharges about air power made
by Colonel Billy Mitchell. Now Morrow was being considered by
Coolidge for another job, Ambassador to Mexico.

The cruiser Memphis was met at 5 p.m. that same day by four
two Army blimps, and forty airplanes from the Army,
Navy, and Marine Corps as it steamed up Chesapeake Bay.
Aboard one of the destroyers, the Goff, was Dick Blythe. At the
request of Major General Mason M. Patrick, chief of the Army Air
Corps, Blythe had with him a colonel's uniform especially tailored
by the Army for Lindbergh's lanky frame, from measurements in his
destroyers,

War Department file.
Blythe gave Lindbergh the uniform, as requested by General
Patrick.

He put it on, Sam Browne belt, riding boots, silver eagles,

and all. It fitted perfectly.
"Not so bad
for a mail pilot," Lindbergh said, regarding
.

.

.

himself in the mirror.

"You can't wear it," Blythe said.

PARIS AND RETURN

131

"What do you mean I cant wear it?"
"Look, dumbbell," Blythe said. "Up to now you weren't an Army
man, or a Navy man, but a plain civilian with a job, and your way
to make in the world. Nobody could claim you and nobody could
be against you/'
"I was always a Captain in the Air Reserve," Lindbergh said.
"But you went to Paris as a civilian," Blythe replied. "The public
remembers you in that old blue serge suit. You can get a new one,
but you don't wear the uniform. Look, you're aboard a Navy vessel,
yet there isn't a man in the crew who isn't on your side. But suppose
."
you put on an Army uniform
"Why couldn't I wear a Navy overcoat over this?" said Lind.

.

bergh.
"It's

June. People would think that you had gone crazy," Blythe

said.

"I've got to wear the uniform," Lindbergh insisted. "It was made

for me and I've been ordered by

my superior officers to have it on

when I land. I have no choice."
Blythe said quickly, "Besides, it's a lousy fit."

"Where doesn't it fit?" Lindbergh asked.
"It's terrible.

No superior officer can expect you to wear a uniform

that looks so bad."

Lindbergh began to argue; then he stopped suddenly and
grinned. "I got you," he said. "You're right. Give me a hand with
these boots, will you?"

When the sun rose in Washington, on Saturday, June 11, there
was no doubt it would be a hot day. The heat that began to build
over the city had a special quality, a kind of breathlessness. There
was a nervous going to and fro; policemen were busy roping off
streets. People looked skyward as airplanes kept droning back and
forth in unaccustomed numbers. Crowds began to gather early
along Pennsylvania Avenue behind barricades. People looked out of
open windows, craning for the surge of movement that would mean
Lindbergh's arrival. Tension was building, minute by minute.
About ten o'clock the Memphis was sighted off Alexandria, and the
city of Washington suddenly exhaled in a whoop of factory whistles,
automobile horns, church bells, and fire sirens. The din was over-

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

132

powering. Airplanes were now thick in the sky; fifty pursuit planes
darted back and forth over flights of slower bombers. The huge
Los Angeles zigzagged above the cruiser as it moved

dirigible

upriver.

"What do you think of it?" Blythe shouted into Lindbergh's ear as
they stood on the Memphis's bridge.
"I wish I could see it from the air!" Lindbergh yelled back.

There was no lull in the noise, which was amplified by the shouts
of people as the Memphis came closer. At eleven o'clock there was a

fifteen-gun salute for Admiral Burrage, of the

Memphis, and a

twenty-one-gun salute for President Coolidge. The Memphis came
alongside the Navy Yard dock and a gangplank was run up. The

Admiral, in summer full dress, descended and a moment later came
back with Mrs. Lindbergh on his arm. The cheering rose by several
decibels. She went into her son's cabin and the two were left alone
for several minutes.

was wearing the blue serge
Bearing out Blythe's judgment, one of the Washington papers

Finally they appeared. Lindbergh
suit.

(

wrote, "He returned as a plain citizen dressed in the garments of an

everyday man." And the other papers copied.

Crowds in windows and along the shore cheered some more as
they walked down the gangplank. The official reception began.
There were three Cabinet officers (Navy, War, and the Postmaster
General), the former Secretary of State, an Admiral, a Rear Admiral, and Major General Patrick. All perspired in uniforms and silk
hats and cutaways, forming a fine contrast to the simply dressed
Lindberghs.

The crowd was getting restless. They rushed the Marines, who
stood with fixed bayonets. Lindbergh was hustled into an automobile and the parade began.
Slowly it wound its way through Washington, bracketed by
cheering multitudes,

many

of

whom wept openly. Finally the

parade halted at the Washington Monument. There President and
Mrs. Coolidge waited on a huge reviewing stand to greet Lindbergh, surrounded by ambassadors and their families. A photograph
taken from the top of the monument shows people scattered as far
as the lens can see.

Lindbergh and his mother mounted the stand, and Coolidge
came forward and took his hand. "Those closest to Mr. Coolidge say

PARIS AND RETURN

133

that rarely has he shown the unrestrained cordiality he put into that

simple greeting," wrote Fitzhugh Green.

Then the President went to the rostrum, which was lined with
microphones for every radio network in the country and many local
stations, and began an address that was second in length only to his
State of the Union Message to Congress. For the laconic Coolidge,
the number of words he used was as much a measure of his
enthusiasm as the emotional content of his speech, which was
warm. He set Lindbergh's feat in the context of the great achievements of aviation by other Americans, starting with the Wright
brothers. He attributed to Lindbergh "the same story of valor and
victory by a son of the people that shines through every page of
American history." He disposed of Lindbergh's radical father in a
short sentence, gave more attention to Mrs. Lindbergh, "who
dowered her son with her own modesty and charm.
She has
permitted neither money nor fame to interfere with her fidelity to
her duties." He ran through Lindbergh's own career, quoting liberally from the War Department file in which Lindbergh's superiors
.

.

.

had called him "intelligent, industrious, energetic, dependable, purposeful, alert, quick of reaction, serious, deliberate, stable, efficient,
frank, modest, congenial, a man of good moral habits and regular in
all his

business transactions."

"One of the officers," said Coolidge, "expressed his belief that the
young man would successfully complete everything he undertakes/
This reads like a prophecy."

He ended the address by pinning the Distinguished Flying Cross
on Lindbergh's lapel, the first such award ever given.
Lindbergh responded with one of his terse, adroit speeches. In
only about a hundred words, he delivered the simple message that
the people of France and of Europe had nothing but good will for
America.
Fitzhugh Green reports that "Just as when Lincoln finished his
Gettysburg Address his listeners sat stunned at the very brevity of
it, so was there a curious silence immediately following Lindbergh's
utterance. Then came long applause

.

.

.

men and women clapped

until their palms were numb. Again many wept, a radio announcer

whose stock-in-trade was routine emotional appeal broke down and
sobbed."

That night the Lindberghs dined with the Cabinet. Later that

134

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

week he was praised by the National Press Club for reinstating the
realization that "clean living, clean thinking, fair play

and sports-

manship, modesty of speech and manner, faith in a mothers
prayers, have a front-page news value." The Postmaster General,
Harry S. New, presented Lindbergh with the first special air-mail
stamp— the first time a stamp was issued by the United States Post
Office to honor a man still living.
He laid another wreath on still another Unknown Soldier's tomb.
He visited wounded veterans at Walter Reed Hospital. He got the
Cross of Honor of the United States Flag Association from Charles
Evans Hughes, soon to be Chief Justice of the United States Su-

preme Court.
In his acknowledgments, Lindbergh was always modest, pointing

out that his feat was the culmination of twenty years of achievement

by American aviation and industry, that what was needed was more
support for commercial aviation in this country.

On Monday morning, June 13, Lindbergh received a life membership in the National Aeronautic Association at a breakfast meeting at the Hotel Mayflower. Then he went to Boiling Field, where
the Spirit of St. Louis had been reassembled by Army mechanics.
He got into the plane about 7:30 a.m. only to find that the engine

was firing unevenly. It was too risky to fly. So, very reluctantly, he
plane and flew an Army pursuit ship to New York. He was
accompanied by more than twenty other craft. There were celebrations in Baltimore, Wilmington, and Philadelphia as the party flew
left his

over those cities.

Lindbergh arrived at Mitchel Field, New York, near noon. There
he got into an amphibian plane and took off again, landing the ship
in the channel just above the Narrows, between Brooklyn and
Staten Island.

The water sparkled in the June sunshine as he planed to a stop.
Ahead of him stretched a tremendous fleet— probably more than
five hundred boats in all— that covered the water of lower New
York Bay like a moving carpet. There were excursion boats, yachts,
tugs, motorboats, launches, fireboats, dredges. A police launch came
alongside Lindbergh's plane and took him to the Macom, the official

yacht of the Mayor of the City of New York.

Every one of the boats was tooting its whistle or blowing its horn,
and so were the factories of New York. The din was so loud that
conversation was impossible aboard the Macom, where Lindbergh

PARIS AND RETURN

135

stood on top of the pilothouse for the trip to the Battery. Overhead
the air vibrated with the sound of airplane engines. Fireboats lent
their

power streams to the

spectacle, offering

moving arches of

water to the procession.
Lindbergh was interviewed in the Macom's cabin by reporters,
but it was not a successful interview because of the noise and his
refusal to discuss his emotions.

M

When the acorn tied up at the Battery, there were about three
hundred thousand people massed at the waterfront. Lindbergh and
Mayor James J. Walker got into Official Car No. 1, a large touring
car with the top down, and began the slow ride to City Hall,
inching between the crowds.
The police estimated that between three million and four and a
half million people were out in the streets— so many, in fact, that
they issued a special warning to householders not to leave their
homes unguarded. Ticker tape and confetti rained down on the
open car, with the bareheaded Lindbergh and the silk-hatted Mayor
perched on top of the rear seat. New York had never seen anything
like the storm of paper. It far exceeded the Armistice Day celebration that had ended World War I. It cost the city more than sixteen
thousand dollars to clean it up the next day.
At City Hall the parade stopped for the welcoming ceremony.
Walker made a graceful and witty speech kidding Lindbergh about
the letters of introduction he had taken to Paris. "If you have prepared yourself with any letters of introduction to New York City,
they are not necessary," he said. And he pointed out that he himself
was, like Lindbergh, the son of an immigrant. He ended by pinning
the Medal of Valor on Lindbergh's lapel.
Lindbergh replied with a deft, short speech. The receptions at
Le Bourget and again in Brussels and London had been tremendous,
he said, and Washington had been "marvelous/' But after an hour
in New York Lindbergh knew that nothing could outstrip the greeting of that metropolis.

The parade continued uptown, stopping at Madison Square,
Twenty-third Street and Fifth Avenue, where Lindbergh laid a
wreath at the World War memorial. And all along the route there
were people, people who had been standing since eight in the
morning ( it was now well after noon ) to glimpse Lindbergh. At St.
Patrick's Cathedral, Lindbergh descended from his car to meet
Cardinal Hayes.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

136

The parade wound into Central Park, where Governor Alfred E.
Smith pinned another medal on Lindbergh: the New York State
Medal of Honor. New York gave an entire day to Lindbergh in an
outpouring of emotion never equaled, before or since. It was not
until five in the afternoon that the official reception was over and
Lindbergh could meet his mother alone in the apartment of Harry
H. Frazee at 270 Park Avenue, where they were able to rest in some
kind of seclusion for an hour or so.*
That night there was a sumptuous banquet for "eighty of New
York's most prominent people," with Lindbergh as guest of honor,
at the Long Island estate of Clarence Mackay, head of the Postal
Telegraph Company.
There was a dinner for four thousand people at the Hotel
Commodore the next night, a banquet that strained every resource
of that large hostelry. Charles Evans Hughes made the welcoming
speech.

"We measure heroes as we do ships, by their displacement/' he
said. "Colonel Lindbergh has displaced everything.

.

.

.

"He has displaced everything that is petty; that is sordid; that is
vulgar.

.

.

.

"America is fortunate in her heroes; her soul feeds upon their
deeds; her imagination revels in their achievements. There are those
who would rob them of something of their lustre, but no one can
debunk Lindbergh, for there is no bunk about him."
On Wednesday, June 15, Lindbergh had dinner with Rodman
Wanamaker aboard Wanamaker 's yacht. (Wanamaker had tried to
underwrite a transatlantic flight as early as 1914, and was the patron
of Commander Richard E. Byrd and his America. ) Afterward they
attended a light opera, and after that a charity benefit at another
theatre. At 1:30 a.m. Lindbergh left by a back door and was driven
to Mitchel Field. Still wearing his evening clothes, he borrowed a
helmet and flew his Army plane back to Washington. He left at 3:05
a.m., picked up the Spirit of St. Louis at Boiling Field, Washington,
and flew it back to Mitchel Field, arriving at 7:30 a.m. He had
promised to fly Spirit to St. Louis the following day, June 17.
Raymond Orteig had decided to waive the sixty-day waiting pe* Frazee was a friend of Grover Whalen, New York City's official greeter,
and offered his apartment at Whalen's suggestion. The New York City police
had said they could not guarantee Lindbergh's privacy in a hotel. Frazee had
not known Lindbergh and was unconnected with aviation.

PARIS AND RETURN
riod for the Orteig prize.

137

On June 16, he handed Lindbergh a

specially hand-lettered check, carrying the design of the Spirit of

Louis, drawn on the Bryant Park Bank for $25,000. For some
unexplained reason, the check was dated June 17, 1927.

St.

The next morning, Friday, June 17, Lindbergh got up very early
and was driven out to Mitchel Field. At 8:17 a.m. he took off in the
Spirit of St. Louis. He flew over the Wright plant in Paterson, New
Jersey, where his engine had been built. At 11:16 a.m. he was over
Columbus, Ohio. A little later, over Dayton, a flight of thirty Army
pursuit planes rose to escort his plane onward.

He passed over

Indianapolis and Terre Haute, Indiana, and later over St. Elmo and
Scott Field, Illinois.

near

St.

Louis.

At about five o'clock in the afternoon he was

A damp fog hung over the city, so Lindbergh

dropped to a lower altitude and circled St. Louis to give the people
a chance to see "their " plane in the air.
St. Louis had been awaiting him impatiently for nearly four
weeks, ever since he arrived in Paris. They put planes in the air to
welcome him, and the earthbound population was out in full force,
in the streets and on roof tops. When he set down at Lambert Field,
after a flight from New York of nine hours and twenty minutes, he
was protected by soldiers from the mob that had gathered to
welcome him.
He was put up at the house of Harry Knight, a large estate where
he could be sheltered from strangers.
The next day, Saturday, June 18, came the triumphal parade in
the city that had named his plane. St. Louis did itself proud. All
who could get to a window overlooking Washington Avenue, or
stand on the street, were out to welcome the hero they could claim
as their own. There weren't as many people as in New York, of
course, but there were enough, and the enthusiasm and excitement
were just as great as New York's.
On Sunday, June 19, Lindbergh flew his airplane over the old fair
grounds in Forest Park, St. Louis, in an exhibition for his "home
town."

Afterward there was another of the endless receptions. This one
was held at the Knight estate. A small gathering of St. Louis's upper
crust was there. Lindbergh stood around making polite conversation. Then he spied Dick Blythe standing near a newly planted tree.
He walked over casually and said, "Hello, flier," and at the same

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

138

time pushed Blythe on the chest. A guy wire holding the tree was
directly behind Blythe's legs,

and he went over backward on the

lawn.

Blythe picked himself up, laughed with the others, and then
suddenly tackled Lindbergh. As Lindbergh went down, Blythe sat
on his back and shoved his face into the grass, rubbing it back and
forth.

"You dirty bum," he said half angrily. "You will make a dunce out
of me, will you? Well, I'll show you who's the bigger dunce!"

Blythe told Bruno later that every time he pushed Lindbergh's
face into the dirt, a shiver ran down his spine. He had no idea of

how the nation's hero would take being publicly chastised.
As Bruno tells it, "Slim got up, brushed the grass from his knees,
and wiped the moist dirt from his face. Then, without a word or a
glance, he walked into the house, while the company stared at
Blythe in horror.
" I've done it now,' thought Dick. 'This ends us with Lindbergh/

"Up in their room, he found Slim seated on the bed, evidently
expecting him. His face was

still

smeared with dirt, and he was

smiling like a tickled kid.
" 'Say, wasn't that slick the

said.

'I

way we got out of that?' Lindbergh
was so filled up with listening to this hero guff that I was

ready to shout murder.'
Blythe and Lindbergh used the incident as an excuse to spend an
afternoon quietly— one of the very few Lindbergh could get. On
June 22, Lindbergh went to Dayton, Ohio, to see Orville Wright. He
was an overnight guest in the Wright house. "The visit was a sincere
gesture," wrote Marvin W. McFarland, in The Papers of Wilbur and
Orville Wright, "and Orville Wright never forgot it." Lindbergh
wanted the visit to be private, and refused to attend any public
functions in Dayton. However, as soon as word got out that he was
in the Wright house, crowds appeared and began to trample the
shrubbery and lawns around the mansion. In order to save his place
from harm, Orville Wright asked Lindbergh to show himself
in public. Lindbergh obliged with a brief appearance on the balcony, and only then did the mob disperse. After that, Lindbergh
made no more public appearances for several weeks.

10
W

WE'

AFTER MEETING LINDBERGH AT THE TEMPORARY WHITE
House the first day the flier arrived in Washington, Dwight Morrow
telephoned his friend Harry Guggenheim that afternoon in New
York. He said, "Harry, almost everyone in the country is after this

young fellow, trying to exploit him. Isn't there something you and
the Fund [the Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of
Aeronautics] can give him to do, to save him from the wolves?
Something that will give him a chance to catch his breath before he
commits himself to some proposition he might regret?"
Harry Guggenheim had already formed a good impression of
Lindbergh at Curtiss Field before the Paris flight, and had seen
something of what he had been up against. He told Morrow he
would be glad to help.
Offers had begun flooding in on Lindbergh before he took off for
Paris. One man wanted him to sign a motion-picture contract for
two hundred and fifty thousand dollars. Another offered Lindbergh
a fifty-thousand-dollar guarantee to go into vaudeville. The only
offer Lindbergh accepted was the one from the New York Times for
the exclusive rights to his story. He was a little sorry about the way
it worked in the beginning. He would talk to Carlisle MacDonald or
Edwin James for a while and they would write stories over Lindbergh's by-line, which he did not have time to correct or often even
to read before they were cabled to New York.
George Palmer Putnam, the book publisher, asked his friend
Frederick Birchall, of the Times, for help in reaching Lindbergh
with a proposition to write a book about his flight and life. Birchall
aided Putnam in composing the message and in getting it to Lind139

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

140

bergh in Paris via the Times Paris office. Lindbergh says he was
under the impression that the book would be written about him in
the third person, based on interviews, and signed by the real author.
He thought he was only supposed to check the facts and write a
foreword to the book. He undertook the venture, he says, because
he needed the money. He was down to less than $1,500 of the
original $15,000 put up by his backers. He had learned, he told a
friend, that "after the flight a hundred dollars didn't go as far as
ten dollars did before I took off." He needed cash for personal expenses, and he wanted to repay his backers. So he signed a contract
with Putnam's.
World syndication rights to the New York Times stories brought
a great deal of money to the paper. Lindbergh signed a new contract
to keep writing for the Times. The New York office decided that
they did not wish to profit from his feat; they wired publisher
Adolph S. Ochs, then in London, to this effect, and Ochs concurred.
"I heartily approve all net revenue to Lindbergh," he cabled, "plus
generous Times payment."
The Paris office was informed of this decision. Birchall wired
James that the Times was not going to hold Lindbergh to the $5,000
contract but was turning over to him all receipts from his stories,
minus expenses. The Times also paid Lindbergh's backers, as per the
contract. James was told to advance Lindbergh what money he
needed, and that an accounting would be made later. The total
amount that Lindbergh got from the Times for his stories was
$60,000.

Putnam said that Lindbergh made a contract with Carlisle
MacDonald to write his book. MacDonald returned with Lindbergh aboard the Memphis and interviewed him during the voyage.
When he got back to the United States, he moved into Putnam's
house in Rye and was "reinforced with secretaries" by the publisher.
He did "a good job and a quick one," Putnam wrote. "Hot from
MacDonald's typewriter the copy was rushed to our printing plant
in nearby New Rochelle." By Putnam's recollection, the galley
proofs

of

the

ghost-written

book

titled

We— Lindbergh's often

quoted expression— were sent to Lindbergh ten days after he
arrived. The publisher's hurry was understandable. He had orders
on hand for 100,000 copies.
But when Lindbergh saw that the book was written in the first
person singular, he said "no." Putnam said that Lindbergh "found

"

"WE"

141

no fault with what
"changed his mind."

MacDonald had

written."

Simply,

he'd

Lindbergh's recollection is that "For one thing it was inaccurate.
For another ... I didn't want a ghost-written book to come out
over my name."
His impulse was to throw up the job. But Putnam's had all those
orders on hand "[I] rate customers were stalking us with knives,"
Putnam said. So Lindbergh declared he would write it himself. Putnam wanted to know when he would get to it. Lindbergh thought he
might have some time in the autumn— and here it was only June.
"At that juncture high blood pressure pretty nearly overcame us,"

Putnam said.
Lindbergh was picking his way through hundreds of demands on
time, trying to maintain some kind of schedule of public
appearances he felt were obligatory, or helpful to aviation, or both.
Yet he had signed that contract. He promised to turn out a manu-

his

script "at least 40,000 words in length."

Harry Guggenheim and his wife, Carol, hearing of his problem,
invited Lindbergh to stay in their house, Falaise, a Norman-style

mansion of thirty rooms on Sands Point, Long Island, while he
wrote the book. Lindbergh stopped all public appearances and
holed up at the Guggenheim house.
"I didn't know what I
later. "I don't think I

was letting myself in for," Lindbergh said

ever would have gotten it done if they hadn't

offered me that retreat. For the next three weeks it was sometimes
as much as fourteen hours of work a day."

In twenty-one days he turned out 45,000 words about himself and
the

flight.

He wrote in longhand, on legal-size sheets of yellow

paper. In the upper right-hand corner of each page was a number—
the exact number of words on that page. George Palmer Putnam

"One could almost see him counting and saying to himself
with a sigh as he cast up the total, 'Well, that many are out of the
way, praise be!'
Fitzhugh Green was hired by Putnam's to write up for We the
receptions given Lindbergh in Europe and the United States. He
signed his portion of the book, which was written in the third
person and introduced by Lindbergh. Green got $4,000 for his
work.
For a "nonprofessional" book, We is a bravura performance. It is
terse, clear, readable. But it is also inhibited. One reason was that
said,

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

142

Lindbergh was pressed for time. He had agreed to start a good-will
flight to all forty-eight states for the Guggenheim Fund in July, and

that deadline was almost at hand. Often he did not have time to

reread what he had written. There was no time for corrections, or

and easily
was hesitant to dwell on my personal errors and
sensations," he said. And he knew the eyes of the world were on
him. He knew he was a symbol of aviation. If he put in the whole,
unvarnished truth about the dangers and problems in flying, he
might weaken the public image of aviation, which was none too
for inserting nuances of thought. Also, "Being young,

embarrassed,

I

sturdy to start out with.

Lindbergh's first royalty check from We was for $100,000. The
book continued to sell. (MacDonald got $10,000 for his aborted
version.) Later, a collector offered Putnam $30,000 for Lindbergh's

manuscript. Putnam wanted to accept the offer; he thought that he

and Lindbergh ought to split the $30,000. Lindbergh said, "If it's
yours, you do as you wish. It it isn't, I want it." The manuscript
was his, and he got it.
One day, while he was writing We, Lindbergh accepted an
invitation to visit William Randolph Hearst, the most powerful
newspaper publisher in America and a prestigious producer of
movies, in Hearst's apartment in Manhattan. Hearst was also probably the most omnivorous collector of art objects in modern times.
Among the treasures in his apartment was a unique pair of silver
globes, one terrestrial and one celestial, made in 1700. Lindbergh
admired them greatly.
Hearst offered him a contract calling for a payment of $500,000
plus 10 per cent of the profits if Lindbergh would star in a film
about aviation. He made a strong pitch about how much good a
really well-made and accurate motion picture could do for flying
and commercial aviation in the United States.
Harry Guggenheim recollects that Lindbergh was strongly
tempted by this idea. Hearst urged, "Sign it [the contract], and I'll
put it in my safe here. It'll stay there till you have a chance to
talk things over with your friends. Then, if you change your mind,
come back and we'll destroy the contract."
Lindbergh signed and went back to Falaise. He told Guggenheim
about the deal. Also present was Colonel Henry C. Breckinridge, a
lawyer, who was to represent Lindbergh for many years. The two
men said that Hearst was undoubtedly planning to use Lindbergh

"WE"

143

not to promote aviation but to assist the career of an actress named

Marion Davies, who would certainly be co-starred. Hearst was
famous for the sums he poured into pictures starring the pleasant
but untalented Miss Davies, who was his mistress. Lindbergh was
not at all sure that Hearst was insincere about promoting aviation.
The argument raged until three in the morning at the Guggenheim mansion, and finally Lindbergh gave in. The next day he
asked Hearst to make good on his promise to tear up the contract,
and Hearst kept his word.
He did better than that. Shortly thereafter a package arrived for
Lindbergh containing the two silver globes he had admired at
Hearst's apartment. It was a truly priceless present.
The Hearst offer was the only time Lindbergh came close to
commercializing his fame. Almost certainly it was not the money
that tempted him. "In one week if he'd accepted all the jobs,
chances to sign testimonials and endorsements, and other commercial opportunities' presented to him, he could have picked up five
million dollars," Harry Bruno says. Bruno and Blythe were in a
position to know, since they were acting as Lindbergh's personal
representatives. "We spent twenty hours a day saying no," Bruno
adds.

"In my presence," Bruno writes, "Lindbergh declined a vaudeville
contract to

which was attached a $1,000,000 guaranty. A motion

picture offer of $1,000,000 met a like reception. Two lecture bureaus

guaranteed him $100,000 each, in vain. Radio offers passing over my

and all declined, in themselves would have netted him a
sizeable fortune." Lindbergh also turned down many presents, such
as "a home in Flushing Meadows, a live monkey, a fifty- thousanddollar offer for a cigarette endorsement, and several motionpicture contracts— one of which carried a figure of five million
desk,

dollars," according to Esther B. Mueller, of the Missouri Historical

Society.

Putnam said that Lindbergh made nearly $200,000 from We. He
received awards of $25,000 each from the Raymond Orteig Trustees

and the Vacuum Oil Company. Lindbergh had endorsed the
Vacuum oil used in his plane, and the company ran his endorsement
in advertisements; he also gave endorsements to other products he

had bought and used— Champion spark plugs, and the Waterman
fountain pen with which he kept his log.
While Lindbergh was still in Europe, one unnamed tycoon and

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

144

three of his associates sent for Dick Blythe, as Lindbergh's agent,
and asked what Lindbergh was going to do when he got back.
"Well, under his contract with Robertson, he still has to fly the

mail for a while," Blythe told them. "But after that, he'll be free to
accept better offers.

"That won't do," said the tycoon. "He'll be exploited, cheapened,

We want to save him from that."
"How?" asked Blythe.
"We want to endow him," said the rich man. His friends nodded
in agreement. "We four want to settle a million dollars on Lindruined.

bergh so he'll be in a position to refuse all offers that mean exploitation."

"And what do you gentlemen expect in return?" Blythe asked.
"Not a damn thing," said the leader of the group. "We only want
to protect him. The thing can be done completely without publicity."
Blythe thought a minute. 'That's fine of you, gentlemen," he said,
"but the answer is no. Captain Lindbergh won't take money he
hasn't earned.
Even if we advised him to take it." And he remained obdurate, even when the men "hinted at using pressure to
.

.

.

make him take it."
Later, when Lindbergh returned to this country, Blythe told him
of the offer. "Total strangers!" Lindbergh said, somewhat angry at

the thought. "What do they think I am, a philanthropy?"

On another occasion, a group of businessmen ponied up another
million dollars and offered it to Lindbergh on the condition that he

stop flying. "You're the symbol of aviation," they argued, "and if you
keep on flying, sooner or later you'll crash. You'll undo all the good
your flight has done. You might even be killed."
Lindbergh turned down that million dollars, too.
Sometimes money was sent to him without any notice. The Aero
Club of France forwarded 150,000 francs which Lindbergh returned
with the request that the money be distributed among the families
of men who had died in aviation; the sum of 5,350 crowns from the
Stockholm newspaper Svenska Dagbladet was returned to that
paper with the request that the money be used in aviation.
Some of the honors bestowed on Lindbergh have been noted.
There was also the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy as well as
citations and awards from thirty governments. Hardly a city of any
size in the United States, and in many other countries, did not

.

"WE"
strike off some

145

kind of gold medal, or plaque, or special gold key

for Lindbergh.

Including those silver globes from Hearst, Lindbergh received

more than fifteen thousand presents from sixty-nine countries. Their
value was estimated ( conservatively ) at more than $2 million.
He accepted the honors, and the money awards listed, but did
not keep the medals, keys, presents, and other objects of value given
him. All this hoard of treasure he loaned, on request, to the Missouri
Historical Society in St. Louis.

During a ten-day show in 1927,

thousand people visited the exhibition. After that, the
awards, scrolls, and presents were left on permanent loan at the
Society. In the first year, 1927-28, nearly a million and a half people visited the Jefferson Memorial Building, which housed the
eighty

trophies.

Among the presents were a stickpin with a picture of the Spirit of
St.

Louis carved on a single large diamond. A huge pearl was sent

The presents also included such things as a set
of the works of O. Henry (from the citizens of Greensboro, North
Carolina); a mesh bag (for his mother) from Plainfield, Massachusetts; and a chest of silver (Providence, Rhode Island), a dress
sword (Hamburg, Germany), a cane carved from a tree in the
Mark Twain garden (Hartford, Connecticut). There were also
portraits in gold, tapestry, oil, water color, and pen and ink, and
to Mrs. Lindbergh.

carved busts in bronze, silver, ivory, plaster, and soap; Spirit of
Louis models in solid gold and embroidered in silk; books, pil-

St.

lows, jewelry, toilet articles, religious objects, good-luck tokens, a

Gutenberg Bible. There was even a police dog (donor unknown),
lifetime gold passes to all National League baseball games, to
Shubert theatres, automobiles from Franklin, Ford, and Cadillac— La
Salle, a five-seater monoplane ( from Ryan )
In 1935 Lindbergh and his mother drew up and signed an irrevocable deed of gift for the medals, awards, and presents they had
received. Part of the Lindbergh collection is on permanent exhibition [the rest is in storage] at the Jefferson Memorial Building, in
Forest Park, St. Louis, Missouri. In the collection is the handwritten manuscript of We.

11

CELEBRATION

THE CELEBRATION OF LINDBERGH STARTED LIKE THE
feting of other folk heroes of the day— gangsters, marathon dancers,
golf champions, and so on. But it acquired a quality of its own and
far outstripped the others.

A number of factors combined to make

him and his flight more significant, better loved, and longer-lasting
in the public consciousness than other doers and other deeds.
Some, like Lindbergh's appearance, youth, and "lone eagle" status,
have been noted. There were many others— even such accidents as
the weather that broke in his favor. The skies cleared over the Atlantic just in time to permit him to arrive in Paris on a Saturday
evening in May— the perfect hour in the week, in the best season of
the year, to attract a crowd. His airplane had been named by a
home-town booster after a Midwestern United States city, but the
name of that city and the plane also happened to be the name of one
of France's beloved saints. It is probable that most Frenchmen took
this coincidence as a gesture of amity, and reacted accordingly.
Certainly, considering the climate of Franco-American relations at
the time, they would probably not have reacted so warmly to Byrd's
America or to Levine's Columbia as they did to the Spirit of St.
Louis.

Then, there was the era, a time after a war that nobody had
wanted and nobody won— a time of disillusionment, the Lost
Generation, mad speculation in stocks, inflation, a loss of values, a

kind of moral vacuum.
In this atmosphere Lindbergh himself was a refreshing change. It
was not only what he had done, but the way he did it, and even
more the way he behaved afterward. Frederick Lewis Allen, the
146

CELEBRATION
historian, in

147

Only Yesterday sums up this aspect, which was men-

tioned by many of Lindbergh's welcoming orators: "For years the

Romance, chivAmerican people had been spiritually starved.
alry and self-dedication had been debunked; the heroes of history
had been shown to have feet of clay, and the saints of history had
been revealed as people with queer complexes.
Something that
people needed, if they were to live at peace with themselves and
with the world, was missing from their lives. And all at once
Lindbergh provided it. Romance, chivalry, self-dedication—here
they were, embodied in a modern Galahad for a generation which
had forsworn Galahads."
It was as if Lindbergh had been bred for this purpose, like a
prince carefully tutored to meet royal occasions. The tough example
.

.

.

.

.

.

of his father, the stoic attitudes of his mother, the strong fruits of a

and of Lindbergh's years of solitary
prove himself against death and danger— all merged into
the epitome of the hero the world had waited for.

lonely unsettled childhood
fights to

was not just a pasteboard ideal, either, that the twenty-fiveyear-old Lindbergh provided. He stood up to everything that was
demanded of him, and more. If he had been normally venal, if his
head had been easily turned or even turnable, if he had betrayed
any of the weaknesses the world was deploring in itself or had been
missing any of the virtues which the world was looking for in him,
Lindbergh might have been another nine-days' wonder. But he
lasted. He had staying power.
Lindbergh fulfilled more than an emotional need in the American
people. He was also a godsend to newspapers, magazines, and
radio. American newspapers sold 50 per cent more copies than usual
of the issues that carried news of his flight and his receptions.
Fitzhugh Green estimates that, as a result of Lindbergh's flight,
more than 25,000 extra tons of newsprint was used by newspapers
in May and June of 1927. And, of course, radio and magazines
profited, too, from an increased and attentive audience.
In a very real sense, everything Lindbergh was given redounded
It

When the heads of governments in
England, France, and Belgium feted him, they shared his glory.

to the benefit of the giver.

When the Navy brought him home in a warship, the Navy got very
good publicity. The suppliers who gave him presents were only
trying to cash in on his fame.

148

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

Dwight Morrow had foreseen the dangers in exploitation. So had
others. Harry Bruno writes, "Ordinarily our job was to get publicity

for our clients; with Lindbergh it was to shield him from all but the
it.
It proved the biggest and one of the
most difficult tasks we'd ever had. The mail came in literally by
truckloads. Several extra telephone lines had to be installed in our
offices and our hotel apartment, and I kept a night secretary on duty
in the room next to my bedroom."
There were also the social climbers to watch out for. If Lindbergh
had accepted even 10 per cent of the weekend invitations he
received, "he'd have looked like a social climber himself," says
Bruno. There were other dangers. When Lindbergh was invited to a
public banquet, it was often because the sponsors wanted to use his
name as bait to sell expensive tickets and raise money.
A leading theatre in New York once offered Lindbergh a private
midnight show, exclusively for him. Bruno and Blythe went over the
guest list and the names all looked very good. There would also be
plenty of police protection. But Bruno got a tip from a reporter that
the star of the show was going to use the occasion to have herself
photographed with Lindbergh.
The manager of the theatre and the actress were waiting for
Lindbergh in front of the theatre when he arrived with Dick Blythe.
The photographers were also waiting, flash guns poised. Lindbergh
got out of the car, the actress came forward, but just before the
shutters clicked, Dick Blythe stepped casually between Lindbergh
and the lady. Result: she was left with a lot of pictures of herself

inescapable phases of

reaching for Blythe instead of Lindbergh.

The purpose of thwarting this ruse was, of course, to protect
Lindbergh from having his name linked romantically with the
lady— or with any lady not of his own choosing. He was, at the
time, as Bruno says, "the most popular and eligible male in the
world."

Women literally flung themselves at him, sometimes singly, sometimes en masse. He accepted an invitation to a private club on Long
Island, thinking he would be among well-mannered people, but he

found the young matrons and unmarried women panting after him
even harder than the girls in the streets. Once, when he was lunching in a restaurant, a middle-aged woman came over and peered
into his mouth to see what he was eating.

CELEBRATION
It

149

was no accident

that he

was forced

to hide

in

a million-

aire's house to write his book, or to stay in another rich man's house

in St. Louis. It

was only in the mansions of the wealthy that he

could get some privacy.

He could no longer walk anywhere freely; he was mobbed
wherever he went. If he ate in a restaurant, people came up to his
table and asked for his autograph; the knife and fork he used, the
plate, the napkin, all became souvenirs for hunters. He never had
any used personal linen. If he sent anything to a laundry, it didn't
come back; he was always buying new shirts and underwear. If he
checked a hat, it was somehow "lost." If he wrote a bank check, it
would not be cashed but kept as a souvenir for his autograph.
Everything around him had acquired magic.
It was a rare day when he could get a few peaceful hours alone
with a friend. People stiffened when he entered a room. Someone
said it was as if he carried Medusa's head; they all turned to stone.
The spotlight was always on him. Undeniably exciting at first, it
became an increasing irritant. "It blinds you," Lindbergh said.
"After a while, you can't see other people, but they can see you."
Lindbergh has described his predicament as being something like
Midas's. Everything he touched turned to publicity. Midas nearly
starved to death when even his food was transmuted into gold.
Lindbergh lived in an emotional desert withered by his blinding
fame.

Midas survived by renouncing his gift; Lindbergh had no choice
in the matter. His fame had become an entity with a life of its own.

He had beaten the sea and the wind and the night, but he couldn't
overcome his own image. No matter what he did, he only added to
its luster. He wanted to go back into some kind of private life; his
fame wouldn't let him. It dictated his movements, his associates, his
schedules— he was only the pilot of the Spirit of St. Louis now;
something else was telling him where to fly.
He didn't like it; in fact, he hated it. It was something he hadn't
calculated, and couldn't control. In the beginning, he rolled with it.
He smiled, made speeches, posed, made himself available. But after
a while the smile appeared with decreasing frequency, finally
degenerated into a frown. No matter. The photographers pictured
him looking tense and unhappy, and the editors promptly captioned
it Lindbergh's "flying face." He could do no wrong.

12

FORTY-EIGHT-STATE TOUR

HARRY GUGGENHEIM HELPED LINDBERGH FIND A WAY TO
put it all to good use. As he had promised Dwight Morrow, he got
the trustees of the Daniel Guggenheim Fund to give Lindbergh
something to do by underwriting a Lindbergh air tour of all fortyeight states in the Spirit of St. Louis. The purpose was to use
Lindbergh to promote commercial aviation, but this was one way he
wanted to be used.
The tour was set up by the Fund with the cooperation of William
P. MacCracken, Jr., Assistant Secretary for Aeronautics of the U.S.
Department of Commerce. MacCracken delegated Donald E.
Keyhoe, of the Department, to go along as Lindbergh's aide.
Keyhoe was introduced to Lindbergh by Harry Guggenheim at
Mitchel Field in late June or early July, 1927. He was a little
overawed by the prospect of spending several months with the most
famous man in the world.

Guggenheim suggested that they find a map so "the colonel can
indicate in general how he wants us to plan the tour."

The three men gathered in front of a large map of the United
and in ten minutes Lindbergh had pointed out the cities
where he wanted to land. Keyhoe said something about using the
States,

transcontinental air-mail route

through the Rockies. Lindbergh

quickly decided against it. "We'll save time by flying straight over
the mountains," he said.

The Department of Commerce planned to send Keyhoe in one of
their planes ahead of Lindbergh, so that he could check the landing

and the arrangements to restrain the crowds. Lindbergh said
he would like to have his ex-Army buddy and air-mail pilot, Phil
Love, pilot the advance plane, and this was approved.

fields

150

FORTY-EIGHT-STATE TOUR

151

Once Lindbergh's good-will flight was announced, almost every
city in the United States wanted to be included on the schedule.
Keyhoe and the Guggenheim Fund hammered out the itinerary
under a bombardment of phone calls, telegrams, and personal visits
from civic officials.
Keyhoe's second meeting with Lindbergh took place at Falaise
about July 12. Present were Guggenheim, Lindbergh (they had just
returned from fishing), Keyhoe, and Milburn Kusterer, the tour
advance man who was to travel by train. Ivy Lee, the Guggenheim
press agent, was in charge of public relations.

After listening to an outline of the tour, Lindbergh took over the

meeting. "We must remember two things," he said. "First, we must

always be on time— if we have to get up in the middle of the night to
do it. We want to show people that aviation can come through on
time.
Now, the second is about landing at airports. Sometimes
the crowds forget and rush out onto the field.
IVe seen a
propeller kill a man, and I don't intend to have anyone hit by my
.

.

.

.

.

.

ship if I can help it. I'd rather skip a city entirely than take a chance

by landing into a crowd."
Guggenheim backed him on both points and at the same time
made it clear that Lindbergh was in charge of the tour.
Guggenheim sent letters to the mayors of all the cities on the
schedule. He asked them to make no plans that would keep Lindbergh from going to bed at nine o'clock in the evening. "I hope you
will pardon me for being so explicit," Guggenheim wrote, "but
Colonel Lindbergh is making a very difficult trip
with a
.

.

.

.

.

.

view to promoting interest in aviation rather than with a view to
receiving personal plaudits [which he can best accomplish] by limiting his activities." Guggenheim also warned that there was to be no
commercial exploitation, that no admission was to be charged to see
Lindbergh, and that Lindbergh could not accept personal invitations.

The Spirit of St. Louis had been resting at Teterboro Airport, in

New Jersey, since July 4. On July 19 Lindbergh flew it to Mitchel
Field. And the next day it was ready for takeoff on the first hop of

the tour, to Hartford, Connecticut. The Department of Commerce

plane piloted by Phil Love left a half hour early, to give Keyhoe

time to check the Hartford field. But it ran into a rainstorm which
forced a detour, and Love lost more time because of an incorrect
map. Keyhoe and Love made it into Hartford just ahead of Lind-

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

152

bergh. "Don't tell Slim about it," Love begged Keyhoe. "He'll kid

me for the next six months, getting lost on a simple little run like
this."

Hartford was primed for the event. Citizens were straining at the
police barricades. Photographers were poised, the mayor's committee was there ready with a welcome. As in previous Lindbergh

was incessant and very loud. Shouts, whistles,
automobile horns— any way noise could be made,
Hartford made it. Lindbergh rode through it all bareheaded, sitting
atop the rear seat of an open limousine. His face had assumed what
several of his friends described as his "public mask," an impassive,
impersonal regard. Only his eyes moved. They seemed to see all the
visits,

the noise

sirens,

bells,

tiny details of what was happening.

As they passed an orphanage, a small crippled girl stood watching the parade. For a second Lindbergh's expression changed into a
tiny smile, and he saluted with his hand. This caused people to turn

toward the child, and immediately Lindbergh assumed his public
face. But a reporter had seen the incident, and was already writing
it up.

Almost everyone reacted sharply to Lindbergh's appearance, and
Those who had been cheering suddenly became
silent when they saw him. Silent people suddenly began shouting
and cheering, to subside in embarrassed silence as soon as he had
passed. People with cameras ready forgot to snap the shutters, and
each time the motorcar slowed down, those nearby rushed in to try
in different ways.

to shake his hand.

After the parade he was interviewed at the local hotel. A female
reporter asked, "Is it true, Colonel, that girls don't interest you at
all?"

Lindbergh smiled. "If you can show me what that has to do with
aviation, I'll be glad to answer you," he said.

"Then aviation is your only interest?" she kept on.
"That is the purpose of this tour, to promote aviation," Lindbergh
said.

"Are you always so evasive?" she asked.
"I shall be

glad to tell you anything I know— on aviation," he re-

plied. But the girl wasn't interested in aviation.

After the interview, Lindbergh relaxed with Love and Keyhoe

and joked about not having any lunch. Somehow this simple item

FORTY-EIGHT-STATE TOUR

153

had been omitted from their flight schedule. At their future stops,
he said, he wanted lunch ordered the minute they arrived at the
hotel. "Phil, that'll

be your

job,"

he told Love, "you don't have

anything to do but fly, anyway."
Before Love could answer, there was a knock at the door. Keyhoe
suddenly saw a "lightning-like transformation" in Lindbergh. The
easygoing Slim was gone to be replaced with the serious Colonel of
public events.

The man at the door was a local committeeman who had stopped
in to ask what to do with all the presents that had been sent to the

party. Lindbergh looked over the flowers, fruit, and candy and sug-

gested sending them to hospitals and orphanages.

That evening there was a banquet at which Lindbergh said his
few words for aviation. When he returned to the hotel with Keyhoe,
Love was taking a warm shower and singing.
Lindbergh listened, then said, with a gleam in his eye that Keyhoe soon learned to recognize, "We ought to do something about
that. You stand here and be ready to close the door."
He picked up a large pitcher of ice water and went to Love's
room. A few moments later the singing stopped abruptly and
Lindbergh appeared, running, with Love not far behind. Keyhoe
slammed the door just behind Lindbergh and ahead of the sprinting
Love. Lindbergh turned the key and ignored the noises Love was
making outside the door.
The next morning breakfast was brought by no fewer than four
waiters, each wishing to take turns serving Lindbergh. They all
wanted autographs, too. Lindbergh took Keyhoe into the next room
and said he'd be glad to give the men autographs, but felt that it
would save a great deal of time if the waiters left and they waited
on themselves.
The habit of the Lindbergh party of eating breakfast and lunch in
their rooms gave one reporter in another town an important news
story. He reported that, only two hours before leaving for a banquet, Colonel Lindbergh had the following luncheon brought to his
room:
4 club house sandwiches
3 pimento cheese sandwiches
1 potato salad

1 double order potatoes au gratin

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

154

1 order sliced tomatoes
1

pot of coffee

2 bottles of milk
1 fruit salad

1 apple pie a la mode

The headline was "colonel Lindbergh eats hearty meal before
banquet." Of course, there was a great deal of interest in the fact
that Lindbergh ate all that was served to him at the banquet that
night.

At another town a photographer broke away from police surveillance and got directly in front of the Spirit of St. Louis as Lind-

bergh was taxiing the ship across the field. On the ground the ship
was blind toward objects dead ahead by reason of its big gas tank
forward. Lindbergh did not see the man. He opened his throttle to
take the plane over a rise. The whirling metal propeller headed
directly toward the photographer. Someone shouted a warning at
Lindbergh and he cut his switch. The propeller missed the man by
only a couple of inches.

Apparently unaware of how close he had come to death, the
photographer began to laugh. Lindbergh beckoned him over. "Do
you know you just missed being killed?" he asked. He did not raise
his voice. "We're trying hard to complete this tour without hurting
anyone, but if everyone acted as you did we wouldn't get very
far.
Don't ever cross in front of an airplane again."
.

.

.

After that Lindbergh asked Keyhoe to wire Kusterer to tighten
security at all fields.

And he told Keyhoe and Love to make extra

sure that no one got in front of his ship again.

When the party was ready to leave Boston on July 23— on the
trip, to Portland, Maine— they found the field
by fog. The weather report also showed fog beyond

fourth leg of the
closed in
Portland.

An airport official commiserated about losing

a

day on the

schedule so early in the trip. Lindbergh paced up and down, looked

up at the mist, and then ordered his ship rolled out.
"You're going ahead, through all that?" the man asked.
Lindbergh said, "It isn't as bad as it looks.
I've seen worse
days on the mail. The only trouble will be at Portland, if the airport
.

is covered with fog."

.

.

FORTY-EIGHT-STATE TOUR

155

He carried no parachute during the tour. He said, "Parachutes
should not be used except in military work, air mail service, testing,
and experimental flying. I'm better off in the Spirit of St. Louis

without a chute. It would give me less room and less freedom in
handling the ship. And this plane lands so slowly that I could stall
it almost anywhere. Dropping with a chute in the mountains might
be a lot worse than sticking to the ship."
The Spirit of St. Louis had the best contemporary instruments for
blind flying— compass, bank and turn indicator, altimeter, air-speed
meter. But such flying depended much more on the pilot's ability to

grasp quickly what the instruments told him and to make instantaneous adjustments than on the instruments themselves.

Love and Keyhoe urged Lindbergh not to fly, but he insisted that
he had to stick to the schedule or the trip would be worthless. He
took off against their objections, and Spirit instantly disappeared
into the mist. Love waited awhile; then, when the fog seemed to be
lightening, he took the other plane up on a test flight. But while he
was in the air, the fog rolled in thickly and he couldn't land at
Boston. After a while his plane was heard heading away from the
airport. With both planes gone, Keyhoe and Ted Sorenson, the
mechanic on the tour, decided to drive to Portland. They skidded
for hours over the wet roads. When they finally reached Portland,
they found that Love had landed safely in an unbelievably tiny
field, but there was no sign of Lindbergh. "Where's Slim?" Love
asked.

After a few nervous minutes, word came through that Lindbergh
had landed safely at Concord, New Hampshire. Lindbergh got on
the telephone and told Keyhoe that he had reached Portland on
time, but had been unable to land. He had circled over the town for
an hour and a half in fog before heading away. "Tell the people at
Portland I reached the city on time," he said. "I could have landed
about twenty miles from [Portland], but I didn't want to leave the
Spirit of St. Louis unguarded."

The next day was also foggy but he managed to land at Old
Orchard Beach, near Portland. Then, a day late, he went through
with the official ceremonies.
Lindbergh's method of navigation was to lay out all his hops
along straight lines, regardless of such useful trails as rivers and

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

156

railroads. Then he would mark off his route in units of ten miles and

arrange his maps in sequence.

geography you can have," he told
Keyhoe. "You start out from plain country, with nothing but the
map to indicate a mountain range a hundred and fifty miles away.
After a while you start looking for the bluish haze that means the
mountains, and pretty soon it shows up. It's something like sighting
land coming in from the sea. It's always interesting."
He loved to read the map, holding it in one hand and flying the
ship with the other, even when he knew the terrain below.
Lindbergh also had a kind of sixth sense, perhaps developed
during combat training, of what other pilots in nearby ships might
do. Certainly he felt at home enough with Love to play games in the
sky. Once, he saw Love flying the advance plane from the cabin
instead of the pilot's seat by means of cords he had attached to the
controls. Lindbergh maneuvered Spirit in front of the other plane
"It's

the

best

lesson

in

and banked to give it the full backward blast of his

propeller.

Love's plane bucked and jumped in the air, sending baggage flying

and the passengers sprawling. Love clawed his way to the cockpit
just as Lindbergh banked to the other side and caught the ship in a

second backwash of his propeller. Love could only shake his fist.
His ship wasn't fast enough to enable him to give the same sort of
treatment to Lindbergh.

On another occasion, Lindbergh learned that a couple of enterprising newspaper photographers had, contrary to agreement, hired

airplanes to follow him and get pictures of him flying the Spirit of
St. Louis in the air. The other ships had started their engines as he
climbed into his plane. "Let them go ahead," he told Love. ( By this
time on the tour, the "advance" plane was taking off behind
Lindbergh so as not to leave him unprotected on the ground. There

were always last-minute requests that would delay his takeoff if
Keyhoe wasn't around to act as buffer. Once airborne, Lindbergh
would delay over their destination until Love had time to land and
see that he had a clear field.
As Lindbergh's plane rose into the air, the photographers' planes
plowed behind him into his dust cloud. He had barely become
airborne when the photographer in the leading plane stood up in his
cockpit and pointed his camera at Lindbergh. The Spirit of St.
Louis immediately went into a steep climbing turn and was out of

FORTY-EIGHT-STATE TOUR

157

range before the photographer could adjust his focus. By now
airborne themselves, Love and Keyhoe could follow the dogfight as
the two photographers' planes "attacked" and Lindbergh constantly
took evasive action; he sideslipped, dived, turned, climbed, always

outmaneuvering the two ships. At last, after a good fifteen minutes,
the frustrated photographers gave up the chase and their planes
turned back to the airport. The next day Lindbergh asked Keyhoe
to get him the newspapers from the city they had visited the day
before. There were big stories in both papers about the visit but no
new aerial photographs of Lindbergh's plane. Lindbergh grinned as
he gave the papers back to Keyhoe.
Although Lindbergh kept strangers at arm's length, he insisted on
whom he had known before Paris. At one stop, a
sailor attracted his eye by shouting, "Slim!" from the crowd. Many
people used his familiar nickname to claim friendship, but they
were usually trapped by Love or Keyhoe. This time, Lindbergh
instantly recognized the sailor and told Love, "That chap helped me
out at Pensacola several years ago. Be sure that no one turns him
away when he comes up to the rooms."
In Butte, Lindbergh arranged to meet and fly with Shorty Lynch,
who had taken him barnstorming only a few years before. And
all along the route he was open to visits from any of the barnstormers and test pilots— the heart of aviation of the day— of whom
he had been one; he was not only available but really happy to see
them. Professor William A. Williams of the University of Wisconsin history department, whose father was one of this group
of pilots, recalls that "all these men knew Lindbergh, and had
profound respect for his flying and his character. There was a
strong, if intangible, feeling [among them] that Lindbergh would
do great things for flying, and a great satisfaction when he did."
Williams was a small boy the summer of 1927. He recalls that
Lindbergh wired his father, William Carleton Williams, to meet him
in Omaha, Nebraska, on August 30. The elder Williams accepted
and in return asked Lindbergh to fly a bit out of his way between
Des Moines, Iowa, his previous stop, and Omaha, so that young Bill
Williams could see the Spirit of St. Louis. He told Lindbergh how
to recognize the house, which was in Atlantic, Iowa, two blocks
south of the main highway linking Des Moines and Omaha. "So,"
seeing anyone

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

158

Professor Williams wrote recently, "my mother put me out in the
big front yard with a sandwich and some milk, and I waited. It was

a magnificently sunny day. Sure enough, at the almost exact time

my dad, Lindbergh and the Spirit of St. Louis came
winging in over the top of the house; you can imagine my joy, etc.,

he'd told

etc.

It

was a great moment and I treasure it even now in the

retelling/'

Lindbergh managed to see his mother in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and take her for a short flight. A photo by Keyhoe shows the

two of them with wide grins. (Keyhoe had a camera and asked
permission of Lindbergh to take pictures through the trip. Lindbergh readily consented, but usually when Keyhoe went to snap
something, he found part of his camera missing. Once, a fish fell
out of the lens.
In Detroit, at Ford Airport, Lindbergh persuaded Henry Ford,

(and only) airplane ride in the Spirit of St.
Louis. Ford's company had been flying the air mail ( it was the first
private company to do so in the United States ) and, like many other
early airlines, was also manufacturing the planes it flew. But Ford
himself did not trust airplanes. The Ford plane, originally designed
by William B. Stout, was an all-metal monoplane with three Liberty
engines (later redesigned to take the Wright Whirlwinds), known
as "the flying washboard," because of its corrugated metal exterior,
or "the tin goose." It was the early work horse of commercial
aviation, but Ford gave up manufacturing it after a few years
because he couldn't make aviation pay.
Sr.,

to take his first

In one city the police escort on motorcycles revved their engines
often to keep from stalling at slow speed, sending dense clouds of

smoke back over the limousine in which Lindbergh rode. At the end
of that parade his face looked haggard, with dark shadows of soot
under his eyes, and he was photographed this way. He had also
often been photographed after landing with the imprint of the
goggles around his eyes, giving somewhat the same haggard appearance. By the time the tour reached Chicago, on August 13,
MacCracken, of the Department of Commerce, was waiting for
them. It seemed that as a result of the photos there was much
public clamor that the tour should be ended because it was undermining Lindbergh's health.

)

FORTY-EIGHT-STATE TOUR

159

MacCracken said that it would be a good idea for Lindbergh to
and have the results made public. The
checkup showed that he had lost some weight but was otherwise
healthy. The Guggenheim Fund also released a telegram sent by
Mrs. Lindbergh, who had flown with her son only a couple of days
earlier. She said she had found him "in excellent health/'
The last official day of the tour was in Philadelphia, October 22,
1927, more than three months after the start. There Lindbergh laid
a wreath on the Liberty Bell. Some photographers did not catch the
get a physical checkup

gesture, so Lindbergh re-enacted it for them, although he said that

he was no actor.

The party slept in Philadelphia. The next day they flew to Mitchel
New York, in an hour and fifty minutes, by way of Trenton
and New York City. ( Flying over many cities in which they did not
have time to land was part of the tour. Over each such place
Lindbergh would do several slow 180-degree turns to give the
citizenry a chance to see the ship in the air. Then he would drop a
canvas bag with an orange streamer attached. The bag contained a
message, "Aboard 'Spirit of St. Louis' on Tour; Greetings," and
explaining why there was no time for a separate stop, and appealing
for aid to civil aviation. It was signed by Lindbergh, Guggenheim,
Field,

and MacCracken.

The plane touched down in Mitchel Field on October 23, 1927, at
exactly two o'clock in the afternoon, ninety-five days after the tour

had started. In that time, they had flown 22,350 miles and spent
about 260 hours in the air. They had stopped in eighty-two cities
and had spent at least one night in each of the forty-eight states.
They had flown through all kinds of weather, including fog, rain,
and snow, and only once (between Boston and Portland) had they
been delayed.

When the Spirit of St. Louis touched down at Mitchel Field,
Lindbergh posed for the photographers once more. Then he said
goodbye to his buddies and handed a package to Keyhoe, saying,
"Will you take care of these?"
The packages contained gold wrist watches for each of the men,
engraved as souvenirs.
One small by-product of the tour: as requests were constantly
being received by the party to fly over cities that had not been part

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

160

of the original schedule, Lindbergh got the idea of exacting a price
for such visits. He would require that the city paint its name
prominently on some roof top so that it would provide a future trail

mark for cross-country fliers. One city, on only half an hour's notice,
managed to get three such signs painted on tops of buildings, and
Lindbergh, in gratitude, spent extra time showing off the Spirit of
St. Louis in the air over that town.

The trip cost the Guggenheim Fund $68,721.27, of which $50,000
to Lindbergh. Although it had the side effect of further

went

popularizing Lindbergh, the tour probably accomplished what

it

set out to do: to make the country more air-conscious, to get more

support for civil aviation. In 1927, the year of the tour, there were
1,036 landing fields and airports in the United States, of which only

By the end of 1930 there were 1,782 airand 640 had lights. This rapid 72-per-cent growth in the
number of fields could be laid to many factors, but not the least
was the tremendous publicity engendered by the Lindbergh tour.
a handful were lighted.

fields,

Lindbergh's activities also gave a strong boost to air mail. In

September, 1926, the month that he got the idea of flying to Paris,
the U.S. air-mail services carried a total of 79,841 pounds of mail. A

year later, during the September of the Guggenheim tour, American
airlines

(by this time the government had dropped out of the air-

mail business) carried 146,088 pounds of air mail— an 84-per-cent
increase.

13

MEXICO

LINDBERGH FLEW THE Spirit of St. Louis TO TETERBORO,
New Jersey, on October 25, 1927, and left it there. He spent the next

month resting and relaxing.

A man several years Lindbergh's senior recalls meeting him at a
house party on Long Island about this time. The group of young
men and women walked on the beach, which, like all Long Island
North Shore beaches, was full of pebbles. A game started of skipping rocks along the water.
The older man was much chagrined at this turn of events. 'Tve
always admired baseball players and wished I could be one, but all
my life IVe thrown like a girl," he confided to Lindbergh, who told
him he had had the same trouble himself ever since he'd dislocated
his shoulder in a

parachute jump. Lindbergh suggested that they

take a walk instead.

The man remembers this incident vividly forty years later as one
of the most thoughtful things that had ever been done for him.

Lindbergh did not have too much time for this sort of byplay,
however. Dwight Morrow had become Ambassador to Mexico and
was greatly interested in furthering good relations with that
country. He had an idea that Lindbergh could help.
Morrow invited Lindbergh to visit him at his estate, Next Day
Hill, in Englewood, New Jersey. He introduced Lindbergh to his
family, among them his dark-haired, brown-eyed daughter Anne
Spencer Morrow, a sensitive, shy, introspective girl of twenty-one.
The Ambassador talked over an idea he had with Lindbergh:
another good-will flight, this one to Mexico City. It would fit in very
well with Morrow's plans, which, in contrast to earlier attitudes of
161

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

162

the United States toward her southern neighbor, can be summed up

by what Morrow said: "I know what I can do for the Mexicans. I
can like them."
This was Lindbergh's reaction to Morrow's proposal:
After returning from Europe and completing a flying tour of the
United States with the Spirit of St. Louis I wanted to make another longdistance nonstop flight before retiring the plane from use and placing it
in the museum. The plane and engine were practically new and in a number of ways the Spirit of St. Louis was better equipped than any other

plane for long flights. I was particularly interested in the future possibilities
of long distance flying and wanted to make a flight under different conditions than I encountered on the

New York-Paris trip. The flight to Mex-

ico was made during the long December nights, under conditions of storm

and fog during nearly the entire night, and over country varying from
high mountains to low coast line. I wanted to experiment with these conditions and if possible to demonstrate that flying could be made practical
under them.
In addition to the technical side I loved any opportunity to fly, particularly in the Spirit of St. Louis, and I was fascinated with the idea of going

to Mexico City when Mr. Morrow made the suggestion.

Morrow even had an idea of how the trip should be made—like
the Guggenheim tour, in short stages. He did not want any kind of
flight that

would put Lindbergh in danger; certainly Lindbergh's

idea of flying nonstop appalled him.

However, Lindbergh was quite set on a nonstop flight between
Washington, D.C., and Mexico, D.F., as a dramatic demonstration of the close linkage of the two capitals. "You get me the
invitation," he told Morrow, "and I'll take care of the flying."
Morrow, a blunt man himself, appreciated this kind of talk and
there was no further argument. In due course an official invitation
was extended through diplomatic channels by President Plutarco
Elias Calles, of Mexico, to Lindbergh to visit his country.
Lindbergh was getting ready to fly the Spirit of St. Louis from
Teterboro to Washington for the official start of the new tour when
he heard that Dick Blythe was in critical condition in a Brooklyn
hospital. Blythe had had an operation, and instead of rallying had
begun to hemorrhage.
Lindbergh immediately phoned Harry Bruno and asked, "How's
Dick?"

)

MEXICO
"Not so good/' Bruno

163

said.

"He may need a

transfusion.

I'm

just going to the hospital now."

"Pick

me up at Harry Guggenheim's office," Lindbergh said.

"I've got to see Dick before I leave."

Bruno drove Lindbergh to the hospital, and Lindbergh sat by the
bedside kidding Blythe as long as he was permitted.
Outside the room he said to Bruno, "About that transfusion.
... I want you to let me furnish the blood."
"Forget it," Bruno said, pointing out that Lindbergh had an
important appointment in Washington the next day.
"Promise me," Lindbergh said. "Or I don't leave this hospital."
Bruno had to agree. The next day, Lindbergh called to find out
Blythe's condition. Bruno said that the doctors had told him Blythe
was doing well and would not need a transfusion. Lindbergh did
not believe him at first, and made Bruno swear that he was telling
the truth. Only then would he leave.
On December 7, 1927, Lindbergh flew Spirit to Washington. On
the eighth he attended a meeting of the board of regents of the
Smithsonian Institution and was given the Langley Medal by the
chancellor of the Institution, Chief Justice William

Howard Taft.

The medal is one of aviation's highest awards, although it is named
after Samuel Pierpont Langley, a man whose aviation experiments
failed often enough so that his name was for a while ridiculed.
A couple of days later, Lindbergh was invited to be a guest of the
House of Representatives. The House went into recess for the
occasion, and each member filed by the dais to shake Lindbergh's
(

hand. After he left, the representatives passed a bill unanimously to

award Lindbergh the Congressional Medal of Honor, previously
reserved only for military heroes, and sent it on to the Senate. On
Monday, December 12, the Senate passed the same bill unanimously and sent it to President Coolidge to be signed. The medal
would be given to Lindbergh later on.
On December 13, 1927, the Spirit of St. Louis was ready to fly to
Mexico. The nonstop trip would cover 2,100 miles, just a bit more
than half the distance between New York and Paris, so Lindbergh
did not need a full load of gasoline. He carried seventy-five fewer
gallons than on the Paris flight; instead of being overloaded, the
plane was about four hundred pounds under its maximum gross
weight.

164

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

Boiling Field was wet and muddy, as Roosevelt Field had been

when he took off for Paris nearly seven months before. The New
York Times described it as a "hummocky, soggy, puddle-bespattered morass." Even with its lightened load, Spirit did not run easily
or take off quickly into the lowering clouds. But Boiling Field was
large enough for Lindbergh to gain good flying speed. He lifted the
plane and headed toward the southwest.
He flew through clouds until nightfall. By that time he was over
the western mountains of North Carolina. He had added to the
plane's complement of instruments a new and highly sensitive
altimeter. He needed all his skill in navigating by instruments that
night, for he was flying in winter and away from the sun, and so
had many hours of darkness before he would see daylight again.
When dawn did break, he was on course, over Houston, Texas.
Then he followed the Gulf Coast down to Tampico, Mexico. There
he had to climb to get above the fog, and he lost his bearings; he
headed north of his projected course. When the fog cleared below,
he found himself flying over desolate country he couldn't identify
from his map.
"There were numerous railroads below," Lindbergh reported,
"but I could not find corresponding ones marked on my maps. I
read the names of railroad stations. I
climbed then to high altitude and obtained my approximate position
from the direction of watersheds. Later I flew over a city and after
tried

unsuccessfully to

coming down to low altitude could read the words 'Hotel Toluca'
on the side of a building. I found Toluca on my map to be only a
short distance [west] from Mexico City."
He looked at his watch: it was past three o'clock in the afternoon
of December 14, 1927 (one hour earlier by Mexican time).
Lindbergh's estimated time of arrival in Mexico City had been
noon. Ambassador Morrow had taken his family out to Valbuena
Airport at eight-thirty in the morning. By twelve o'clock a crowd of
a hundred and fifty thousand people were gathered to greet Lindbergh, among them President Calles.
There was no sight of Lindbergh, and no word. The plane had
been reported passing over Tampico at nine-fifty that morning, and
after that there was only silence. Morrow, not a very calm man,
began to get extremely anxious. So did almost everybody in Mexico
and the United States. On the Guggenheim tour, Lindbergh had

"

MEXICO
established a reputation for near

165

superhuman promptness. The

feeling was, therefore, that if he was late there could be only one

reason: he had crashed. As the sky remained empty and silent for

two hours past Lindbergh's ETA, the apprehension grew into cerMorrow began to think he had sacrificed Lindbergh for

tainty.

political expediency.

A bright sun overhead did nothing to lighten the massed gloom
below. But suddenly out of the void came word that Lindbergh had

been sighted over Toluca, and the mood changed immediately.
In a few minutes his plane appeared from the west, and the
crowd went wild. Lindbergh followed his usual tactic of flying over
the field before he landed. He managed to set down without being
mobbed, a tribute to the Mexican officials. He had been in the air
for twenty-seven hours and fifteen minutes.
Morrow was overjoyed to see him. Mrs. Morrow wrote in her
diary, "Dwight and Capt. Winslow went over to the plane and
brought him back to the grandstand in our open car. Dwight
brought him to the President, who welcomed him and gave him the
keys of the city. Lindbergh only said 'Thank you very simply. The
throng on the field shouting and screaming with joy was indescribable. As we went to the car our clothes were almost torn off.
Dwight, Constance [a Morrow daughter], Lindbergh, General
Alvarez, and I were in the car, Burke driving. Ceto and two officers
on the running board. Oh! The crowds in the streets on the way to
the Embassy! On trees, on telegraph poles, tops of cars, roofs, even
the towers of the Cathedral. Flowers and confetti were flung every
moment. We took him to the Chancery and to the balcony to wave
to the crowd. He had soup and a bath while the Staff had a buffet
lunch. We all drank to him in champagne. Then he came out and
met all the Staff, telegraphed to his mother, and saw the reporters.
We left him sleeping tonight as we went to the University Club
dinner for Will Rogers.

The Mexican welcome was probably as large and impressive as
any that had gone before, and if emotion could be measured, it
probably topped them all in a sheer outpouring of unrestrained
joy— and relief. And it was not just the charismatic hero the
Mexicans were welcoming; they were opening their hearts to another gesture of amity from their fearsome neighbor to the north.
Lindbergh had risked his life— the late arrival had added some

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

166

gilding— to bring them reassurance that Uncle Sam was not going
to eat them up.

An editorial in the New York World echoed the American reaction: "It is just eleven months since Secretary Kellogg
charged that a Bolshevist government in Mexico threatened the
peace of the United States. The Mexican government ... is the
same [one] with which a new Ambassador has succeeded in
establishing unusually cordial relations.
The flight of Lindbergh follows a series of events which indicate a real shift in
sentiment and a thoroughgoing change in policy." Coolidge issued a
formal statement and Calles hailed Lindbergh's feat as a harbinger
.

.

.

.

.

.

of "closer spiritual and material relations."

Not since the days of the conquistadors had Mexico seen anything like the following week. There were bulls dedicated to Lind-

bergh in the arena, and the presentation of the gold-threaded
capote from the leading torero, Jose Ortiz (the cape is now in the
Lindbergh collection ) There were exhibitions of Mexican folk dancing in his honor, rides through the floating gardens, rodeos staged
for him. He was formally received by the Mexican Chamber of
Deputies. Memories of this triumphal week are preserved in some
of the huge murals in Mexico City buildings, painted by Juan
O'Gorman and other Mexican painters.
In Mexico, Lindbergh was the guest of the Ambassador. He
renewed acquaintance with the Morrow family, including the darkeyed Anne. The Morrows invited Mrs. Lindbergh to come to
Mexico to spend Christmas with them and her son. Mrs. Lindbergh
sent her regrets; she didn't want to interfere with her son's activities.
But the Morrows persisted, and she relented when Henry Ford
offered to have her ferried down in a Ford tri-motor airplane.
(This would not be her first flight in one of these metal monoplanes. After the ride with her son in August, in Grand Rapids,
Michigan, she had been flown back to Detroit in a Ford tri-motor.
Her trip then had been at night, and a reporter had asked Lindbergh if he was worried about his mother's safety. "I don't see why I
should be worried," he said. "She is in a good ship, flying with an
.

experienced

pilot.

She

is

as safe as she

would be in a train or

a motorcar.")

As the plane carrying his mother to Mexico neared Mexico City

MEXICO

167

on December 22, Lindbergh went out to Valbuena Airport and took
He met the Ford in the air out of town
and escorted it back to Valbuena.
This time, landing the Spirit of St. Louis was a problem. Lind-

off in the Spirit of St. Louis.

bergh records in his log: "Three short nights, made to avoid injuring
anyone in crowd which overran field hrs. 15 min." And he goes on
to add, "Took off before end of first and second landing rolls. Then
landed in adjoining field to attract crowd. Took off before first
people reached my plane. Returned to Valbuena Airport and taxied
Spirit of St. Louis into hangar."
The reception given Mrs. Lindbergh was nearly as overwhelming
as that given her son a week before.

After Christmas she was flown back to Detroit, and Lindbergh

took off on his good-will flight to seventeen Latin-American coun-

His first hop lasted seven hours and five minutes and brought
him to Guatemala City, Guatemala. His longest flight was the last
one on the tour, fifteen hours and thirty-five minutes from Havana,
Cuba, to Lambert Field, St. Louis, on February 13, 1928. On this
flight both of his compasses malfunctioned while he was crossing
the Florida Strait at night. Not being able to see any stars through
the heavy haze, he flew nearly three hundred miles off course.
In each of the countries in which he landed, he demonstrated his
friendliness toward the inhabitants and helped to re-establish the
tries.

image of Uncle Sam as a benevolent fellow.
Throughout the 9,000-mile Latin-American tour, except for the
time he got lost over Mexico, Lindbergh always landed safely and
on time, once more demonstrating the reliability of air transportation. There were dramatic moments. There were times when he was
almost forced down. There was a fifteen-minute period between San
Salvador and Honduras when he flew through the roughest air he
had ever encountered, but somehow he always managed to avoid
trouble by skillful flying. In fact, his record of success in country
after country was so consistent that

one managing editor wired a
reporter, "no more unless he crashes." This might have been
prompted by editorial envy. Lindbergh was himself writing up the
trip under an exclusive contract with the New York Times, for a
reported $50,000.

On the ground, he threaded his way through a series of compli-

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

168

cated political situations. He followed protocol, and was cordial
toward the press, although he made it clear to his friends he wanted
to retire to private life as soon as possible.

"The New York-Paris flight is past," Lindbergh told Keyhoe. "I
suppose that it helped aviation by interesting the people, and
probably it had a certain amount of pioneering value. But we need
to go ahead in commercial flying, and we should not live in the past.
I wish that people would just remember my flight to Paris as something that happened in 1927, and then forget about me."

Keyhoe replied that it would be impossible. "You are a public
"and everyone insists on keeping you in the fore-

figure," he said,

ground."
"I can either be in public life, or go back to private life. It might
help aviation if I were to keep on visiting cities and talking about

but I think that there are more important things to be done.
be free to work on some of the scientific problems we
ought to solve
there is still a lot of research to be done."
Coolidge presented him with the Congressional Medal of Honor
flying,

I'd like to

.

.

.

House on March 21, 1928. The ceremony had to be
gone through three times, once in the President's study and twice
more on the lawn for the newsreel cameras. "The first time,"
Lindbergh told Harold Nicolson, the English journalist-historiandiplomat, a few years later, "I was kind of moved by the thing.
After all, I was more or less a kid at the time and it seemed sort of
solemn to be given that thing by the President of the United States.
But when we had to go through the whole damned show again on
the lawn— me standing sideways to the President and looking an
ass— I felt I couldn't stand for it. Coolidge didn't seem to care or
notice. He repeated his speech twice over in just the same words. It
seemed a charade to me."
at the White

The Smithsonian Institution had asked for the Spirit of St. Louis.
made only two more
flights in the plane. The first was around St. Louis on February 14.
The second was from Lambert Field to Boiling Field on April 30,
1928. The 725-mile trip took only four hours and fifty-eight minutes.
There was a strong tail wind.
"At Boiling Field," writes Lindbergh, "the Spirit of St. Louis was
presented to the Smithsonian Institution. It was dismantled, and
reassembled in the museum in Washington, where it now rests, in
After the Latin-American tour, Lindbergh

a

MEXICO

169

permanent exhibition, with the Kitty Hawk biplane of Orville and
Wilbur Wright."
His logs show that the Spirit of St. Louis made 174 flights, the
shortest about 5 minutes, the longest 33 hours, 30 minutes, and 29.8

seconds (to Paris). Its total flying time: 489 hours and 25 minutes.

On April 1, Lindbergh had accepted delivery of a new monoplane, built for him by the Mahoney Aircraft Company.

(

Mahoney

had changed the Ryan company's name to his own. The company
no longer exists. The Ryan Aeronautical Company, of Harbor Drive,
San Diego, is a successor company, started by T. Claude Ryan, the
man who had originally founded Ryan Airlines.) It was a luxury
"brougham" version of the Spirit of St. Louis, with leather seats for
three passengers in the cabin and without the huge gas tank
forward. The engine was a present from the Wright Company—
nickel-plated J-5 Whirlwind. And the plane had an electric selfstarter.

14

A NEW LIFE

IN FEBRUARY, 1925, THE

U.S.

CONGRESS PASSED THE

Kelly bill, which was intended to take the government out of air-

mail transportation and encourage private operators to fly the mail

under government subsidy. Postmaster General Harry S. New realized that this shift would set the pattern for future commercial
aviation in the United States; the air-mail lines would eventually
become the air-passenger lines. So he carefully excluded the air-mail
contract bids of blue-sky promoters and inadequately financed
businessmen from those acceptable to his department. In effect,
New started to move the center of gravity of American aviation
from the gypsy fliers and barnstormers to more business-like types.
It was under New and the Kelly Act that the Robertson Aircraft
Corporation got its contract which gave Lindbergh his job as an airmail pilot.

Now that the government was giving subsidy support to flying,
and with the added inspiration of an easy money market, many
banks and underwriters became interested in the aviation industry.
Soon thereafter, under the stimulus of Lindbergh's Paris flight and
Guggenheim tour, the public became aware that aviation was a
coming thing. Harry Guggenheim released an open letter to investors warning them of "ill-advised, economically unsound aviation
enterprises" and telling them to "be extremely wary of investing
.

.

.

money with unknown promoters

and operation ...

[of the industry]

.

.

.

.

.

.

until the

science, art

have been more thor-

oughly perfected." Nevertheless, in the stock-market boom of 1927-

outpaced the general market average. In 1929
alone, the public poured $400,000,000 into aviation securities. Any

29, aviation stocks

170

.

A NEW LIFE

171

company with the word "air" or "aviation" in its title could sell its
stocks. Even the price of the stock of the Seaboard Air Line— an
East Coast railroad— spurted suddenly when some members of the
investing public decided that with such a name the road must be
truly an airline.

The Daniel Guggenheim Fund played an important part
pushing aviation forward. In 1927 the Fund made a grant

in
to

Western Air Express, one of the private-contract fliers of air mail, to
explore the possibilities of carrying passengers over its route be-

tween Los Angeles and Salt Lake City. Using this grant to buy the
latest-model passenger planes, the company quickly turned a profit

on the passenger business. Within two years it had earned enough
to repay the grant.

As by far the best-known personality in aviation, Lindbergh was
constantly being asked to join various aviation deals and schemes.

Most of those offering deals wanted him as a front man to push
securities or raise money. But Lindbergh had already outlined his
own ground rules. He wished to be private, and he wanted to make
a genuine contribution.

With the help of people like Harry Guggenheim and Colonel
Breckinridge he carefully analyzed the offers and decided to accept
two. Both were with airlines which were well-financed, serious
enterprises. And they did not just want his name; they wanted his
competence. One was Pan American Airways, Inc.; the other Transcontinental Air Transport ( TAT )

Pan American had been formed by Juan Terry Trippe, a young exNavy bomber pilot and graduate of Yale's Sheffield Scientific
School. Trippe had started one of the earliest air-passenger services
in the United States in 1923, an air-taxi line from Long Island using
surplus Navy planes. In 1925, with the backing of a Vanderbilt and
a Whitney, he organized Colonial Air Transport and won a contract
to fly air mail between New York and Boston. But Trippe had
always had his eye on an overseas line.
Partly to offset Scadta, a German owned and operated airline
flying in Colombia ( "too close to the Panama Canal to be ignored,"
according to Major Henry H. Arnold, of the Army Air Service ) and
another German airline, Lufthansa, both of which were seeking to
set up a more extensive network between points in Latin America,
the Caribbean, and the United States, two American companies—
,

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

172

Pan American, Inc., and one called Florida Airways— were competing for an air-mail contract between Havana, Cuba, and Key West,
Florida. At this point Trippe stepped in and bought out the two
American lines. He formed them into Pan American Airways, Inc.,
late in 1927. With the air-mail contract between the United States
and Cuba as his base, he set up passenger service between Miami
and Havana. A lot of the passenger business in those prohibition
days was made up of Americans seeking a place where they could
get a decent drink and do some legal gambling.
Trippe had the idea of expanding this airways overseas, and he
was encouraged by men like Arnold to set up a regular air and
passenger service between the West Indies, Central America, and
Mexico. The Kelly Foreign Air Mail Act of 1928 gave him important
help in the form of higher subsidies for overseas air mail. (The
justification was that overseas carriers had to install their own
airfields, emergency landing fields, beacons, etc., all of which were
being provided by the U.S. government to mainland carriers.
Trippe needed Lindbergh's technical help. So did TAT, which
was owned by a holding company, North American Aviation, run by
Clement M. Keys and backed by Blair and Company, Hayden, Stone
& Company, and General Motors.* Keys, a former Wall Street
Journal reporter, was a demon organizer who started National Air
Transport, which is now part of United Airlines. He started TAT
in 1928 to give coast-to-coast transportation to mail and passengers.
For both companies, TAT and Pan American, Lindbergh undertook to be technical consultant. He could work for both because
the lines were noncompeting. TAT was strictly within the borders of
the United States; Pan American was an overseas carrier. Both
needed someone who knew how to survey air routes, assess weather
conditions, find landing fields, arrange practicable schedules, and
select or help

adapt the necessary aircraft. Lindbergh's training,

experience, and interests fitted him to do exactly this type of work.

He went to work for TAT in May, 1928. His job was to lay out the
route for the company between New York and California. At first
this

service

combined both airplanes and trains. Passengers

left

New York at night by train. In the morning they transferred at
* Two Lindbergh backers, Harold Bixby and Harry Knight, were directors.
And the Wright Aeronautical Corporation was part of the complex.

A NEW LIFE

173

Columbus, Ohio, to a plane which flew through the day to Wichita,
Kansas. At night they were put back on another train to New
Mexico. The following day they arrived in Los Angeles by plane.

The coast-to-coast trip took forty-eight hours. This was twentyfour hours faster than a straight train ride, but it also cost more and

was not popular.
Harry Bruno was press agent for TAT (but no longer for Lindbergh) and says he continued to try to keep Lindbergh's name from
being "unduly exploited." However, it was Bruno who, in a TAT
publicity story, followed the company's name with brackets in which
he wrote ["The Lindbergh Line"].
"The moment Keys saw it his face lit up," reports Bruno. " 'Great!'
he said. We're not using Slim's name in advertising, but we can
through constant repetition of the slogan "The Lindbergh Line" in
news stories get the public to realize what Lindbergh has done for
air transportation.' And 'The Lindbergh Line' became the name of
the service."

Lindbergh was not wholly averse to such identification. TAT
a promotional film showing the ease and comfort of its
relatively quick method of transportation. It is called Coast to Coast
in Forty-eight Hours. It shows well-dressed people climbing aboard
a train and follows them through their various embarkations and
debarkations in passenger planes through the trip to the West
Coast. At one point in the film the airborne camera shows Lindbergh flying a small plane alongside the passenger ship, and the
narrator makes the point that this intrepid pilot is the same man

made

who laid out the airline.
Laying out the TAT line took most of the spring and summer of
1928.* In October, Lindbergh accepted an invitation to hunt at the

Chihuahua ranch of the Mexican Secretary of Agriculture. From
there, he flew to Mexico City on invitation to visit the Morrow
family.

Lindbergh had become friendly with Anne Spencer Morrow since
the time he had met her in Englewood in 1927, before the Mexican
flight.

He saw her several times after that in New York, at the

* In June,

Lindbergh was invited to a reunion of the class of 1924 of the
University of Wisconsin, at Madison. He spent a pleasant afternoon with his
former classmates, the most honored member of the group although he had no
diploma. That lack was made up by the University when they awarded him
an honorary LL.D. at the commencement exercises.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

174

family's

town residence, during the fall of 1927. Her family was

then already in Mexico. Lindbergh began to use an incognito with
the servants when he rang her up on the telephone. They met again
in Mexico in December, on his good-will flight, and saw a good deal
of each other during the two weeks Lindbergh spent as the

Morrows' guest in the Embassy.
In many ways they were opposite. Her interests were literary; she
yearned to be a writer; she had graduated with special honors from
Smith College. Lindbergh, the college dropout, was interested in
mechanical things that went fast, and in science. Where she was
very contemplative he was adventurous. But they shared many
traits of character. They were both shy; both were solitaries; both
had lively, questing minds. They both loved nature. They had very
similar ideas about integrity and service and what one owed to one's
country.

Lindbergh had learned to camouflage his personal interests from
the press. But he couldn't keep them from speculating. Many papers
reported the rumor that Lindbergh was interested in Anne's pretty
sister,

Constance.

By this time, he was beginning to fly around Central America for
Pan American, so his flights to Mexico to see Anne could be made to
seem like business trips. However, after his November visit to the
Morrows, his second in 1928, certain Mexican newspapers began to
hint at a romance. This was promptly denied by the Morrows, but

when Lindbergh continued to fly in and out of Mexico, each time
managing to spend some time with the Morrows, the rumors got
stronger. The Morrows had bought a house in Cuernavaca, and
Lindbergh spent several weeks there walking with Anne and giving
her flying lessons in his Curtiss biplane.

One day in February, 1929, he was flying the mail for Pan
American on his way into Havana— he was behind schedule by
reason of heavy seas and a detour to survey possible landing fields
on a couple of British islands— when the Morrows issued the
following statement:
"Ambassador and Mrs. Morrow have
announced the engagement of their daughter, Anne Spencer
Morrow, to Col. Charles A. Lindbergh."
When Lindbergh landed in Havana, reporters clustered around
to ask him about this one-sentence announcement. "Well," he said

A NEW LIFE

175

blandly, "I see you know all about it.

... I will confine my remarks

to aviation."

In February, 1929, the plane that Lindbergh was flying with his
Such a thing was to be

fiancee in Mexico lost a wheel on takeoff.

expected and coped with by the pilot, but Lindbergh was not alone.
Inside the cabin he packed Anne with cushions before attempting to
land. Then he brought the plane down on one wheel and a wing tip.

After a short run, the wing dipped and the plane nosed over. Anne
was unhurt, but Lindbergh wrenched his shoulder—the same
shoulder he had dislocated in one of his emergency parachute
jumps. Lindbergh said later, "Landing on one wheel and a wing tip

with a lightly loaded plane isn't very dangerous when a pilot is well
acquainted with his craft. It's not likely to cause much of a crackup, and it has been done a great many times. The newspapers
always make it seem a good deal worse than it really is." In Mexico,
there

had been a

full

contingent of press and motion-picture

photographers at the field to shoot Lindbergh's flight, and they
recorded his mishap. But no pictures got out. Mexican Army
personnel at the field confiscated all the film that had been taken of
the incident.

Hidden but steady warfare had started between Lindbergh and
the reporters. He insisted on continuing to confine his cooperation
with the press to matters he considered to be of legitimate public
interest; namely, his flying and business activities. They, of course,
had a public to satisfy and wanted personal news about his emotions, his private life, his relations with Anne and his mother.
These cross-purposes inevitably produced tensions. Yet the personal attitude of reporters was kept well hidden in their accounts of
Lindbergh's activities. Once, when he flew some members of the
Morrow family to Maine in an amphibian plane, Lindbergh had to
put down in Portland for refueling. It so happened that a group of
photographers had gathered at the field to cover another story;
when they saw Lindbergh, they rushed over and wanted interviews
and posed pictures. He refused. He was there to get some gasoline

and continue his flight.
After he took his fuel aboard, the heavily laden plane became
stuck in a mudhole on the runway. The reporters and photographers
would not help him pry the wheels loose. Lindbergh struggled

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

176

alone for a half hour with the ship until he could get it rolling and

according to the late Morris Markey, an eyewitness reBut the papers next day omitted all mention of the delay.
They wrote only that Lindbergh had stopped off for fuel.
It was now nearly two years since the Paris flight, and Lindbergh
was still as sought-after as in the beginning. Only in sequestered
surroundings, where his movements could be shielded, could he
relax with people he knew.
In May, 1929, Mrs. Lindbergh visited the Morrow home in Englewood, New Jersey. There was a big reception on Saturday, May 26.
On Sunday the twenty-seventh the Morrows invited a number of
friends informally by telephone to drop in for a visit, perhaps for
lunch. Dr. Brown, the minister of the church the Morrows attended,
was among those invited. In the middle of the afternoon, Mrs. Morrow began circulating among the guests, asking them into the living
room. When she had got them all there, she suggested that they
take

off,

porter.

stand up when Dr. Brown did.

Everybody obeyed, not

certain exactly

what was happening.

When Dr. Brown stood, they stood, and then a side door opened
and Anne Spencer Morrow entered dressed in a white wedding
dress. It had been made secretly. She was carrying a bouquet of
flowers. She came and stood beside Lindbergh, and the wedding
service was read. Then, without fuss, the young Lindberghs
changed into the clothes they had been wearing before the ceremony and drove off in a car.
They reached a secret hideaway before the reporters found
out that they had been married. It took ten days to track them down
in York Harbor, Maine, where Charles and Anne Lindbergh were
spotted aboard a sailboat. Then reporters and photographers in a
speedboat began circling the Lindbergh craft, while Anne ducked
into the cabin. Lindbergh had to stay on deck. For eight hours they
kept up this harassment, yelling and hurling bottles at the Lindbergh boat. After that, the couple began cruising down the Maine
coast.

Some days later, at Mitchel Field near New York City, Lindbergh
and his wife made their first public appearance as a married couple
in connection with a demonstration of aviation

safety

for

the

Guggenheim Fund. Lindbergh was interviewed afterward, and a

A NEW LIFE

177

reporter asked if it was true that Mrs. Lindbergh was pregnant He
turned pale and did not reply.
Lindbergh's two employers both grew rapidly during these years.

TAT combined with Western Air Express, the company that had
shown such success in passenger air travel, to form Transcontinental
& Western Air Express (TWA) and dropped the rail service from
its schedule. This merger was helped along by Herbert Hoover's
Postmaster General, Walter F. Brown, who used his ample powers

from Congress to promote similar large consolidations of air-mail
and air- transport companies. Brown carried forward the policies of
Harry New, his predecessor, to select only financially powerful
groups as beneficiaries of air-mail contracts. These subsidies went
to a small group of companies, and resulted in the establishment
and expansion of some of today's major American carriers: TWA,
American Airlines, United Airlines, Northwest-Orient- Airlines. By
the time Brown left office in 1932, all these lines plus feeder lines

formed a network of passenger air service from coast to coast in the
United States. And the government, which had paid out $34,500,000
in mail subsidies to help achieve this system, was spending only half
as much in subsidies as it had in the beginning.
Brown favored Pan American as the "chosen instrument" of the
U.S. Post Office overseas. He even got the State Department, under
Secretary Henry L. Stimson, to intervene on Pan Americans behalf
when another U.S. company tried to block one of Trippe's expansion plans in South America. When the government called for bids
on overseas mail contracts, Pan American had already surveyed the
routes and established franchises with the governments involved.
They were able to beat out competition and get air-mail contracts,
even though they sometimes had to bid very low to do so.
In 1929 Pan American had four air-mail contracts. Wall Street
looked on it as a prime investment, calculating that the company
would receive, in government mail subsidies alone, fifty million
dollars during the next ten years. Thus, Trippe and his associates
were able to float a large stock issue to pay for their expansion.
In February, 1929, Lindbergh made the first air-mail flight, two
thousand miles, between Pan Americans Dinner Key seaplane base,
in Miami, and Panama. He made the trip in three days, flying a
Sikorsky S-38, by way of western Cuba, Honduras, and Nicaragua.

178

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

After this, Pan American moved to increase its bases farther south.
By the end of its first three years of operation, Pan American had

completely encircled South America with air service. (The line had
formed a joint company with the Grace shipping and banking
interests to do this.) The company reported at the end of 1929 it
had "forty-four multi-engined transport planes, 1,200 employees,
seventy-one airports on two continents, and twenty-six ground

control radio stations."

With Lindbergh as technical consultant, the company ordered
and launched in October, 1931, the amphibian Sikorsky S-40—
"American Clipper'— then the largest transport ever built in the
United States. Lindbergh made the first regular flight in this plane
that month.
The early scientific atmosphere and attitude of the Land household had planted in Lindbergh a lifetime interest in new ideas and
explorations. Accordingly, he combined his survey of Central
America for Pan American with aerial prospecting for archaeological
sites. It was one of the earliest uses of the airplane as an aid to
archaeology; he could see ancient patterns in the ground from the
air that were not visible to

men below.

Lindbergh told the Carnegie Institute that he had discovered a
ruined Mayan city while flying over Yucatan. At his suggestion,
Carnegie and Pan American jointly financed an expedition to explore the site. Anne went along with the expedition, doing her full
share of the work; Lindbergh never coddled her. Nobody outside
the family knew it, but she really was pregnant.
Their first child, Charles Augustus Lindbergh, Jr., was born on
Anne's twenty-fourth birthday, June 22, 1930, at the Morrow house
in Englewood. Full security was maintained; not even the child's
name was given out for more than two weeks. Then Lindbergh
handed to reporters, whom he had agreed to meet, some snapshots
he had taken of the baby.
As Deac Lyman wrote several years later, the Lindberghs lived in
a state of siege. They could not go out of the house without being
assaulted by curious strangers, reporters, and photographers. They
were not much safer at home. Bribes were offered by newspapers to
household servants to betray family confidences; one reporter tried
to get a job as a servant in the house. Their telephone was tapped.

A NEW LIFE

179

The Lindberghs could not even go to a movie without disguising
themselves.
"It's

all

right for your Prince of

Wales and people

like that,

because they have an organization to protect them," Lindbergh told
Harold Nicolson. "I don t. But then they have to be polite whereas
I don't, so it works out either way."

They rented a farmhouse near Princeton, New Jersey, and moved
there.

Meanwhile, Lindbergh bought a large tract of land of about

four hundred acres, farther north and west, in Hopewell,

New

Jersey, and began putting up a house on the land. He and Anne had
few friends; an occasional visitor would drop in on them. Donald
Keyhoe remarked how Lindbergh straightened up as he entered his
house; how the tenseness that marked his demeanor in public fell
away; how he could laugh easily and play with the baby and the

dog.

Charles A. Lindbergh's marriage into the Morrow family has been
adduced by some critics as one piece of evidence that he had sold

out to the same interests his father had fought. It is true that his
father-in-law, Dwight W. Morrow, had been a partner in J. P.

Morgan & Company for thirteen years. But it is also true that
Morrow's work in the bank, and before that in a large firm of
corporation lawyers, had had the effect of making private utilities

and other powerful groups more responsive to the public interest.
Morrow was not an acquisitive man. He had almost a horror of
wealth; he once woke up and told his wife, "I have had the most
horrible nightmare. ... I dreamt
that we had become rich.
But enormously rich." He was visibly shaken by the experience. Yet
he was so talented that, like C. A. Lindbergh, he made money almost
in spite of himself and he did become very rich. One could not call
him a tycoon, however; his money was not used as power. Nor was
it used to procure more than a modest share of the world's goods.
He was generous with his family. He spent money on travel and he
liked to buy books. He lived very well, but not extravagantly, in
Englewood, New Jersey. He was always more interested in what he
could do for his country than what he could gain for himself. When
President Coolidge, who had been his classmate and friend at
Amherst College, asked him to become Ambassador to Mexico,
a backwater of a job without a future (because Coolidge was not
.

.

.

180

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

going to run again for the Presidency), Morrow talked it over with
Coolidge and then wrote to his partner, J. P. Morgan, who did not
want him to leave the bank. "What in substance he said to me,"
Morrow wrote to Morgan, "was that you were probably right that I
could do more good where I was [in J. P. Morgan & Company] than
in Mexico. He said, however, that that was not the whole story; that
it was not the business of the Government to do good but to prevent
harm, that when Governments tried to do good they generally got
themselves and other people into trouble, that he felt that I should
probably prevent a good deal of harm if I went to Mexico now. The
upshot of it was that I told him he was the President and that if he
thought I ought to go, I was willing to go." And he went. Later, he
was asked to run for the U.S. Senate from New Jersey. He did so,
and won, and in winning he did not compromise his ideas. He was
the first candidate to come out for the repeal of the prohibition
amendment, when his advisers thought such a stand political suicide.
But it was typical of Morrow that he would not pussyfoot; he did
not go for cheap compromises or evasions In short, he was very
much like C. A. Lindbergh. If Charles A. Lindbergh gained from
marrying into the Morrow family, it was not in the financial sense;
his wife had been brought up to the same ideals as he had. His
parents-in-law had the same kind of integrity as the Lindberghs and

the Lands.

15

TO THE ORIENT

JUAN TRTPPE WAS RESTLESSLY PROBING FOR NEW AIR
and Pacific. There could be no doubt,
watching him, that he meant Pan American to encircle the globe.
routes across the Atlantic

In 1931, to help forward this purpose, Lindbergh planned a very
long exploratory flight by way of Canada, Alaska, and Kamchatka
(Soviet Union) to China to survey a possible great-circle air route

from the United States to the Orient. This route had been first
attempted as part of the first round-the-world flight by four Army
biplanes seven years previously. Only three of the four planes got as
far as China in that effort, although the full resources of the Army
and Navy had been behind it, and there had been many skilled pilots
and mechanics aboard those craft.
Now Lindbergh was setting out to fly the same course in a lone
monoplane carrying himself as pilot and his wife as radio operator.
In her chronicle of the trip, North to the Orient, Mrs. Lindbergh
acknowledged the commercial purpose of the flight. But she and her
husband had other, more personal motives for making it— a love of
travel and the thrill of flying to the far and glamorous East which
evoked pictures of Ming porcelains and Marco Polo.
The plane they used had been ordered by Lindbergh the year
before. In 1929, at the Cleveland Air Races, Lindbergh was in the
market for a fast plane. The Lockheed company had been experimenting, not too successfully, with a low-wing monoplane. Lindbergh spoke to the company's designer, Gerard F. Vultee, who
sketched a ship of this type for Lindbergh on a piece of Cleveland
hotel stationery and drew up prehminary specifications.

Lindbergh told them to go ahead and build it. Now, of course, he
had the money, $17,825, to pay for a ship built to his own needs.
181

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

182

He went out to Burbank, California, and, as he had done with the
Spirit of St. Louis, lived at the plant while the ship was being built.

He put on overalls, ran errands, got materials for the plane from
stock,

even brought the mechanics sandwiches. His presence

tracted visitors

at-

and reporters. One day a company executive took

him to lunch at a nearby hot-dog stand. When the man put in an
expense voucher for eighty cents for the meal, the incident made
national headlines.

Also at the plant was Colonel Roscoe Turner, a colorful pilot with

a reputation for fast flying and high living. Turner wore a Sam
Browne belt, riding breeches, highly polished boots, or sometimes
spats

and a derby— in contrast to Lindbergh's dirty overalls. But,

like Lindbergh, he was a practical joker.
It started when Lindbergh wound a copper wire around the
rubber cord stretched across the entrance to the hangar where
his plane was being built. The wire was attached to a booster coil.
One day Turner came for a visit. He picked up the rope to enter the
hangar. Lindbergh flipped a switch sending an electric current
through the wire. Turner's reaction showed that he had a command
of speech as colorful as his costumes.

He got even a few days later by using the same coil. He wired it
to a metal box of nuts

and bolts. Then, when Lindbergh came to

pick out some small part for his plane, Turner closed the switch and

was Lindbergh's turn to jump and howl.
The plane was finished in October, 1929. Its fuselage was of the
modern, monocoque construction; i.e., the shell of plywood was its
own support. It had a 600-horsepower Wright engine, nearly three
times as powerful as the engine in the Spirit of St. Louis. It was also
a ton heavier than Spirit—over 7,000 pounds gross weight— and so
it had to have great lifting power. It had a range of 2,000 miles.
The Lindberghs christened the fast ship— top speed 185 m.p.h —
Sirius after the brightest star in the sky. It was painted black, with
red trim. On April 20, 1930, they took off in the Sirius and flew it to
New York. Including one stop for gas en route, they made it from
it

Glendale, California, to Roosevelt Field,

New York, in fourteen

hours and forty-five minutes. This was a new, but unofficial, transcontinental speed record— more than seven hours faster than Lindbergh's record in Spirit three years earlier.

The ship was later modified to use retractable landing gear, and

TO THE ORIENT

183

even later than that, for the northern flight to the Orient, Lindbergh
decided to have the Sirius equipped with pontoons.
"Of course, well have to use pontoons instead of wheels up
there" Lindbergh told his wife as he studied the map of Canada.

He was explaining how safe the trip would really be.
She wanted to know why pontoons were necessary over land.
He said there were a lot of lakes in northern Canada. "The
Canadian pilots always use seaplanes." Along the coast of Siberia
they would find plenty of sheltered landing spots on water, and if
the worst came to worst and they had to, they could land in the open
sea. For that, they had the rubber boat.
Mrs. Lindbergh pointed out that if they came down in the middle
of the Bering Sea, "it would be quite a long row to Kamchatka."
"We might sail to shore," Lindbergh said, "but otherwise we
wouldn't have much chance of being found without radio."
His wife asked if he could operate a radio.
He had studied radio in the Army, he said, but she would have to
be the radio operator.
The next day he brought home a practice set of buzzers so she
could begin to learn how to send Morse code. When she pressed
the key, "there was a little squeak which brought four dogs and the
baby [Charles, Jr.] scrambling into my room," Mrs. Lindbergh
recalls.

They would need a third-class license to operate the radio for
anything but emergency calls. This meant passing an examination in
sending Morse code at fifteen words a minute, and other tests on
the care and operation of vacuum-tube apparatus and on radio

communications laws and regulations.
"Now, Charles, you know perfectly well that I can't do that," said
Anne Lindbergh. "I never passed an arithmetic examination in my
life. ... I never understood a thing about electricity."
"It's too bad you didn't take more," he said, "but it's not too late;
we'll start tonight. I don't know much about radio; we'll work on it
together."

They sat with clean pads and sharp pencils while their instructor
lectured them.

They would start with the vacuum tube the instructor said.

And after a lengthy explanation of the vacuum tube the instructor
was ready to move on to the next subject.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

184

Anne Lindbergh asked where the vacuum tube was.
The instructor's face mirrored several emotions before he said,
"This is it," as though talking to a child.
It was just like studying French at Smith;

when she missed a few

words, the rest became gibberish. At college her mind used to go

blank and she would hope to get it all explained after class.
This time she used her college textbooks on physics and the
diagrams given by the radio expert, and pieced it all out with her
husband's explanations. At last came the written examination, one
hot day. Anne and Charles Lindbergh went together to take the
test.

She finished first. They both passed, but he got the higher

grade.

Then they went out to the plane in its hangar for the practical test
A radio operator on Long Island listened for

of sending messages.

her signal.

He asked, in code, who was sending. She spelled her name, and
asked if her sending was

He

replied,

"Pretty

—

all right.

good

— just—like—my—wife's — sending."

Although this was a dot-dash conversation, "I could hear the tone
of his voice, the inflection, the accent on the my, the somewhat
querulous, somewhat kindly and amused, somewhat supercilious,
husbandly tone," Anne Lindbergh remembered.
Meanwhile the route was being planned, caches of gasoline were
set out across Canada, a radio of the type Pan American used in its
South American flights was installed in the Sirius.
Lindbergh balanced the possible emergencies they would encounter on the flight— polar landings, ocean landings, forced landings in insect-ridden country— against the weight of the equipment
they could carry to meet these contingencies. For weeks before the
departure, the floor of their room was covered with heaps of
electrically heated flying suits, gloves, helmets, parachutes (they
would take them on this trip), revolvers (a .38 and a .22). The .22
was part of the parachute-jump equipment, which included
matches, Army rations, fishhooks, line, compass, a rubber boat, and
other things needed for a forced landing at sea. Each item was
weighed on the baby's scale. Mrs. Lindbergh read books on nutrients to help select the most essential foods (tomatoes were good
against beri-beri). Lindbergh endlessly added to and subtracted

TO THE ORIENT

185

from lists. He weighed a shotgun: six pounds. And each shell
weighed nearly two ounces. "Think what that would mean in food!"
he said.
"Or shoes" said his wife. She was trying to get along on two
pairs, since they had allowed themselves only eighteen pounds each
of personal luggage— including the suitcase.
She went into a shop and said, "I want a pair of shoes that I can
wear at balls and dinners, and also at teas and receptions, and also
for semisport dresses, and also for bedroom slippers." And, she
added, she would like them to have low heels.
"Try our 'Growing Girl' department" was the clerk's exasperated
reply.

On July 27, 1931, they were ready to begin the long flight. They
were starting from College Point, on Long Island, where they would
take off from Flushing Bay for Washington, D.C., on the first leg.
The weather was dark and steamy when they gathered at the
ramp. Of course, the takeoff was a matter of international importance; every kind of newspaper, most magazines, and all newsreels
and radio stations were represented.
On one side, Lindbergh was answering technical questions. Other
reporters asked Anne Lindbergh about the danger—wasn't she
afraid? And about her clothes, and where she stowed the lunch
boxes. These conventionally feminine questions depressed her, and
she gave noncommittal replies.
As the mechanics rolled the plane into the water, Mrs. Lindbergh
overheard a radio announcer covering the departure. He described
her, on that sweltering day, as being dressed in a leather flying
helmet and leather coat and high leather flying boots.
She looked down at herself in wonderment. She was wearing a
cotton blouse and light sneakers and no helmet. Then she realized
that the man thought he had to describe her in conventional flying
gear because that was what people expected to hear.
On the flight to Washington, Anne Lindbergh tried out the radio.
It didn't work. She wondered what the reporters would write;
perhaps that she didn't do any radio sending because she couldn't
get the coils into place. But her husband passed her a note telling
her to check the fuses— and then passed her a fuse so that she would
know what to look for. Then he wrote:

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

186

"Don't look so gloomy. Probably due to a short circuit when they
installed the compass light— get it fixed at North Beach on our way
to Maine."

They arrived in Washington in an hour and twenty-five minutes,
stayed overnight, and flew back to New York the next day. On July
29 they took off for the Morrow summer home on the island of

North Haven, in Maine, where Charles, Jr., was being cared for by
his grandparents.

Anne Lindbergh had been accustomed to take a

In the past,

sleeper train from New York, then a ferry and a small boat to North

Haven. It had been a long, leisurely overnight trip, during which
one could savor the slow change from New Jersey to Maine, from
school to vacation. But the Sirius cut through all that and brought
her there in a swift, slashing two and a half hours. She really wasn't
ready to greet her parents and her friends; she needed a night in the
familiar Morrow house before she could adjust to being there. They
stayed less than twenty-four hours, and the next day were off in
brilliant sunshine for Ottawa.
That night they dined with experts and discussed the trip. There
were aviators, explorers, meteorologists, surveyors, scientists— the
people who knew just about all there was to know about northern
Canada. And they all argued with Lindbergh.
The big question was: why had he chosen that route?
"Well/' said Lindbergh, "it's the shortest."
But it wasn't much shorter than the route along the Mackenzie
River, which would be much safer. And there were only Hudson's
Bay posts and Mounted Police stations to stay in, they told him.
Lindbergh smiled and said, "Well?"
So they began to tell him about the tremendous tide in Hudson
Bay, which might drag the plane from its mooring or leave it high
and dry
the terrible fogs
and "glass water," which you
couldn't see and which could cause a dangerous crash
and the
magnetic pole that would throw the compass out, and the terrible
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

mosquitoes.

.

.

.

.

.

One man remarked that he wouldn't take his wife over that counLindbergh replied that his wife was crew.
They tried to cajole him into taking another route nearly as wild

try.

and just a bit longer.
Lindbergh looked them in the eye and said distinctly, "I like to

TO THE ORIENT
feel that in flying I can mark one point on the map for

187

my position

and another point for my destination, and that I can draw a straight
line between the two, and follow it. I don't like to deviate for
possible difficulties en route. I'd rather prepare for the difficulties/'
They played their last card. If something happened to Lindbergh,
they couldn't take the responsibility.

"AH right," he snapped. "If we can't take that route we'll go back
and go over Greenland!"
That would be even worse, they said, and at last they began to

come around. They gave him advice about landing places, special
photographic maps of anchorages, wing ropes, special life preservers that couldn't be got anywhere else. And, at last, a word of
encouragement: they knew he would make it.
Lindbergh wasn't that sure of himself. He had from the beginning literally flown in the face of accepted ideas of the possible.
Privately he sometimes wondered, "Is aviation too arrogant?
Sometimes, flying feels too godlike to be attained by man. Sometimes, the world from above seems too beautiful, too wonderful, too
distant for human eyes to see, like a vision at the end of life forming
a bridge to death. Can that be why so many pilots lose their lives?"
.

.

.

However, he kept such self-doubts carefully concealed from other
To the world he offered a set face, masked with firm,
unshakable purpose. He would defend his plans, and he would
justify later the snap decisions he made en route.
They took off from Ottawa the next day, August 1, and made
Moose Factory, Canada, without incident. They continued along
Lindbergh's chosen route to Alaska, managing to avoid all the
threats which the experts had warned of.
Point Barrow, Alaska, the northernmost stop on the trip, was a
disappointment in one respect: the gasoline that was supposed to be
there for the Sirius had not arrived. The ship did carry enough
gasoline to reach the next stop, Nome, but with not much margin
for error. They took off on August 11, and headed south toward
Nome. Although it was the time of year when one might expect to
people.

find almost perpetual daylight in the arctic, astonishingly at eightthirty in the evening the light was beginning to disappear. It was the
first twilight

they had seen in a week. It was so dark in Anne Lind-

bergh's cockpit, in fact, that she could barely read the message her

husband handed her to radio to Nome asking what time it got dark.

188

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

They were short of fuel and would have to land somewhere before
night.

There was no answer from Nome, but a relay station picked up
the message and made contact for them. The station radioed that

Nome was putting out flares on the river for the Lindberghs, and
would light them when the plane was expected. That would be in
an hour and a half, Lindbergh wrote in a message for his wife to
radio back.

They were flying over a mountain range whose deep valleys were
ominously filled with shadow.
Suddenly Lindbergh pulled the plane up into a stall and throttled
back on the engine. It was quiet enough for his wife to hear him
shout, "Tell him there's fog on the mountains ahead. Well land for
the night and come into Nome in the morning."
She had barely enough time to get the message off, then had to
reel in the antenna as Lindbergh was diving toward the water. He
had to get down before the light was completely gone. The plane
whistled seaward and smacked the water lightly. It seemed to run

on for miles before it slowed. It must have been a down-wind
landing; in that dim light any landing was an achievement. When
the plane came to rest on the dark water, the shore was an indistinct
shadow perhaps a half mile away. Lindbergh climbed on a pontoon
and threw out the anchor. It made a great splash, but sank so little
that the rope floated. The water was barely three feet deep. A little
shallower, and he might have wrecked his pontoons. They were at
an inlet called Shishmaref.*
* Many years later a fellow flier and arctic expert, John Grierson, asked
Lindbergh why he hadn't checked sunset time at Nome before he left Barrow.
"That sort of error we made early in our flying careers— but once running out
of daylight we carried the lesson permanently in our pocket," Grierson commented.
Lindbergh attempted to defend himself by categorizing the Shishmaref No. 4
on a list of hazards in which No. 1 represented most danger— danger of deatharid No. 4 the least— risk of unimportant damage to the aircraft. He also
emphasized his belief that danger cannot be totally avoided and may be
increased by too much forethought and preparation. He admitted in the letter
that he had made many mistakes in his life.
Grierson did not let him off so easily, and continued to criticize the landing
as a hangover from Lindbergh's barnstorming habits.
Lindbergh defended himself in a second letter, and capped the debate by
writing the introduction to Grierson's book Challenge to the Poles in which

the correspondence is reproduced.

TO THE ORIENT

189

Later, on August 19, flying south from Petropavlovsk, Kamchatka

(Soviet Union), to Japan the Lindberghs saw fog in the distance.
Suddenly there was fog all around and a storm system up front.
Lindbergh turned north and found fog there, too.
He pushed back the cockpit cover, put on his helmet and goggles,
and raised his seat so he could see better. "Here we are again,"
thought Anne Lindbergh, recognizing by this familiar buckling on
of armor that the fight had begun.
Her mind turned back along a long corridor of fears. There was a
time over the Alleghenies, another over the San Bernardino Mountains, when they had been trapped in fog, and both times there had
been a river that Lindbergh had followed, flying down the valleys
between the towering mountains, until they had found safety. There
was no river out here; they couldn't even see the ocean.
And they couldn't stay up forever. They had already been flying
for six hours. Alongside a peak, the plane nosed downward, "Like a
knife going down the side of a pie tin, between fog and mountain.
Will he say afterward, It was nothing at all?" Mrs. Lindbergh
wondered.
Lindbergh tried to fly his way down the side of the mountain,
alternating between patches of visible flight and areas of blind
flying, with jagged peaks springing at the plane. There were tantalizing glimpses of the sea, but not enough visibility to land. "Oh,
God!—we'll hit the mountain!" Anne Lindbergh thought. Then the
engine roared, and they were climbing again. She caught her breath
and thanked God for the blue sky overhead.
She was watching her husband's face as he sat up high, staring
out of the cockpit. "The wind flattened his face, made the flesh
flabby, the brows prominent— like a skeleton." It forced his mouth
into an expression of fear.
Suddenly she felt the plane nose downward once more and
realized he was going to repeat the maneuver. She made a mental
resolve never to fly again. "Really, it was too much." Lindbergh
flew straight down the side of another mountain, skimming over
bushes and rocks, almost feeling his way toward the water. They
plunged downward, and over a cliff, and the water was there fifty
feet below. There was no choice but to keep on going at the same
angle. The surface of the water appeared only in brief glimpses; it
might disappear altogether. Suddenly the pontoons were spanking

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

190

the tops of waves, very hard.
.

.

.

The ship bounced once

.

.

.

twice

three times. It seemed as though it might break up. At last they

stopped.

Lindbergh turned around and looked at his wife's face. "What's
the matter?" he asked.

"Nothing/' she said. "I'm so happy to be down."

He laughed.
There was the sound of waves on a shore, although the shore line
was invisible. They taxied slowly until they found the edge of an
island in the lee of the wind. Lindbergh cut the engine and dropped
anchor.

They had hit the surface much too fast. The impact had buckled
the spreader bar bracing the two pontoons. Mrs. Lindbergh radioed
their position,

which they reckoned near a Japanese island called

Ketoi. The Japanese radioed an offer to send a ship, but Lindbergh

declined help. However, the ship came anyway, and it was just as
well that it did. For the weather grew stormy, and without help
Lindbergh could not have repaired the spreader bar for takeoff.
Also, the sailors saved the plane from being dashed to pieces when
its anchor rope was accidentally cut against a rock.
There were no fewer than three such forced landings, any one of
which would have made a less skillful pilot crash. But Lindbergh,
except for that hard landing at Ketoi Island, did not damage his
plane during ten thousand miles of flying.
However, he nearly lost his life in another kind of situation. When
he and his wife had landed in Nanking, China, they found the
Yangtze River in flood. Tremendous areas were inundated and cut
off by the rising water. The Lindberghs offered to help. They made
a number of flights for the National Flood Relief Commission, to
map the flooded land. Hundreds of villages were underwater.
People driven out of their houses were living in sampans. There was
no way of reaching them; the water was too shallow for motorboats,
and of course the roads were impassable. The month was September and there was no hope that the waters would subside until
spring at least. It was a heartbreakingly frustrating experience to fly
over these people who were slowly starving or dying in epidemics

and who couldn't be helped.

On one of the survey flights, Lindbergh had seen the walled city
of Hingwa standing above the flood, isolated by at least twenty-five

TO THE ORIENT

191

miles of water from the nearest dry land. The Commission thought

would be a useful place for distributing food and
So Lindbergh loaded his plane with two doctors— one
Chinese, one American— and medicines. Leaving his wife in
Nanking, he flew to Hingwa.
that this city

supplies.

He landed on some flooded fields near the city. The natives in
sampans were fearful of the plane. The Chinese doctor managed to
wave one or two close. He stepped from the plane's pontoons into a
sampan and handed an old woman in the boat a package of
medicines. She sat on it.
Now there were other sampans approaching. They saw the old
woman with the package of medicines. They thought it was food.
They wanted their share. More and more sampans began crowding
against the Sirius. The Chinese doctor's sampan was sunk by people
climbing aboard. They were all making chopstick motions with their
fingers. They were desperate for food. The Chinese doctor moved
into another sampan, and it, too, sank under the weight of the
people who followed him.

The plane was being threatened by the heavy prows

of the

sampans, which could have knocked holes in the pontoons. The
American doctor in the plane asked Lindbergh if he had a gun. "Yes
—a thirty-eight revolver," Lindbergh said, "but someone in that
crowd may have a rifle, probably several— fatal to show a gun in a
crowd like that." By now there were literally hundreds of boats and
thousands of people, sullen, menacing, packed around the plane.
Suddenly a man put his foot on one of the plane's pontoons.
Lindbergh took out the gun which he had been hiding and pointed
it at the man. Men on the other side of the plane moved to board
the craft. Lindbergh whipped the gun back and forth, shooting
from one side to the other, over the heads of the boarders. The
maneuver made each group think that someone on the other side
had been hit; they began to fall back.
The Chinese doctor saw that he could do nothing. He managed to
reach the plane, only to be confronted with the revolver. He stood
up and shouted before Lindbergh recognized him and let him
aboard. Meanwhile the American doctor hauled in the anchor.
Lindbergh in the front cockpit was ready to take off. A single
sampan remained stubbornly in front of the plane.
The wind swung the nose of the plane around so that it just

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

192

Lindbergh pressed the starter and began
starving, food-maddened Chinese who
paddled after them. Soon the plane took off, leaving the desperate
cleared the sampan.

taxiing

away from

the

people far below.

For nearly two weeks Lindbergh put his plane at the service of
Chinese Relief Commission. He moved on to Hankow to
continue mapping flooded areas and flying doctors to emergency
stations. The river was so swift at Hankow that it was dangerous to
anchor the plane. The British aircraft carrier Hermes was berthed
there, and the captain offered to take the Sirius aboard each night
after the day's flights. To do this, he rigged up a special sling,
the

hoisting the seaplane out of the river to the security of the ship.

On the last day, October 2, when the Sirius was being lowered
Lindberghs aboard, a sudden surge in the
current, a sudden shift in the wind caught the plane. The sailors
couldn't release the makeshift sling. The plane's engine was turning
over, and Lindbergh attempted to move the Sirius so there would
be enough slack cable to unhook the sling. But the wind and current
tilted the plane, a wing went underwater, and Lindbergh shouted to
his wife to jump. They both dove clear and swam to safety.
The plane was damaged, but still flyable. Efforts were made to
right it, and this was almost done. But just as the cables were being
tightened, a sampan loaded with Chinese headed straight for the
Sirius, and this time there was nothing to do but let it go under. It
was later taken aboard the Hermes to Shanghai and shipped to the
Lockheed factory in California for repairs. But the Orient flight was
into the river with the

effectively ended there in Hankow.

The Lindberghs would probably not have flown much farther
anyhow. Three days later, they got a telegram from Englewood,
New Jersey. Dwight Morrow had had a stroke on the morning of
October 5, 1931, and died at home that afternoon.

The Orient survey was never made the basis of a Pan American
the company could not get the necessary bases and

air route;

concessions in Japan or the Soviet Union. Instead, with the encouragement of the Navy Department, Pan American developed a
mid-Pacific route

by way of Midway, Wake, and Guam islands,

with a terminus at Manila, in the Philippines. As a private company,
it

could build elaborate installations on these outpost islands, and

TO THE ORIENT

193

the Navy could defend this activity as private enterprise when the

Japanese charged that it was U.S. aggression. The installations
would prove extremely useful in the event of a Pacific war. The Pan
American route to Manila was opened officially in 1935 and was

extended to Hong Kong in 1936.
The great-circle path that Lindberg surveyed did become a
commercial air route when Northwest-Orient- Airlines began flying it
to Tokyo after World War II.

16

DEATHS IN THE FAMILY

DWIGHT MORROW WAS ONLY FIFTY-EIGHT WHEN HE DIED
suddenly at the height of his powers. His death was perhaps more
shocking to the family because it was so unexpected.
But the family's sense of loss may have been mitigated by the fact
that Morrow had been a distant man, totally absorbed in his work,
his thoughts, or what he was reading. He could sit in the living
room reading a book while the children played the piano and
carried on loud conversations, and not hear a thing.
"Breakfast was for a long time the only meal, in fact the only
time, we saw Daddy," Anne Morrow Lindbergh recalled. "I realize
now, looking back on it, that it was the only time we felt ourselves
as a family." And the only time he would speak at breakfast was
when he was eating his poached eggs. He needed both hands to do
this, so he had to put down his newspaper. At this time he usually

made little jokes, or teased the children.
His most frequent gambit was to ask 'Who do you like best—
your mother or your father, Elisabeth?" "This," reports Anne Lindbergh, "was always agony. I could see the question coming to me
next, like a bad dream, and I was never well prepared. Elisabeth
was asked first and always answered honestly and courageously—
perfectly frankly (which delighted him). 1 like Mother best— and
next to Mother I like Daddy/ Then he would turn to me. I can

remember the torture of trying to be honest, yet not to hurt his
feelings. First I would say, evading and embarrassed, 1 like you
both Qie same/ But Daddy would persist, 'Now, Anne, tell me the
truth— Who do you love best?' Then I would protest— But I like
you— differently!' 'Now, Anne— He enjoyed very much teasing me
194

DEATHS IN THE FAMILY

195

and would insist on my explaining myself, going on and on. But I
never admitted liking Mother most.
* 'Well— come here and give me a kiss— anyway/ it would usually

endAfter Morrow's death the Lindberghs spent a great deal of time

with Mrs. Morrow. Having her daughter, grandson, and son-in-law
around eased the shock of sudden loss for the widow.
Lindbergh was working a good deal in New York. His duties for
the airlines

had become

rather routine,

and

routine, he did not make unwelcome news.

if

he stuck

to the

When he did anything

else, he took care to keep it a secret.

On the weekends, Charles, Anne, and the baby would drive to
Hopewell, New Jersey, to the new house they had built. The twostory house, an imposing structure something like C. A. Lindbergh's
big house (the one that had burned down in 1906, when Charles
was four), was livable but still needed work; for example, the
shutter in the baby's nursery on the second floor had warped so that

be closed.
Normally on a Tuesday, like March 1, 1932, they would have
been in Englewood. But the baby, now twenty months old, had
developed a cold over the previous weekend. Anne Lindbergh,
pregnant with her second child, had caught the cold. So they stayed
on in Hopewell instead of returning to the Morrow house. Other
it could not

than the cold, Charles, Jr., was a healthy, blond, bright baby who
played happily with his nurse, his dog, and his parents. He was a
perfectly normal child, except for two slightly overlapping toes.

Lindbergh went to work in New York on Monday, February 29.

He called up during the day to say that he would have to stay in
Englewood that night, and would drive to Hopewell the next day,
Tuesday, after work. It had been widely advertised that he would
attend a banquet for New York University Tuesday evening, but he
got his dates mixed.
arriving

early

He made the sixty-mile trip to Hopewell,

Tuesday

night.

After dinner, he sat and talked

for a while in the downstairs living room with his wife. Charles, Jr.,

had been put to bed in his upstairs nursery, carefully wrapped
against the cold. It was a raw, windy night. Lindbergh heard a
sudden sound around nine o'clock that seemed to come from the
kitchen. He thought it was something falling off a chair.
At ten o'clock it was the custom of Betty Gow, the baby's nurse,

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

196

to take the baby to the bathroom.

She did not turn on the light in
the nursery, but left the door open so she could see by the hall light.

She entered the baby's room, closed the casement window, then
plugged in an electric heater. Before touching the baby she warmed
her hands.

But when "I bent over the crib I couldn't hear the baby breathe,"
she recalled later. "I bent down, felt all over for him and discovered
he wasn't there. I thought that Mrs. Lindbergh may have him. I
went out
met Mrs. Lindbergh
and asked her if she didn't
have the baby. She looked surprised and said, no, she didn't.
"I said, Well where is the Colonel, he may have him.' I said,
.

.

.

.

.

.

Where is he?'
"She said, 'Downstairs, in the library.'
Betty Gow ran down the main staircase and found Lindbergh
sitting at his desk, reading.

"I said, 'Colonel do you have the baby?'

[Lindbergh recalled that

her voice was rather excited.]

"He said, 'No. Isn't he in his crib?'
"I said, 'No.'"

Lindbergh immediately ran up the stairs to the baby's room, followed by the nurse.
Lindbergh: "From the appearance of the room I realized and from
the appearance of the crib I realized something had gone wrong
the bed clothing in the crib was in such condition that I felt
it was impossible for the baby to have gotten out for himself. ... I
knew that neither my wife nor Miss Gow had taken him because
Miss Gow had asked me if I had him."
Lindbergh turned to his wife, who had come into the nursery, and
said, "Anne, they have stolen our baby." He went down to a closet
and got out a Springfield rifle.
The sudden assumption that the baby had been kidnaped was
.

.

.

logical; the

Lindberghs' mail had always contained a number of

cranky, threatening letters among the avalanche of good wishes and
requests for help or money. They had kept the baby's photograph

out of the newspapers as one safeguard against his being seized and

held for ransom. He had certainly disappeared from the house. He

could walk, but it was unlikely that he could have climbed out of
the crib without disturbing the covers.

There was an envelope propped on the radiator in the nursery,

DEATHS IN THE FAMILY

197

some muddy footprints— all

of which reinforced the idea of an
Lindbergh touched nothing. He asked the butler, Oliver
Whateley, to telephone the local police while he looked for the
intruder.

child.

Lindbergh meanwhile called his lawyer, Colonel Breckinridge,
and the New Jersey state police. Then he took his rifle and went
out to search for his son. But he quickly realized he could do
nothing alone, without lights, in the dark woods.
Soon came the police— local and state— and a professional search
of the grounds was made. In the house, the state police opened the

envelope found in the nursery. It contained a note crudely written
in pencil, which read, in part:

Dear Sir Have 50000$ ready 25000$ in 20$ bills
15000$ in 10$ bills and 1000$ in 5$ bills After
2—4 days we will inform you were to deliver the
money We warn you for making anyding public or
for notify the police The child is in gut care

The signature was two red circles, partly overlapped. The overlapped area was filled in with blue. In each of the three areas a
square hole had been punched through the paper.
The letter had said, "Indication for all letters are singnature and
three holes/'

Not far from the house, the police found a wooden ladder, made
in three pieces, joined by dowels. One rung was broken. There was
also a carpenter's chisel, probably used to force the window in the

nursery.

The police had put the crime on the teletype: "Colonel Lindbaby was kidnapped from Lindbergh home in Hopewell,
N.J. sometime between 7:30 and 10 p.m. this date. Baby is nineteen

bergh's

months old and a boy. Is dressed in sleeping suit. Request that all
cars be investigated by police patrols." A New York Times reporter
at the state police barracks in Somerville, New Jersey, phoned his
office with the news. The night editor in New York routed the call
to one reporter and, at the same time, asked an assistant to tell Deac
Lyman to call Lindbergh to check the accuracy of this information.
He knew that Lyman and Lindbergh were friendly.
Lyman called Colonel Breckinridge and then came over to the
city desk. "It's true! It's true!" he shouted.

198

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

Lyman and another reporter were immediately dispatched to
Hopewell in a rented car with a chauffeur. Another correspondent
was assigned to meet them at Princeton and guide them to the Lindbergh house.
On the way, in Elizabeth, New Jersey, Lyman saw a policeman,
stopped the car, and identified himself. He said they were on the
way to cover the kidnaping and asked if there was any news. The
policeman had not yet heard of the kidnaping; and Lyman made
a mental note of how easy it would have been for the kidnaper to
use a main highway for escape.
Two Associated Press men from Trenton beat the Times to the
scene and put out a report that a kidnap note had been found. Lindbergh admitted Lyman to his house to use the telephone. The
Times in New York wanted more about the kidnap note. Lyman
went out to talk to Lindbergh and found that the state police were
going to ban all reporters and photographers from the grounds, but
Lindbergh intervened to allow them to stay.
It seemed that the kidnaper had threatened to harm the baby
if the note were made public; so the Times decided to keep the
contents out of the paper and merely report that a note existed.
William Randolph Hearst, Jr., was in Hopewell on the story and
spoke to Lyman about the note; his father, in San Simeon, California, was on the telephone. Young Hearst said to his father, "Pop,
I don't think the New York Times will use this thing." Then he
turned to Lyman: "Pop said we're not using it either. He said we
aren't going to print anything that might interfere with the return
of the baby." However, other New York papers reasoned that the
contents of the note had been syndicated on the wire and that
somebody would be bound to break it. So they printed the kidnaper's message.

Of course, the kidnaping was immediate front-page news and kept
enlarging as fast as reporters could write and typesetters could set
their stories. More and more reporters and photographers were sent
to cover Hopewell. The other wire services and every daily paper
in New York and Philadelphia dispatched men and women and
automobiles; there were nearly fifty newspaper people in Hopewell
within a couple of hours. One service hired two ambulances to rush
photographs back and forth to New York, the backs of the vehicles
equipped as darkrooms.

DEATHS IN THE FAMILY

199

The kidnaping was a matter of moment not only to the newspapers—sales of newspapers went up about 20 per cent, meaning
millions of extra copies and a great deal of windfall revenue— but to

movie stars, anyone who had to
have the public's attention. Governor Franklin D. Roosevelt, of New
York, put the New York state police at the disposal of the Lindberghs. President Herbert Hoover said that federal authorities
would help as much as they could; there was then no legal sanction
for their participation in a case of kidnaping unless they were
invited by local police to do so. Bishop Manning, of New York,
issued a special prayer for "immediate use" by the public. ( Sunday
was still more than four days off.) Al Capone, the gangster, in a
Chicago jail, told Arthur Brisbane, Hearst newspapers' leading
columnist, that he and Mrs. Capone felt sorry for the Lindberghs
and offered $10,000 to try to get the baby back. Brisbane ran the
offer in his column with the statement that if the government would
pardon Capone's conviction on income-tax evasion, the chances
were good that the baby would be returned.
Lindbergh read the piece and called Ogden Mills, the Secretary
of the Treasury, to find out if anything could be done. Mills sent the
head of Treasury enforcement, Elmer Irey, to see Lindbergh in
Hopewell the next day. Lindbergh made it clear that in asking
about Capone he was not requesting any favors, just exploring
possibilities. He said he wouldn't ask for Capone's freedom as the
politicians, gangsters, ministers,

price of saving his son's life.

The Lindberghs tried to cooperate with the newspapers. The
night of the kidnaping, they admitted reporters to the living room of
their house. They asked them to assist the police by leaving the
grounds so that any clues would not be obliterated. The reporters

obliged.

The day after the baby's disappearance, March 2, Anne Lindbergh gave the papers a list of the foods the baby was supposed to
get. Just the recital of the diet was enough to wring anyone's heart:
"A half cup of orange juice on waking.
"One quart of milk during the day.
"Three tablespoons of cooked cereal morning and night," and so

down to, "Fourteen drops of Viosterol, a vitamin preparation,
during the day."
on,

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

200

Every leading newspaper carried the list on its front page of

March 3.
That day, the Lindberghs wrote an open letter and gave it to the
newspapers.
Mrs. Lindbergh and

I

desire to

make a personal contact with the

kidnapers of our child.

Our only interest is in his immediate and safe return and we feel ceris strong enough to
them in having complete confidence and trust in any promises

tain that the kidnapers will realize that this interest
justify

that we may make in connection with his return.

We urge those who have the child to select any representatives of ours
who will be suitable to them at any time and at any place that they may
designate.
If this is accepted, we promise that we will keep whatever arrangements that may be made by their representative and ours strictly confidential and we further pledge ourselves that we will not try to injure in
any way those connected with the return of the child.

Charles A. Lindbergh

Anne Lindbergh

The New Jersey state police did not like the idea of seeming to
promise the kidnapers immunity. They said that whether the Lindberghs prosecuted or not, they would prosecute anyone they
caught.

The Lindbergh letter was widely published on March 4. That
same day the Lindberghs received a second note from the presumed kidnaper, with the same signature of interlocking circles. A
whole series of such communications, dealing with the ransom
(the demand was increased to $70,000), methods of procedure,
etc., followed— not only to Lindbergh but to his lawyer.
Reporters continued to flood into tiny Hopewell, combing the
countryside for news. They had to have copy; as much as fifty
thousand words were filed on days when there wasn't enough hard
news to fill a half column of type.
Once again the Lindberghs were in the center of a cyclone of
speculation and manufactured sensation. Once again the reportage
was so out of proportion to the scope of events that it became a
force of its own, stronger than the circumstances that

summoned

it up.

Much of the writing was improvisation; most of it had to be

DEATHS IN THE FAMILY
fiction.

201

On one particularly dull day, a lady writer for a well-known

chain of newspapers was searching about for nonexistent news. She
of the Times. Lyman had been a
Lindbergh house in Hopewell. The lady, sniffing a
good feature story, asked him some questions about the interior of
the house, which she had never seen. Lyman answered her without
thinking too much about it. The next day, her newspaper carried a
page 1 story under her by-line on "My Visit to the Lindbergh

came

across

Deac Lyman,

visitor at the

House." It was a great news beat at the time. It was also almost
totally incorrect in its details, aside from the fact that the

woman

claimed to have seen something that she had not.

The area around Hopewell was overrun by sightseers and souvenir hunters in literally tens of thousands. Cars clogged the roads;

the curious hunted for whatever they could find to prove to other
neurotics that they had been in the area. In this mob scene, most
clues

were soon erased and the police were impeded

in

their

work.

Colonel Breckinridge believed with Capone that the underworld
was involved in the kidnaping and found a couple of hoodlums
named Salvy Spitale and Irving Bitz to act as go-betweens. The
chief of their gang, Morris Rosner, gave out a statement that he had
definite knowledge that the baby was alive and well. Spitale and
Bitz made trips to many cities with the announced intention of
making contact with the kidnapers.
These gangsters were only the first of a number of people who
said they knew who had kidnaped the baby and could get the child
back safely.
The second offer came from a man named Gaston B. Means, a
paunchy former agent of the Department of Justice, a payoff man in
the high councils of the bribe-ridden administration of President

Harding, and an ex-convict. Means got in touch with Evalyn Walsh

McLean, owner of the Hope diamond and wife ( separated ) of the
Means had shrewdly estimated
that Mrs. McLean would be susceptible to his pitch. ( Her own son
had been killed not long before, and she was close to a Lindbergh
cousin.) He told her that the kidnaper was a man who had been

publisher of the Washington Post.

Means' fellow-convict in the Atlanta penitentiary. For $100,000,
Means said, he could arrange to have the baby delivered to a priest.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

202

Mrs.

McLean got in touch with a priest, and with Lindbergh's

cousin, and they both agreed that Means

seemed anxious to help.

His connections with gangsters were undeniable. So Mrs. McLean

withdrew $100,000 in old bills from her bank, plus $4,000 in new

money for Means' expenses, and gave it all to Means.

A third major go-between in the case was a boatbuilder— John
He claimed to have made
through a former rumrunner; the
kidnapers were, by his account, local Virginia rumrunners who
feared intervention by the New York, Detroit, and Chicago mobs.
There was one other contact. He was a tall, erect, white-haired
gentleman by the name of Dr. John F. Condon, a retired schoolteacher. Condon was an eccentric, yet much admired in his community, which was the Bronx, New York. Condons motivations
were probably the purest of any of those who volunteered to help.
He was an old-fashioned, flag-waving patriot who believed in God,
his country, and motherhood. All of these things had been violated
by the kidnaping. In Condons mind, Lindbergh was identified
with the very essence of America's virtues. The kidnaping of his
child had somehow sullied the nation's honor. Condon sought to
wipe out this blot by offering his services in getting the Lindbergh
Hughes

Curtis, of Norfolk, Virginia.

contact with

the

kidnapers

baby back.
Early in March, 1932, around the sixth or seventh, Condon wrote
a letter to the Bronx Home News, which published it in its weekly
edition. Condon offered his total cash savings— $1,000— in addition
to the Lindbergh ransom money, for the return of the baby. He
wrote that he would go anywhere at his own expense to meet the
kidnapers. He promised total secrecy, and he was well known in the
Bronx as a man of his word.

The Home News had barely come out when a reply came by
mail to Condon's house. It was a penciled note, which turned out
to be identical in handwriting and signature with the original Lind-

bergh ransom letter. But only the Lindberghs and the police— and
the kidnaper—could have known that at the time; the signature had
not been made public when Condon got his reply. Condon did not
get this letter until after 10 p.m. on March 9. He had been out
lecturing. When he read the letter, which gave instructions as to
the payment of money, and which contained an enclosed letter to
Lindbergh saying that the kidnaper would accept Dr. Condon as

"

DEATHS IN THE FAMILY

203

Condon "was pleased to think I had been so honored."
The letter for Lindbergh began: "Dear Sir: Mr. Condon may act
as go-between. You may give him the 70,000$ make one packet.
." The letter to Condon contained the instruction that when he
had the ransom he was to put an advertisement in the New York
American reading "money is ready."
Condon went to the house of a man named Al Reich, who owned
a car in which he had often chauffeured the old teacher. Reich was
not at home, but a restaurant owner friend was there. Condon
called the Lindbergh house from Reich's home. By this time, according to their joint recollection, it was after eleven.
Lindbergh did not answer the telephone. The phones in the Hopewell house had been arranged, Lindbergh said, so that a number of
people could answer them. The idea was to avoid the numerous
liaison,

.

.

cranks who pestered the Lindberghs while leaving a line of communication open to the real kidnaper.
Lindbergh did not remember talking to Condon on the telephone

But Condon said that he had refused to deliver his message
anyone else and that eventually Lindbergh did get on the line.
According to Condon's recollection, he described the signature
on the letter to Lindbergh:
"'Colonel, I do not know whether this is important or not, but
there are what I'd call a secantal circle, that is, one circle cutting in
the other, the same as a secant cuts through a circle/ and I said,
at all.

to

Ts it important? Shall I bring it down to you?'

"And he said to me 1 will get the automobile and come up to
you. Where are you?'

am in the Bronx, but you don't have to. You have enough to
do and I will come down to you, to Hopewell.'
The restaurant keeper got another man with a car and they drove
Condon to Hopewell after midnight.
There was a long discussion at Hopewell, between Condon, Lindbergh, and Breckinridge. Condon sent his two friends back to the
Bronx, but he was asked to stay the night. Lindbergh fixed him a
makeshift bed on the floor of the nursery. The next day Lindbergh
handed him a note dated March 10, 1932, authorizing Condon to
act as a go-between. It was signed by both Charles and Anne Lind" T

bergh.

On March 11, Condon ran the ad in the American: "money is

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

204

ready/' He signed it "Jafsie," a code name he made up with the

Lindberghs out of the phonetics of his initials.

A series of messages brought Condon face to face with a man
who identified himself as "John," first in Woodlawn Cemetery, in
the Bronx, and afterward on a park bench. John kept his face
shielded and it was dark. But Condon had a good chance to learn
his voice and accent; also he was able to assure himself, through the
man's knowledge of details that had not been published, that his

man had been in the baby's room.
After

this,

there

was a good deal of correspondence between

Condon and John, always with many precautions on John's part.
The letters were all similar in their Germanic grammar, misspellings,

and handwriting to the original kidnap note found at Hope-

well. John's conversation with Condon also contained many German

locutions, and his voice had a distinct German accent.

There were weeks of negotiations, cryptic advertisements,

at-

tempts by Condon to see John again. Finally, on Thursday, March
31,

Condon got a letter that told him to have the money ready on

Saturday, April 2. He would receive instructions about where and

how to deliver it.
Meanwhile the newspapers were printing all sorts of rumors. One
was that the Morgan bank had offered $250,000 to Lindbergh to pay
the ransom. Breckinridge was livid; stories like that might make the
kidnapers think they were pikers in asking for only $70,000.
(Though Lindbergh was well off, he was not a rich man. He
had more than $70,000, of course, and his wife's family had millions.
Still, $70,000 was a huge sum to him; although, needless to say, he
never had any hesitancy about paying it.
Elmer Irey, of the Treasury, insisted that Lindbergh put gold
notes in the ransom bundle; gold notes, yellow U.S. currency, were
scarce and easier to trace. Lindbergh at first demurred, but he
yielded when Irey threatened to step out of the case. Two ransom
packages of 5,150 bills, totaling $70,000, were made up at J. P.
Morgan & Company. That international banking firm had plenty of
the scarce gold notes on hand. Samples of the paper and string used
in making the bundles were put in a Morgan vault for later use as
evidence. A list of the bills' numbers was kept.
On April 2, Condon put the message demanded by his correspondent in the American: "Yes. Everything O.K. Jafsie." That

Charles A. Lindbergh, Jr., at the age of eight, photographed with
Brown Brothers
his father, Congressman C. A. Lindbergh.

A photograph taken in March, 1927, several weeks before Lindbergh's historic flight.
The man to Lindbergh's right is B. F. Mahoney, president of the Ryan Aircraft Company, which was building the Spirit of St. Louis.

Culver Pictures

mt
c*
V-

K

/

k

Impelled to uncharacteristic anxiety by newspaper stories emphasizing
possible disaster, Lindbergh's mother, Evangeline Land Lindbergh, visited

her son a week before he took off on his New York-Paris flight.

UPI

Just before takeoff, early in the morning of May 20, 1927.

Lindbergh stands bareheaded beneath the wing of his plane.

UPI

After Lindbergh's arrival at Le Bourget field outside Paris, May 21, 1927.

Brown Brothers

)

Right: Lindbergh with

U.S. Ambassador to France

Myron T. Herrick (right,
with hat and cane
acknowledging the cheers
of a Paris crowd.

Brown Brothers

Below: Part of the crowd
around Lindbergh's plane
at Croydon Aerodrome, England, just after he landed,

May 9, 1927.
Brown Brothers

mn mm?

«* ••*>

A hero's return: Lindbergh, in mufti, debarking from the U.S. cruiser
Memphis, in Washington, D.C., June 11, 1927. His mother is in the background.
Brown Brothers

Eighteen hundred
tons of paper

showered on Lindbergh's
triumphal march up Broadway on June 13, 1927. An
estimated 4,500,000 New
Yorkers watched the
parade, the biggest crowd
in the city's Jnistory.

UP1

Charles Lindbergh with his fiancee, Anne Morrow, and her parents,

Ambassador Dwight Morrow and Mrs. Morrow.

Brown Brothers

/*r

*-

m

Mr. and Mrs. Charles A. Lindbergh stand in front of their plane,
during their 1931 flight north to the Orient from New York to China.

Sirius,

Brown Brothers.

s,

&

Lindbergh prophesied disaster for Army attempts to fly air mail in 1934.
Here he is shown with War Secretary George H. Dern, who asked Lindbergh's
support of government action, without success, March 10, 1934.
UPI

Bruno Richard Hauptmann (left), Bronx carpenter, was convicted in 1935
of first-degree murder of kidnaped Charles Augustus Lindbergh, Jr. (right)
UPI
Hauptmann was executed in the electric chair in April, 1936.

Part of the crowd outside Flemington, New Jersey, courthouse during the

Hauptmann trial in February, 1935. People's faces reflect the carnival
atmosphere that surrounded the proceedings.
UPI

*J&
^ftg

"<,

Lindbergh with the other delegates to the Fourth International Congress of
Experimental Cytology, August, 1936, at which the perfusion pump, developed
UPI
by Lindbergh in collaboration with Dr. Alexis Carrel, was exhibited.

Lindbergh leaving the White House on the day of the National Advisory
Committee on Aeronautics Conference, April 20, 1939. He is thought to
have reported on European air strength to President Roosevelt.
UPI

®&g3Ja&;

ifl

ITF#*
iX^

ttb

.

B

**'

Lindbergh was the isolationist movement's biggest draw. This is the
audience at an America First rally he addressed in Chicago on April 18,
UPI
1941, where he urged that Americans "unite to stay out of war/'

Lindbergh greets
Dr. J. F. ("Jafsie")

Condon, a go-between in
the effort to recover the

kidnaped Lindbergh baby,
at an America First rally
in New York City,
April 23, 1941.

UPI

Anne Morrow Lindbergh is cheered by the audience waiting for her husband
to speak at an America First rally, Philadelphia, May 29, 1941.
UPI

Lindbergh while he was serving as
technical representative for an
aircraft company in the Pacific

during World War II, 1944.

United Air Craft

Lindbergh and Harry Guggenheim meet at a ceremony
at the American Museum of
Natural History, April 21,
1948, honoring a man they
both believed in and supported: the late Robert H.

Goddard, the father of

modern rocketry.

UPI

bigg*At the invitation of
the U.S. Air Forces,

Lindbergh made a tour of
air bases during the

Berlin Airlift to suggest

methods for improving the
operation. Here he is
shown with Lt. Gen. John
K. Cannon, commanding
general of the U.S. Air

Forces in Europe, at the

Rhine-Main Base in Frankfurt,

January 21, 1949.

UPI

!>-*£:

**

Lindbergh (right) next to Harry Guggenheim at an Aeronautical Sciences
Institute dinner, January 25, 1954, where he received a Guggenheim medal.
Mrs. Lindbergh is at table (arrow).
UPI

Brigadier General Lindbergh
reports to the Pentagon in
November, 1954, for several
weeks of active duty shortly
after being commissioned in

the Air Force Reserve.
Lindbergh held no Army rank
from 1941 to 1954.
UPI

Jon Lindbergh, Charles
Lindbergh's eldest son,
aboard a Navy vessel, 1954.

Jon was trained as
a frogman.
UPI

Mr. and Mrs. Julien Feydy at their wedding in Douzillac, France,
December 23, 1963. Mrs. Feydy was Anne Spencer Lindbergh; her mother,
Anne Morrow Lindbergh, is at left.
Paris Match

DEATHS IN THE FAMILY

205

afternoon, he and Lindbergh stuffed the two packages of bills into a

wooden box. And then they waited. And waited. At Condons house
in the Bronx.

The time crawled. An hour passed. Another. It was nearly eight
o'clock when the doorbell rang. Condons daughter opened the door
to a short, thin man with dark hair, a taxi driver. After handing the

man drove off.
Lindbergh opened the envelope. It contained a note of instructions for Condon. He was to go to a nursery on Tremont Avenue.
"Bergen Greenhauses florist." There would be another envelope
there with instructions. They had three-quarters of an hour to
reach the greenhouse, and they were warned not to notify the
police. The signature was exactly the same as the others— the intergirl an envelope the

locked circles.

They took the same car in which Condon had been driven to his
meeting with John, a Ford coupe. Lindbergh drove. He was
wearing a shoulder holster with a gun in it.
The message at the greenhouse told Condon to walk down a dirt
road, which ran alongside St. Raymond's Cemetery, adjacent to
the florist's. Condon started to do so, with Lindbergh sitting in the
car, waiting. The money was still in the Ford, too. Condon thought
the dirt road might lead him into a trap, so he turned and walked in
a different direction past the cemetery, staying on the main road,
Tremont Avenue. He walked back and forth past the cemetery
gates, then called to Lindbergh, "I guess there's no one here. We'd
first

better go back."

A man's voice from the cemetery shouted, "Hey, Doctor!" A figure
could be seen crouching behind a tombstone within the cemetery.
"Hey, Doctor, over here!" the voice shouted, loud enough for
Lindbergh to hear.
Condon went into the cemetery. It was John again. They had a
brief, sharp bargaining talk. Condon suddenly got an impulse to try
to save Lindbergh's money and told John he couldn't get $70,000,
but had $50,000. He got him to agree to accept the smaller sum.
Then, when he left to get the money, John went to get the note he
was supposed to give in exchange— a memorandum of the baby's
whereabouts. Lindbergh took the $20,000 package from the wooden
box, leaving the promised $50,000 ransom.
John handed over an envelope as Condon gave him the box. But

206

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

he told Condon not to open the letter for six hours. Condon agreed,

and John looked over some of the ransom bills to see if they were
marked; then he shook hands with Condon and told him he had
done a good job. "Your work was perfect," he said.

When Condon handed the unopened note to Lindbergh in the
he told him of his promise not to open it for six hours. Lindbergh held the envelope and thought. "Well," he said, "if that was
the agreement [we will] live up to it."
They drove to a deserted house owned by Condon, and talked it
over. Then they decided to open the note to see if it was a fake. If it
was, and they waited, they would have no chance of retrieving the
ransom. So they opened it and read a handwritten letter:
car,

the boy is on Boad Nelly, it is a small Boad 28 feet long, two persons
are on the Boad. the are innosent. you will find the Boad between Horse-

neck Beach and Gay Head near Elizabeth Island.

Lindbergh and Condon were overjoyed. They thought they had
received accurate instructions for finding the baby.

However, days of search by Lindbergh in an airplane, and by
Coast Guard boats, failed to turn up the "Boad Nelly" or the baby.
Meanwhile, Gaston Means claimed to have got rid of Mrs.
McLean's $104,000 through some mischance, a story the authorities
did not believe. He tried for another $35,000 from Mrs. McLean,
but was frustrated by one of her suspicious friends.
John Hughes Curtis, the Virginia boatbuilder with the rumrunning connections, claimed he had made contact with a man
called Dynamite on April 18. Dynamite, a Scandinavian, had a
schooner on which the Lindbergh baby was being held, Curtis said.
Also, he met a man called John, who tallied with the by then
published accounts of Condon's graveyard John, and saw some of
the ransom bills. He even tallied them with some of the ransom-bill
numbers published in the newspapers. John and Dynamite wanted
more money, it seems. They had never intended to be satisfied with
only one ransom payment.
For the next twenty-four days, Curtis kept Lindbergh occupied
with comings and goings, alarms and excursions. The family was in
a constant state of agonized hope. A boat was chartered, the
Cachalot, to make rendezvous with the kidnapers. Lindbergh was
aboard the Cachalot at Cape May, New Jersey, trying to get in

DEATHS IN THE FAMILY

207

touch with the kidnapers when he got word that his son had been
found, dead.
Jft_was__early that day,

on

May 12, 1932, that a truck driver

stumbled on the baby's body in a shallow grave in some woods
about a mile from the Lindbergh house. It was taken to a Trenton
funeral home which served as the county morgue. Mrs. Lindbergh
and her mother were told of the discovery by the state police, who
said it was not necessary for them to see the body. Betty Gow
identified the baby. An autopsy revealed the cause of death as a
fractured skull.

Lindbergh had been notified too late to get there that day. The
next day he went to the morgue to identify the body, along with the

doctor who had delivered the baby.

Lindbergh wore no hat. His face was pale, drawn. It showed no
He walked over to a table on which something was covered by a sheet. "Take that off," he said. Somebody
picked up the sheet and stepped back.
Lindbergh stared at the body. His face flushed. He bent
over, looked into the mouth, and counted the teeth. He looked at
the foot with the overlapping toes.
He walked into the next room. Erwin E. Marshall, Mercer County
prosecutor, asked, "Colonel Lindbergh, are you satisfied that it is
the body of your baby?"
"I am perfectly satisfied that it is my child," Lindbergh answered.
emotion, only fatigue.

The body was cremated.
Then the police began to check up on the various people, like
Curtis, Means, Rosner, et al., who had forced themselves into the
case— not excepting Dr. Condon.

John Hughes Curtis was the

first

to crack.

He signed a full

confession that he had created his story from a "distorted mind." He

had caused Colonel Lindbergh,
and trusted he would be forgiven the "worry and injustice I did him
in his time of grief." All the hopes he had cruelly aroused had been
a fraud. Now everyone who had anything to do with the case was
under suspicion. Colonel Schwarzkopf, of the New Jersey state
police, said that he had been holding back in the hope of recovering
the baby alive. Now that hope was gone, he intended to dig and
grill and pursue every clue to find the murderer.
There were many questions raised about Condon. Why had he
regretted the "inconvenience" he

208

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

been so anxious to help? Why had everything happened in the
Bronx? Why had he risked his life? The insinuation was that he had
been connected with the kidnaper, perhaps had even kept part of
the money. He was called in for questioning by the police. His mail
became filled with hate letters. He got so many telephone threats he
had to change his phone number to an unlisted one. Colonel
Breckinridge told the Lindberghs how the old man was suffering for
his good deed, and said that something should be done. Lindbergh
took time out in the midst of his grief to write Condon a letter.

My dear Dr. Condon:
Mrs. Lindbergh and I want to thank you for the great assistance you
have been to us. We fully realize that you have devoted the major portion
of your time and energy to bring about the return of our son. We wish to
express to you our sincere appreciation for your courage and cooperation.
Sincerely,

Charles A. Lindbergh

The letter was released for publication.
Police work became much more intensive in other directions after
the child's body was found. A famous handwriting expert was
called in to examine the ransom notes; there were fourteen of the
letters, all apparently written by the same hand. The

wood from the

three-piece extension ladder that had been used to reach the baby's
bedroom was sent to an expert in the Department of Agriculture.
Lindbergh went back to work, looking gaunt and older.
The news pressure continued to mount. Now it was being fed by
the nation-wide hunt for the kidnaper and by the trials of Gaston
Means and of Curtis. Means was tried in Washington, D.C., early in
June, 1932. He was convicted on two counts of larceny (for the
$104,000) and sentenced to fifteen years in federal prison. It was
the tliird conviction in his career. Later he was convicted of
attempted extortion (for the $35,000) and got another two years.
Curtis was brought to trial in Flemington, New Jersey, on June
27, on the vague charge of obstructing justice. Strange as it seems,

what he had done was not illegal. He hadn't been out for money; he
had, in fact, spent some of his own on the hunt for the kidnapers.
There was no law to cover what he had done, which was mainly to
rouse the hopes of Anne and Charles Lindbergh, to keep them on
tenterhooks for more than a month, to take their time and energy

:

DEATHS IN THE FAMILY

209

and prey on their good will. He had perpetrated a cruelty on two
young people that is beyond belief. Why? It would take a psychiatrist to untangle his motives. He said in a signed statement that he
had been "insane ... for the time being."
Yet, in order to convict him, the jury had to go through some
mental gymnastics. They had to accept the idea that what Curtis
first said about being in touch with the kidnapers was true. If
he was to be found guilty, it had to be on the ground that after
telling this lone truth he had lied and in so doing hampered the
search for the kidnaper: "obstructed justice."

Lindbergh testified during Curtis's trial that he was sure Curtis
had never been in touch with the kidnapers at any time; that he had
lied from the beginning. There was other testimony to this effect.
Yet the jury managed to find Curtis guilty of obstructing justice,
with a recommendation for mercy.

The penalty could have been three years' imprisonment or a $1,000
fine, or both.

On June 28 the judge sentenced Curtis to a year in jail

and a $1,000 fine. His lawyers appealed and Curtis was set free
on $10,000 bail. On November 6 he came back to Flemington.
His lawyer requested that he be resentenced. The judge then
suspended the jail sentence, but insisted on payment of the $1,000
fine. The grinning Curtis paid it, and gave out the statement that if
he had wanted to fight the case he could have saved his money.
Meanwhile the Lindberghs, under constant surveillance by the
press and the public, had to flee Hopewell. They moved to the
Morrow house in Englewood, Next Day Hill, which was set in a
private estate that could be guarded. Inside they were safe, but
outside the roads were clogged with sightseers' cars.
When the time came for Anne Lindbergh to give birth to her
second child, she was driven from Englewood in the middle of the
night to her mother's town apartment in New York at 4 East Sixtysixth Street. Jon Lindbergh was born there, August 16, 1932.
Lindbergh issued a statement to the press
Mrs. Lindbergh and I have made our home in New Jersey. It is natu-

our wish to continue to live there near our friends and interests.
Obviously, however, it is impossible for us to subject the life of our second

rally

son to the publicity which we feel was in large measure responsible for
the death of our first.

We feel that our children have a right to grow up normally with other

210

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

children. Continued publicity will make this impossible. I am appealing to

the press to permit our children to lead the lives of normal Americans.

Such appeals had no effect either on the public or on the
newspapers. Lindbergh made copy just by breathing. Many lonely
or desperate people focused on him in some way, good or bad. They
all wanted to get in touch with him. In this large number of people,
there was the usual proportion of nuts and cranks. After Jons birth
was announced, the Lindberghs began getting letters threatening to
kidnap the child. Lindbergh bought a vicious watchdog to guard
Jon. Some of the threats were taken seriously enough by the police
to be investigated. Two men were arrested on a charge of attempted
extortion, but the case was dismissed for lack of evidence. The next
June the Lindberghs decided that it would never be safe to return
to Hopewell; instead of selling the place ( some promoters offered to
buy it; they wanted to open it to the public and charge admission),
they donated the estate to a nonprofit foundation set up by themselves and with some eminent people on the board. The purpose
was "To provide for the welfare of children, including their education, training, hospitalization, and other purposes, without discrimination in regard to race or creed." The place, High Fields, is still
run as a boys' home.

17

THE HAUPTMANN CASE

THE LINDBERGHS HAD BEEN FORCED OUT OF THEIR HOUSE
guarded seclusion. They lived under the constant threat of
another kidnaping. But real life is not always intense. During the
most horrendous tragedies there are uneventful moments. Life

into

goes on.

The Lindberghs made a special effort not to be submerged by
what had happened, by what was continuing to happen. They were
handicapped in their effort to recapture a normal existence, but
during the years that followed the taking of the baby, they managed

on a great many activities both separately and together.
Lindbergh went about his airlines business, became involved in a
large political controversy regarding air-mail contracts, and worked
on two scientific projects in which he had begun to be involved
before the kidnaping. (These will be discussed in following chapters. ) Mrs. Lindbergh took care of her second child and began her
career as a professional writer by writing North to the Orient.
After deeding their Hopewell house to the foundation, they left
their son Jon in the well-guarded security of the North Haven
summer home with Mrs. Morrow, and prepared for a second survey
flight for Pan American Airways, this time over the Atlantic.
The purpose of the flight was to survey three alternative routes
across the ocean— the northern Greenland route, the southern
Azores route, and the great-circle route which Lindbergh had taken
to Paris. Said Lindbergh in summing up the venture, "The North
Atlantic is the most important, and also the most difficult to fly, of
all the oceans crossed by the trade routes of men.
Where the
to carry

.

.

.

distance is short, the climate is severe, as in the north; while in the
211

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

212

south, great distances counteract the advantages of a milder season."

The flight began on July 9, 1933, in Flushing Bay, New York,
went by way of Newfoundland and Labrador to Copenhagen. The
plane they used was the same Lockheed they had flown to China in
1931. Only now it had been refitted with a more powerful engine of
710 horsepower, and with a variable-pitch propeller. It was rechristened Tingmissartoq, an Eskimo word meaning "he who flies
like a big bird."

It was necessary to be as independent as possible of outside
assistance," Lindbergh wrote. "In 1933, there were no facilities for

most of the places where we landed. In fact we considered ourselves fortunate when we found a good anchorage and a

aircraft at

We often reached our destination
without advance information about landing conditions. If they were

well-placed buoy to moor to.

bad ... we continued on.

.

.

.

.

.

.

We never took off without having

alternate destinations within our range.
On most flights our
plane was heavily overloaded when measured by conventional
.

.

.

standards. Our safety lay not in dogmatic formulas of performance

and structure, but in the proper balance of constantly changing
factors
sometimes ... in a quick take-off, as among the
and
icebergs at Angmagssalik; sometimes in a long range
always in extra rations and emergency equipment." The plane
carried two complete radios, one waterproof and fitted into a rubber
sailboat for an emergency landng at sea. It also mounted just about
.

.

.

;

.

.

.

every instrument available for pilots at the time: directional gyro,
gyroscopic horizon, two aperiodic compasses, an ice indicator, and a
great many fuel and pressure gauges, as well as the usual instru-

ments—altimeter, rate of climb indicator, tachometer, volt-ammeter,

and the like.
Lindbergh made careful studies of terrain and weather en route
and sent back handwritten reports to Juan Trippe as he went. From
Stockholm in September he wrote: "I believe that a transatlantic air
route by way of Greenland and Iceland can be operated satis-

Even with existing equipshould be possible to compete advantageously with the
Atlantic steamship schedules." He said only by flying experimentally
the year round could it be determined whether steady winter
factorily during the summer months.

ment,

.

.

.

it

service could be maintained. "I believe that such flying should be

done between bases rather than from one base, and that it is of

THE HAUPTMANN CASE

213

utmost importance to use only personnel who like the north country
and have confidence in its future."
"Stefansson has already stated that one side of Iceland is frequently clear even tho the other is covered with fog," Lindbergh
reported. "Our experience and inquiries tended to confirm this."
On their tour, the Lindberghs visited the Faeroe and Shetland islands, Denmark, Sweden, Finland, Russia, Norway, EngIreland, Scotland, France, the Netherlands, Switzerland,
Spain, Portugal, the Azores, the Canary Islands, Rio de Oro, and the

land,

Cape Verde Islands. It was late November by the time they reached
this last spot.

Lindbergh picked the island of Santiago as an ideal

takeoff point for the long hop to South America. Santiago was two

hundred miles off the coast of Africa. Leaving from there would
make the difference between a secure flight of sixteen hundred
miles across the South Atlantic and a hazardous flight of eighteen
hundred miles (from the African mainland)—hazardous because of
the plane's limited range.

But at Santiago he found that the wind blew too strongly and
steadily to allow them to take off with enough fuel for the transatlantic flight. So they flew back to Bathurst, British Gambia, in
Africa— only to be held up there by lack of wind. Without some
wind, the heavily loaded plane could not take

off.

After waiting

several days and stripping the plane of every useless ounce, Lind-

bergh did manage to nurse it into the air with enough gasoline to
reach Natal, Brazil, eighteen hundred miles to the southwest.
Mrs. Lindbergh made a book, Listen! the Wind, out of the ten-day
segment of the trip between Santiago, Bathurst, and Natal, from
November 27 to December 6, 1933. From Natal they flew by easy
stages to Flushing Bay, landing there on December 19. The entire
trip had covered more than twenty-nine thousand miles, and had
lasted five months. The plane was placed on exhibit in the Hall of
Ocean Life in the Museum of Natural History, in New York City,

soon after the Lindberghs' return. In 1955 it was moved to the Air
Force Museum at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, in Dayton,
Ohio.

Meanwhile there were some new developments in the kidnaping
case. The wood expert from the Department of Agriculture patiently, by intricate scientific devices, traced the different woods in
the kidnap ladder to their source. Lindbergh ransom bills began

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

214

turning up in various places during 1933 and 1934; many were gold

now rapidly becoming illegal. The nation was going off the
gold standard and the Treasury was calling in such bills. The police

notes,

asked that any filling station getting a gold note from a motorist jot

down on the note the license number of the motorist's car. In
September, 1934, one such note turned up at a New York City bank
with the license number 4U-13-41 penciled in the margin. The
license belonged to a car owned by Richard Hauptmann, a German

carpenter who lived at 1279 East 22nd Street, Bronx,

New York.

Hauptmann, whose full name was Bruno Richard Hauptmann, was
interrogated and his house and garage were searched; more than
$13,000 of Lindbergh ransom money was found hidden there. The
wood in the ladder left near the Hopewell house and the chisel
found nearby were traced to Hauptmann. The holes punched in the
overlapping circles on the ransom letters were made by one of his
tools. Hauptmann was positively identified by Dr. Condon as John.
Hauptmann was arrested. The Lindberghs were in California at
the time. They went into seclusion in Will Rogers' house. They came
east to Next Day Hill a few days later.
Harold Nicolson arrived in America at this time to write the
biography of Dwight Morrow. He had been invited to do so by Mrs.
Morrow.
Nicolson came to stay at the Morrow house on September 30,
1934, soon after Hauptmann was caught. He found the Lindberghs
there alone; Mrs. Morrow was out to dinner. Anne, he decided,

was—"shy,

Japanese, clever, gentle, obviously an adorable

little

Lindbergh— slim (though a touch of chubbiness
about the cheek), schoolboyish, yet with those delicate prehensile
hands which disconcert one's view of him as an inspired mechanic.
Lindbergh's hand was resting upon the collar of a
dog. I had heard about that dog. ... He is a police dog of enorNot for a moment did
mous proportions. His name is Thor.
Lindbergh relax his hold upon the collar. It is this monster which

person. Charles

.

.

.

.

.

.

guards Jon Lindbergh.
"

What a nice dog!' I said.

"'You will have to be a little careful at first, Mr. Nicolson,' he
answered.
" Is he very fierce?'
" 'He's all that. But he will get used to you in time.'

THE HAUPTMANN CASE

215

Nicolson tried saying the dog's name. It made a sound "not a
growl ... a deep pectoral regurgitation— predatory, savage, hungry."
Lindbergh said it would take the dog about a week to become
used to Nicolson. He let Thor go. "If he wags his tail, Mr. Nicolson,
you need have no fear," he said. Thor did wag his tail.
Later, after a steadying drink, Nicolson asked what happened if

Thor didn't wag his

tail.

"Well," Lindbergh said, "you must be

careful not to pass him. He might get hold of you."

"By the throat?" Nicolson asked.
"Not necessarily," said Lindbergh. "If he does that, you must stay
still and holler all you can."

No doubt the dog was savage. But Nicolson did not know
Lindbergh well enough to realize that he might have been kidding,
just a little. The opportunity to scare an old-school-tie type was
probably irresistible to Lindbergh.
On October 8, Lindbergh was called by the New York police to
identify Hauptmann's voice, the voice he had heard calling "Hey,
Doctor" in St. Raymond's Cemetery. Yet that morning he gave no
sign of anything dramatic. At breakfast he helped Nicolson
unload his camera, and then said, "Well, I have got to go up to New
York—want a lift?" Nicolson, who had already started work on the
Morrow biography, said no.
Lindbergh returned toward the end of lunch, and the family
chatted gaily. After coffee, Nicolson left the room. But as he walked
out, he saw Lindbergh, reflected in a mirror, take his wife's arm and

lead her into the study. "Obviously he was telling her what happened in the court," Nicolson wrote to his wife, the novelist Victoria
Sackville-West. "But they are splendid in the way that they never

intrude this great tragedy on our daily lives. It is real dignity and
restraint." What Lindbergh told his wife that day was that he had
recognized Hauptmann's voice as the voice in the cemetery.

Lindbergh described Hauptmann as a "magnificent-looking man,
very well built." But his eyes were small, said Lindbergh, "like the
eyes of a wild boar— mean, shifty, small and cruel."

Once Mrs. Morrow broke down and talked about the kidnaping
to Nicolson. It was the night she was flying to California to be with

her eldest daughter Elisabeth, who was dying of pneumonia. Then
Nicolson said something about her control and courage. "Courage?"
Mrs. Morrow said. "Do you know that I cry about that baby of ours

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

216

every night, even now? [This was two and a half years after the
kidnaping.] That is not courage!" Elisabeth Morrow

Morgan died

not long after Mrs. Morrow arrived in California.

The

arrest,

identification,

indictment, and extradition to

New

Jersey of Hauptmann were counterpointed by a mounting hysteria

The impact of these events could be measured in the
amount of mail received by the Lindberghs. When the case was on
the front pages, the number of letters mounted to 100,000 a day.
To handle this mountain of mail from strangers, the Lindberghs
had worked out a system of having it sent to an office in New York
and winnowed by office boys. In this way, many important letters
never reached them. Friends and relatives addressed them by
special names at a secret address.
The court proceedings against Hauptmann began in Flemington,
Jersey, the Hunterdon county seat, on Wednesday, January 2,
1935. Hauptmann had been in the county jail since October 19.
in the press.

-

Small, rural Flemington did the best it could to cope with the influx
of reporters and publicity hounds who had asked for reservations in

iNew
the local

hotel. At least three hundred reporters came to cover the

Among them were Walter Winchell, Edna Ferber, Arthur
Brisbane, Fanny Hurst, Damon Runyon, Kathleen Norris, Alextrial.

ander Woollcott, Adela Rogers St. John, Raoul de Roussy de Sales
(Paris-Soir), Lionel Shortt (London Daily Mail), Dixie Tighe
(London Daily Express). Cafe society also attended en masse— film
people, singers, dancers, and perennial first-nighters.
Lindbergh had worn dark glasses and a cap when he observed
and listened to Hauptmann at the police station in New York. But
he attended the court proceedings in New Jersey without any
disguise. He sat there alone watching as the jury was chosen, and
his wife joined him when the trial started on January 3. The charge
was murder. (Breaking and entering to commit a burglary is a
felony, and a death caused during the commission of a felony is a
capital crime. On that basis, the state Attorney General, David
Wilentz, had been able to get Hauptmann charged with first-degree
murder. As a kidnaper Hauptmann could have been charged only
stars, society

with extortion, not a capital offense.

Anne Lindbergh was the second witness for the prosecution.

Among the questions she had to answer was one by Prosecutor
Wilentz about the baby: "Was he healthy?"

THE HAUPTMANN CASE

217

Anne Lindbergh replied, "He was very healthy." She described the

//

baby, the fact that he could walk and talk, that his hair was curly.
She had to identify the child's wardrobe, and describe the events of

~\

the night the baby was kidnaped.

was an exquisitely painful
examination, but it was necessary and she went through it in fine
style. The defense did not cross-examine.
/
Lindbergh was the next witness, and his ordeal lasted much
^— longer. He, too, was taken through the events of the night of the
crime, particularly the sound he and his wife had heard while
It

/

chatting in the living room— the sound, probably, of the kidnap
ladder breaking or falling to the ground. Lindbergh said it sounded

an orange crate falling off a chair, which I
assumed to be in the kitchen." He said he noticed it enough to ask

like "the top slats of

his wife, "What is that?"

His testimony on how he had learned of the kidnaping:
reading in the library. Miss

"I

was

Gow called me in a rather excited

voice and asked me if I had the baby. I immediately went upstairs
into the nursery, and from the appearance of the crib I realized that

something had gone wrong. The bedclothing in the crib was in such
condition that I felt it was impossible for the baby to have gotten
out for himself. The bedclothing was standing stiffly enough so that
the opening where the baby had been was still there— the clothing
had not collapsed." And he told of the envelope on the radiator
/
containing the kidnap note.
Carefully the prosecutor led him along the trail of events, the
.second note, the visit to the cemetery with Dr. Condon when he
hea**l the voice calling in a foreign accent, "Hey, Doctor."
"Since that time have you heard the same voice?" Wilentz asked.

^

"Yes, I have."

"Whose voice was

it,

Colonel, that you heard calling, 'Hey,

Doctor'?"
"It was Hauptmann's voice," Lindbergh replied.
The prosecutor went on to the finding of the child's body, and

Lindbergh's identification of it in the Trenton morgue.

Anne Lindbergh's testimony had been peripheral; Charles Lindbergh's was central to the charge of murder. Hauptmann's chief
defense counsel, Edward J. Reilly, could not allow it to stand
unquestioned.

He immediately went to the attack and asked Lindbergh if he

f

218

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

was carrying a gun. (There were rumors that Lindbergh would
The judge interrupted, but Lindbergh said he
didn't mind answering. He was not carrying a gun.
Reilly asked Lindbergh if he was aware of any local hostility
among the residents of Hopewell against him and his family.
Lindbergh said he was not. Reilly pressed on, saying that the large
Lindbergh estate had sealed a good part of formerly open land from
local people, which they might resent. But Lindbergh did not go
shoot Hauptmann.)

along with this.
Reilly tried for another opening, asking Lindbergh what he had

done to check on the people he had hired as servants in the house.
Lindbergh said he had talked to each of them for about half an
hour.

"Beyond that, did you go any further?"
"Beyond that I never go any further," Lindbergh replied.
Reilly went into Lindbergh's actions the night of the kidnaping.
Did he examine the ground for footprints? Did he want to reexamine the past histories of the servants? No reason, said Lindbergh, to do either; the area in question had been covered with
loose gravel that would not reveal footprints and he depended on

The defense
counsel asked Lindbergh if the butler, Mr. Whateley, would know
he wasn't coming to Hopewell on Monday.
"He probably would," Lindbergh said.
"And Mrs. Whateley would be very likely to know— she was the
the thoroughness of the police check of the servants.

cook wasn't she?"
"It is quite probable."

"But the outside world would not know that you were not coming
home Monday night, would it?"
"Very few people would know that."
"Very few people would know that you were going back to New

York again on Tuesday, would they, Colonel?"
"Very few people know what I do."
Reilly, the defense counsel, went into other matters. There had
been a fox-terrier puppy that played with the baby. Did the dog
sound any kind of alarm? Lindbergh said that the dog was not a
watchdog and hadn't been trained to give an alarm. Could anyone
have come into the house by the front door while the Lindberghs
were dining? No, said the Colonel, the front door did not open

THE HAUPTMANN CASE
easily and there was no

219

door closed between the dining room and

the front door.

"Then would it be possible for anyone in the house, who knew the
house, to take the baby out of the crib and bring it down the main
stairs— and to a window?"
"It might have been possible," Lindbergh said.

"Let's take the other course, Colonel. If there

was disloyalty in

your home, would it be possible for a person acquainted with the
home to take the baby out of the crib and descend the servants'
staircase and hand it to someone in the garage yard while you were
dining?"
/

;

Lindbergh said it would have been possible.
Reilly went on to the matter of a footprint on a suitcase in the

faaby's room, and asked if it wasn't odd that if it was made by the
/man who was heavy enough to break a rung of the ladder, why
hadn't he broken the suitcase? This was obviously not a question
within the range of Lindbergh's competence. Reilly swung again

into the possibility that some person or persons known or unknown

—but not Hauptmann— committed the crime. Had the child been
much exposed to strangers, he asked. No, only friends, Lindbergh
replied. Had the baby cried out at any time during the evening?
Lindbergh said that as far as he knew it had not. The implication
that Reilly left with the jury was that no stranger had been near the

baby.
Reilly also established that the nurse, Betty Gow, had spent more

time with the baby than anyone else had. But when she had called

Lindbergh to ask if he had the baby she wasn't hysterical— as
though this indicated that she, perhaps, had been the one to hand
the baby over to a kidnaper. Round and round went Reilly, circling
and attempting to find openings. But the only time he aroused
Lindbergh to anger was when he asked if it wasn't peculiar that Dr.
Condon's letter offering to help find the kidnaper, in a small, out-ofthe-way newspaper, had been almost immediately answered. He
asked if Lindbergh hadn't considered the possibility that both
questions and answers came from the same person.
"I think that is inconceivable from any practical standpoint,"
Lindbergh said.
Reilly hammered away at Condon's reliability. Lindbergh hadn't

actually seen him get a note from the kidnaper. Lindbergh had said,

•*

220

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

at the earlier trial of John

Hughes Curtis, the fraud from Norfolk,

that he had believed that Curtis was in touch with a gang who had

kidnaped the child.
"Yes," said Lindbergh, "but I found out later that Curtis was not
telling me the truth."

When his public inquisition was over,

the frenzy of public

curiosity continued. Outside the Morrow place, a constant autocade

of sightseers moved slowly by.

And the Hopewell estate was still

overrun by people who searched for souvenirs, the most prized of

which were yielded by the actual spot where the baby's body had
been buried.
In spite of his dislike of public appearances, Lindbergh showed
up every day at the Hauptmann trial. The proceedings dragged on
for six weeks as the prosecution tried to weave a tight web of
circumstantial evidence around Hauptmann, and the defense retaliated doggedly with question and evasion. Finally, the hearing of
evidence ended and Judge Thomas W. Trenchard charged the jury
in a long, complicated lecture about the law and the case on the

morning of February 13, 1935.
As he went through Hauptmann's testimony, he asked, "Do you
believe that?" The charge as printed in the newspapers sounded
quite impartial. But, Lindbergh said, it was not. Judge Trenchard's
questions did not sound the way they were printed. What he asked
was "Do you believe that?"
After hearing the charge, Lindbergh left the courtroom and drove
back to Englewood to be with the family. The jury would deliberate
for eleven hours and vote a rumored seven times before it reached a
verdict.

The jury had been consulting for only five hours when Mrs.
Morrow sat down to dine with the Lindberghs and Harold Nicolson. There were two radios turned on, one in the pantry next to the

dining room, one in the dressing room, with the usual music and

comedy shows coming through. The family kept up a spirited
conversation, but everyone was straining to hear the radio give the
newsbreak on the trial.
After dinner they sat in the drawing room talking about Dwight
Morrow. Suddenly Mrs. Morrow put her head around a screen and
said, "Hauptmann has been condemned to death without mercy."
She looked very pale.

THE HAUPTMANN CASE

221

They all went into the dressing room, where the radio had been
it: "One could hear the almost
diabolic yelling of the crowd [the yells of the crowd were really
terrifying, Nicolson said later. And Lindbergh replied, "That was a
Anne looking
lynching crowd"]. They were all sitting around
very white and still. 'You have now heard/ broke in the voice of the
announcer, 'the verdict in the most famous trial in all history. Bruno
/ Turn that off,
Hauptmann now stands guilty of the foulest
Charles, turn that off/ Then we went into the pantry and had gingerbeer. Charles sat there on the kitchen dresser looking very pink
about the nose. [He had a terrible cold.] 1 don't know/ he said to
me, whether you have followed this case very carefully. There is no
doubt at all that Hauptmann did the thing. My one dread all these
years has been that they would get hold of someone as a victim
turned up. As Nicolson describes

.

.

.

.

.

about whom I wasn't sure. I am sure about this— quite sure. It is
this way

.

.

/

"And then quite quietly, while we all sat round in the pantry, he
went through the case point by point. It seemed to relieve all of
them. He did it very quietly, very simply. He pretended to address
his remarks to

me only. But I could see that he was really trying to

ease the agonised tension through which Betty [Mrs. Morrow] and

Anne had passed. It was very well done. It made one feel that here
was no personal desire for vengeance or justification; here was the
solemn process of law inexorably and impersonally punishing a
culprit."

In the Flemington courtroom Wilentz moved for an immediate
sentence.

Hauptmann stood while the judge complied. "The sen-

tence of the Court is that you suffer death at the time and place and
in the manner provided by law," in March, 1935.

There was some dispute about the verdict, some feeling that the
had come in with a murder verdict unsupported by direct
evidence. The New York Times editorialized on it: "The charge of
the judge and the verdict of the jury established a crime but did not
clear away a mystery. We do not yet know exactly what happened
on the tragic night at Hopewell.
The presiding judge
told the jury that the State had been unable to present positive
evidence identifying the prisoner at the time and place of the
original crime, and that circumstantial evidence alone had to be
depended upon
beyond a doubt.
Hauptmann had guilty
jury

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

222

knowledge of the outrage and was at least an accessory. The jury
[found] him guilty as a principal.
Nothing but a confession or
the turning up of new evidence can now be expected to throw
."
further light upon a mystery
But Hauptmann never confessed, and there was no new evidence.
There was, however, a lot of legal maneuvering— appeals, stays of
execution, denials. Hauptmann became a martyr to some of his
fellow-Germ an- Americans; there were rallies at which the name of
Hauptmann was cheered, Lindbergh's booed. These rallies were held
in German-American neighborhoods, like Yorkville in New York
City, and were attended mostly by Bundist groups. The New Jersey
Court of Errors and Appeals heard the arguments of Hauptmann's
lawyers for a reversal of the verdict. In twelve thousand words the
Court refuted the arguments and let the verdict stand. Then there
was a petition to the Supreme Court to review the New Jersey
.

.

.

.

.

decision.

Meanwhile the Governor of New Jersey, Harold Hoffman, got
the case personally. He actually went to see Hauptmann
secretly in his death cell. Later he let this fact be known and made
headlines with it. He said he wasn't worried about Hauptmann the
individual, but about truth and justice. He issued a statement
saying that Hauptmann ought to be given a personal hearing by the
into

New Jersey Court of Pardons so he could plead his own case for life
imprisonment.

There was more than the smell of politics in this. Hoffman was a
Republican, a glamour-boy governor; Wilentz, the young prosecutor
in the Lindbergh case, had been built up as his probable Democratic opponent by the successful handling of the trial. In this situa-

Meanwhile the
Supreme Court of the United States rejected the plea of Haupt-

tion Hauptmann's life was almost an election issue.

mann's counsel for review of the case.
Politicians

granted

still

Hoffman
months so that new

got a lot of publicity mileage out of it.

Hauptmann a reprieve

of several

evidence could be hunted. H. L. Mencken got into the act with a
letter to Hoffman saying he thought Hauptmann was guilty, but
that the crime could not have been committed alone. A crank outfit
called the Committee of Witnesses made the fantastic charge that

was a reprisal against Lindbergh for having made his
flight to the Orient in 1931, which, they said, was for the purpose of
the crime

THE HAUPTMANN CASE

223

stealing Chinese air routes from the German Lufthansa Airline. The
Committee's conclusion and message: vote against the Republican
party, because they had deliberately failed to catch the kidnapers.

was in the midst of this kind of social science fiction that the
Lindberghs attempted to piece together their lives and, most parIt

ticularly, to give their second son, Jon, a normal existence.

A flood

mail— continued to pour in on
them at the Morrow house. Jon had to be driven to nursery school
by a teacher, but even then he was not safe from the Peeping
Toms.
One day in the fall of 1935, a black sedan came alongside the
teacher's car and pushed it to the side of the road. Men jumped out
of the sedan and onto the running board of the teacher's car. The
teacher screamed in terror— but the men were not kidnapers, only
newsreel and newspaper cameramen out for a news beat. They got
closeups of Jon which appeared on the front page of the next day's
paper, although Lindbergh had a working agreement with the press
that no photographs of his second son should be published.
After this, Jon was taken out of the school and kept at home
under armed guard. Now three years old, he had lived since birth in
an atmosphere of fear and secrecy.
Lindbergh told a friend that "we Americans are a primitive
people. We do not have discipline. Our moral standards are low.
... It shows in the newspapers, the morbid curiosity over crimes
and murder trials. Americans seem to have little respect for law, or
of letters— part of it hate or crank

the rights of others."

The kidnaping threats against Jon, against Mrs. Lindbergh and
Mrs. Morrow fluctuated with the amount of news in the papers. But
the number and quality of threats became especially intense after

Hauptmann's conviction. Lindbergh could guard himself— he refused
a bodyguard, but did frequently carry a revolver— but he could not
guarantee the security of his family.

Nobody could, although the

police made at least a dozen arrests of would-be extortionists.

Lindbergh had visited England twice, in 1927 and in 1933. He
thought that the English "had a greater regard for law and order
than the people of any other nation."

On Thursday, December 19, 1935, Deac Lyman was in the city
room of the New York Times when Lindbergh called him and invited him to come out to Englewood, where he was staying with

224

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

the Morrows. He said, "I've got something to talk about, but not

on the telephone."
Lyman had to go to New Jersey anyway; he took his wife, Mab,
with him. Mrs. Lyman talked to Anne and played with Jon in one
room while in another Lindbergh said to Lyman, "Deac, I'm taking
my family to England. I've got to get Anne and the baby away.
Crank letters have started again. There have been threats against
the family. I'm going to make England my home."
Lyman couldn't talk for a moment. Then he asked Lindbergh
why he wasn't giving the story to C. B. Allen of the Herald Tribune
and other reporters he trusted.
Lindbergh said, "If I give the information to a half-dozen people
there will be a half-dozen versions. I know if I give it to you it will
be right. If it's in the Times first the others will pick it up.
Lyman said, "Judas, Slim, don't you know this is one hell of a
news story?"
Lindbergh said, "I don't know about that; it's up to you."
The details were worked out. Lindbergh told Lyman that he
planned to sail secretly with his family on Sunday, December 22.
He had booked passage on the freighter American Importer leaving
from West Twentieth Street in New York. Nobody would know
they were on board until he revealed their identity.
He asked Lyman to hold the story until the ship had been at sea
for twenty-four hours. He promised to keep Lyman informed of any
change in plans.
On Saturday, Lindbergh called Lyman at home to say goodbye
and to assure him that they were definitely leaving.
Lyman was not working on Friday or Saturday. He came in to
New York late Saturday evening, after Sunday's Times was on the
presses, and revealed his story to the city editor, Bruce Rae.
Lyman had to do a bit of arguing with Rae to prevent him from
running the story immediately, but he assured Rae that Lindbergh
was totally reliable and would not give the story to anyone else.
Lyman stayed in the city room until he read on the ticker that the
American Importer was outward bound.
He came in on Sunday to write the story, which was handled
with the greatest secrecy. No copy boy touched it; it was given for
setting to a couple of typesetters carefully chosen for their closed

mouths. It was put into the Monday Times, December 23. Lyman

THE HAUPTMANN CASE

225

waited for the first papers off the press, took one and went home.

By a fantastic coincidence, a New York American reporter was
Lyman in the train he took to Long Island and saw

sitting behind

the front-page headline in the Times over his shoulder, and so the
American managed to run a paragraph on the Lindbergh departure
that day.

But as Meyer Berger said, "The Times had put over one of the
... It was generally recognized that the story had come [Lyman's] way because
of the character he had established as a trustworthy newspaperman." It later won Lyman the Pulitzer Prize.
The story started on page one of the Times under a four-column
greatest exclusive news stories of the generation.

headline:

LINDBERGH FAMILY SAILS FOR ENGLAND
TO SEEK A SAFE, SECLUDED RESIDENCE;
THREATS ON SON'S LIFE FORCE DECISION
"Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh has given up residence in the
United States and is on his way to establish a home in England,"
Lyman wrote. "Although [the family] do not plan to give up their
American citizenship they are prepared to live abroad permanently,
if that should be necessary." The story spoke of the ebb and flow
of threats and of the final, crowning incident of the cameramen and
the car. It concluded: "And so the man who eight years ago was
hailed as an international hero and a good will ambassador between
the peoples of the world is taking his wife and son to establish, if
he can, a secure haven for them in a foreign land."
There was much editorial comment on an American hero being
forced to flee his own country, but most of it blamed the press and
the public. A few called Lindbergh a "quitter." There was no doubt,
according to the Morrows' neighbors, that the Lindberghs had been
in fear for Jon's life for months. Considering Lindbergh's strong
sense of patriotism, the move had to be a desperation measure.
The consensus was probably summed up in the Herald Tribune's
editorial hope that the Lindberghs would find in England a "tolerable home ... in a safer and more civilized land than ours has
shown itself to be.
When has a nation made life unbearable to
.

.

.

one of its most distinguished men," the Tribune asked, "through a
sheer inability to protect him from its criminals and lunatics and the

226

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

vast vulgarity of

its

sensationalists, publicity-seekers, petty politi-

cians and yellow newspapers?"

However, the New York Daily News disagreed: "He would have
been pestered less if he had acted more as a popular hero is
supposed to act, and been less embarrassed in the public gaze."
A few years later Lindbergh told Larry Kelly, of the Hearst
papers, that the reason for going to England was that "it was
impossible for me or for my family to lead a normal life because of
the tremendous public hysteria.
We couldn't go to a theater, a
store, or even for a stroll without being surrounded, stared at and
.

.

.

harassed.

"We came to the conclusion that it would be best to take a trip
abroad for a time until these events had been forgotten and we
could return to ordinary life." There had been no question that they
would ultimately return, Lindbergh said. "America always was and
always will be my country."
The Lindberghs were received with some excitement in England,
but after the original flurry they were allowed to settle quietly in the
country. They rented Long Barn, Harold Nicolson's house near
Sevenoaks-Weald, in Kent. They lived there quietly for two years,
until 1938, when they moved to France.

At 8:47 on the evening of April 3, 1936, Hauptmann was electrocuted in the State Prison at Trenton, New Jersey. The appeals and
stays of executions had given him more than a year of life beyond
the date set by Judge Trenchard for his execution. He died maintaining his innocence.

Comparing Lindbergh's actions and statements before 1932 with
those after 1935 makes it clear that it was the events of this period
that turned his aversion to publicity into a towering insistence on

privacy.

An acquaintance calls his fear of the public a kind of

paranoia; if it is, it is a paranoia based on a number of persistent
reality factors, not the least of which was the threat to the life of his
child.

The kidnaping and death of his first-born, exacerbated by four
years of vulgar exploitation by the news media, some officials, and
many of his fellow-citizens, left Lindbergh with a psychic wound
that has never healed. Unlike his wife, he has never been able to
discuss the case with his children. There is one exception. This took

THE HAUPTMANN CASE

227

place one day about 1950 when a nameless stranger, a young man,

rang the bell of the Lindbergh house in Darien. Reeve, Lindbergh's
youngest daughter, then about five years old, answered the door.
The man told the little girl that he was her long-lost brother,
Charles A. Lindbergh, Jr. He insisted on seeing "their" parents.

Lindbergh was working in his study, and Mrs. Lindbergh was in

New York. Reeve knew that her father did not like being disturbed,
so she called her sister Anne instead. Anne, about ten at the time,
tried to get the stranger to leave but he refused. So the

two girls

decided to tell their father.

Lindbergh came out immediately. He talked quietly to the man
and finally got him to go. He did not become obviously upset. After
the man left, Lindbergh spoke to the girls unemotionally for a while
about the kidnaping— the only time he has talked of it to any of his
children. When he was certain that the girls were no longer upset at
the intrusion, he went back to his work.
Lindbergh is still bitter at the press for the barbarous things they
did between 1932 and 1935. A few years ago he was in Washington
to attend a professional conference. He was in one room; the
conference was ready to begin in another. But between the two was
a roomful of reporters. In order to get to the conference, Lindbergh
would have had to. walk through that room. He refused to budge
unless the reporters left.

"But you'll only have to wave at them and say hello," a friend
said.

"Get those people out of there," Lindbergh replied.

Somebody remarked that they were only doing their job.
"Yes, and they were only doing their job when they pried the lid
off

my son's coffin to take pictures in the morgue," Lindbergh

replied.

Mention of the tragedy is enough to throw Mrs. Lindbergh into a
even today. And the Lindbergh children
reflect this trauma. When one Lindbergh child recently found a
copy of George Waller's book Kidnap, the Story of the Lindbergh
Case in a friend's house, she methodically tore the book to pieces.
state of complete silence,

The sensational circumstances surrounding the case helped to
focus attention on the legal loopholes that existed in the crime of
kidnaping and furthered the passage of national legislation against

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

228

the crime. Until then, only state laws had prevailed, and penalties
varied.

New Jersey had no state law against kidnaping until after

(

the crime. ) But as a result of the Lindbergh case, the United States

Congress passed a law in June, 1932, making kidnaping, in effect, a
federal crime.

Under the new statute, it was presumed that if a

kidnaped person was not returned within a week, he had been
taken across a state line, and federal authorities could enter the case
without invitation by local police. The waiting period was later
shortened by legislation to twenty-four hours. Since this law was
passed, more than six hundred and seventy-five cases of kidnaping
have taken place in the United States. The Federal Bureau of
Investigation solved or helped to solve all but three of them. The
law that gave them their authority is still known as "the Lindbergh
law."

In January, 1967, the chief Federal District judge in New Haven,
Connecticut, held that the Lindbergh law was unconstitutional

because it stipulated that if the defendants were tried by a jury, the
jury might recommend a death penalty; whereas if they elected to
be tried by a judge, or pleaded guilty, they would not suffer this
hazard. Thus, "the defendants must risk their lives to get a jury
trial
[which is] a constitutional right," the Judge, William H.
Timberg, said. The final disposition of the law is still in doubt.
.

.

.

18

DR. CARREL

ON MAY 16, 1932, SOON AFTER THE BODY OF THEIR SON
was found, the Lindberghs received a letter that said, "There are no
words that can properly express what I feel at the end of your great
tragedy.
Today, the final blow has come. But life continues. I
wish for you both all that the future holds in store for those who
possess indomitable courage." The letter was signed "Alexis Carrel."
No stranger knew that Lindbergh knew the famous Carrel. It was
a relationship he managed to keep secret from the public for five
.

.

.

years.

1930 when Anne Lindbergh's sister, Elisabeth Reeve
Morrow, was stricken with a dangerous heart condition. This was a
mechanical problem, something that a surgeon might repair if he
could operate on the heart. But in 1930 heart surgery was as
It began in

impossible as the flight to Paris had been in 1920— the machinery

simply didn't exist. An operation on a living heart means opening
the chest. This collapses the lungs and requires a means of breath-

ing for the patient in some mechanical fashion. Then, to work on the
heart, that organ must be stopped. To keep the patient alive, his
blood must be circulated mechanically, too. What was needed was
some kind of blood and air pump.
Lindbergh asked the family doctor why, with the technology then

available, a heart-lung machine had not been invented. The family

doctor didn't know. Another doctor, an anesthetist

who had at-

tended Anne Lindbergh at the time of Jon's birth, seemed a more
promising source of information. He offered to introduce Lindbergh
to a man he knew, a medical researcher, who was working on the
problem of a heart pump, or something similar. The man was at the
229

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

230

Rockefeller Institute, in New York City. Lindbergh eagerly assented
to the meeting.

On November 28, 1930, Lindbergh was introduced to Dr. Alexis
Carrel at the Rockefeller Institute. Carrel was a star performer in
that famous group of scientists.* He was a Nobel Prize laureate,**

the first and for a long time the only surgeon who had won that
prize. He was a man of enormous erudition and self-confidence, a
kind of maverick in the scientific community who was carving out

new disciplines for himself. He had come to the Rockefeller Institute because he couldn't have the kind of freedom he wanted in his

native France,

where the scientific establishment created a rigid

environment.
Carrel was a tiny manf with brilliant eyes; one was bright blue,
the other dark brown. He had a way of sizing people up instantaneously; he would shake hands while peering through his pince-nez at
their faces.

He believed that every person has the qualities of his

soul, mind, and body written on his face. This was done, he used to

by the brain through its control of nerves and muscles which
molded the features to mirror character. If his scrutiny gave
him a good impression, he would begin to smile and talk. His talk
consisted of questions at first. But if he had a bad opinion of a face,
he would shrug and turn away.
say,

He accepted Lindbergh immediately. And Lindbergh, not one to
had a reaction similar to Carrel's.
Kenneth Davis, "both spoke of their [meeting],

give his confidence quickly,

According

to

* The Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research was established in 1901 by
John D. Rockefeller to "conduct, assist and encourage investigations in the
sciences and arts of hygiene, medicine and surgery ... in the nature and
causes of disease and the methods of its prevention and treatment." In 1908
the New York state legislature extended the corporate charter by special act to
allow the Institute to carry on educational work as well. It has long been
known for the brilliance of its research and teaching staff. Peyton Rous ( another
Nobel laureate) and Rene Dubos are two members. In 1954 the Rockefeller
Institute

became Rockefeller University, part of the University of the State of

New York, and is empowered to grant degrees of doctor of philosophy and
doctor of medical science, as well as honorary degrees. It has an endowment
of more than $130,000,000.
** He won it in 1912 for his method of suturing blood vessels during surgery
instead of destroying them, and for work in transplanting organs. This work
was also basic to later developments in blood transfusion.
t Who stated in Man, the Unknown: "Men of genius are not tall. Mussolini
is

of medium size, and

Napoleon was short."

DR.

CARREL

231

shaking hands, their sharp gaze into each other's eyes, as one of the
remarkable experiences of their lives it was as if an electric current
:

passed between them." Carrel believed in extrasensory perception,
and so did Lindbergh.
Carrel worked in a black hooded monk's robe in his laboratory, as

did all his assistants. The explanation was that black absorbed light
instead of reflecting it, but the effect was theatrical, particularly as

Carrel and his staff were the only black-robed people in the
Rockefeller Institute. Carrel absent-mindedly often wore his black

hood into the building's cafeteria.
Accepting Lindbergh as an equal, Carrel immediately began
explaining what he was up to. His purpose, he said, was to study
organs of the body in vitro, the scientist's description of the examination of living tissue in a glass environment. The study of organs

up to that time had been in the hands of the pathologists, who had
worked only on dead tissue. Living organs were something different, Carrel said, and if they could be kept alive outside the body,
there was no telling what medical advances might not be possible;
for example, dying organs might be removed, revived, and replaced
to function once more within the body.
He told Lindbergh he had been working on this problem for more
than twenty years. He had built an apparatus, a kind of pump, that
would keep organs alive outside the body, but not for very long.
They would soon become infected with disease and die. What he
needed was a better apparatus that would keep the organs alive and
free of infection, and a means of using blood in the machine
without having the blood clot.

"For me," Lindbergh wrote, "that began an association with an
extraordinarily great man.

... To me, his true greatness lay in the

unlimited penetration, curiosity, and scope of his mind, in his
fearlessness of opinion, in his

deep concern about the trends of

modern civilization and their effect on his fellow men."
Lindbergh, as he does
carefully

and punctuated

when learning something new, listened
Carrel's discourse with simple

but ex-

tremely pertinent questions. When he left, he immediately began to

work on the problem. In a couple of weeks he had brought back a
glass perfusion pump that had been blown to his specifications by a
glassmaker in Princeton, New Jersey. It was designed to perfuse

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

232

organs, through their blood vessels, with the fluids necessary to life.
It did not work, but it was a good start.
trial and error before
problem,
which
seemed almost insuperLindbergh overcame
able to other scientists. One of his co-workers was Dr. Richard J.
Bing, now chairman of the department of medicine at Wayne State
University, in Detroit, Michigan. Dr. Bing recalls Lindbergh as

Actually,

it

took about four years of
this

"direct,

sensitive

and simple. ... I think

it

is

because of his

simplicity that he dared to do what others had failed to attempt.

,,

In the course of his work on the pump, Lindbergh developed a
system for washing the blood used in the apparatus. He also
invented a quick way of separating serum from whole blood by

means of a centrifuge, replacing the laborious process of grinding
plasma by hand with mortar and pestle. He was a dedicated worker
who spent whole days in Carrers laboratories, sometimes forgetting
to eat.

He was well liked by the people who worked with him, but was
generally removed from the life of the Rockefeller Institute by the
seclusion in which Carrel carried on his researches. However, even
in that monkish atmosphere Lindbergh never lost his penchant for
practical jokes. One of his favorites was "a bucket of water over the
door so that when you opened the door you got drenched/' Dr. Bing
recalls. "This I was told, since I never got a shower of that sort." But
Bing, and those who did get drenched, apparently felt there was no
malice in Lindbergh's horseplay. They knew he liked sour-ball
candies, so they would put them in his bag.

When the perfusion pump was developed, the first announcement
was made in June, 1935, in an article in Science magazine signed by
both Carrel and Lindbergh. The names alone were enough to make
news, but the description of how cats' organs—ovaries, hearts,
kidneys— not only lived, but went through cycles of life in the
apparatus, added a great deal of excitement.
There was a kind of chemistry in the association of the two names
with a development that seemed fraught with possibilities for
extending life. Time magazine theorized at length about the potential value of the pump. There was a spate of headlines and
editorials in newspapers. Lindbergh was aloof from this; he wrote a
technical article on the workings of the pump for the Journal of
Experimental Medicine, published by the Rockefeller Institute, in

DR. CARREL

233

September, 1935. A year later, at the International Cytological
Congress in Copenhagen ( cytology is the study of cells ) Lindbergh
demonstrated his pump and Carrel lectured on its uses in science
,

and medicine. Lindbergh was quite factual; Carrel theorized on
how the pump might heal organs or limbs, "removed from the body
and placed in the Lindbergh pump, as patients are placed in a
hospital."

"You've got to understand that because Lindbergh and Carrel did
this

thing together, it was blown up out of all proportion," said a

Rockefeller doctor. "If they had devised a new mousetrap there
would have been loud screams about it." The pump was, as a

colleague of Carrel's put it, "a step in the right direction, useful to

study isolated organs. This study has since become an important
branch of science. The pump was extremely sophisticated for its

time— and quite remarkable, considering that the man who engineered it had had no training in this work. It was a very ingenious
piece of apparatus that Lindbergh worked out. I got mine out the
other day and looked at it— it's like looking at your grandmothers
picture. We don't use that pump any more, but we do use later
developments based on the same principle."
Another colleague of both men says, "The newspapers called it
'the Lindbergh heart,' but it was not a heart. It had nothing to do
with the later development of the heart-lung machine. Its real worth
was in a scientific area of study that was not nearly so dramatic as
the newspapers made out by calling it a heart. But it was an
important contribution to science, all the same."
Actually, the Lindbergh

pump is much more than a museum

piece even today. In the November-December, 1966, issue of Cryobiology, a journal devoted to reports on biological experiments at

low temperatures, there is an article on Lindbergh's work in this
field.* It is an extension of his work with Carrel. Researchers at the
U.S. Naval Research Institute in Bethesda, Maryland, working in
the field of organ transplant, had come across the Lindbergh-Carrel
reports and were astonished to find that Lindbergh and Carrel had

better results in keeping organs alive thirty years ago than re-

searchers were getting currently with "new and improved" equip* "An Apparatus for the Pulsating Perfusion of Whole Organs," by C. A.
Lindbergh, V. P. Perry, T. I. Malinin, and G. H. Mouer.

234

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

ment. They got in touch with Lindbergh, and had some of his
pumps made by Corning Glass. Then they asked Lindbergh to
design a new pump that would be much less expensive and withstand the cold of cryobiology. This he did successfully. Monkey
hearts have been brought back to life in the equipment. The
ultimate purpose of the Navy research is to bring to fruition what

Carrel had dreamed of— the cultivation and reuse of organs. But

cryobiology did not exist when Carrel was alive. The experimenters
with the new technique hope to freeze-dry hearts of people who die
in accidents, then bring the hearts back to life and implant them in
person with dangerous heart conditions.

When he settled in England in 1936, Lindbergh began working
on his scientific notes. He visited Carrel on the island of Saint-Gildas,
in the English Channel, where Carrel had a summer house which
he used for certain experiments. In December, 1937, Lindbergh
returned quietly to the United States and stayed there until March,
1938. He wrote his part of a book on which he collaborated with
Carrel. The Culture of Organs was published in 1938. Its chapters
were written alternately by Lindbergh and Carrel, and signed
separately. Lindbergh contributed chapters on the design, construction, and operation of the perfusion pump, as well as diagrams
and other explanatory material. Carrel wrote the scientific chapters
and rationale.
A good example of Lindbergh's scientific writing style is from
Chapter II, "The Apparatus. " "The composition of all gas in contact
with the organ and the perfusion fluid is controlled. Flaming and
evaporation of the fluid are prevented. The maximum and minimum
pulsation pressures and the pulsation rate are adjustable. The
pressure at various points in the pulse cycle can be controlled. The
temperature of operation is adjustable. The rate of flow of perfusion
fluid can be measured. Changes in the rate of flow through the
organ are compensated for automatically with a minimum effect on
pulsation pressures. The perfusion fluid is filtered during its circula-

and before it enters the organ. Organs can be removed from
one apparatus and installed in another aseptically. The perfusion
fluid can be removed and replaced aseptically. The organ and the
perfusion fluid can be observed at all times/'
The perfusion pump was only one part of the collaboration
between Lindbergh and Carrel, however. The relationship went
tion

DR.

CARREL

235

deeper and lasted longer than their joint work at the Rockefeller
Institute. They were friends for about fourteen years in the United
States and in Europe. In 1938 the Lindberghs rented a small French
island, Iliec, very near to Carrel's place on Saint-Gildas. Lindbergh set up a laboratory in the barn, and the two men did some
experiments there. When the tide was low, it was possible to walk
between Iliec and St. Gildas; the Lindberghs and the Carrels saw
a lot of each other. The Lindberghs were very happy in the quiet
seclusion of this retreat, and a friend of Lindbergh's says that the
flier had planned to devote the next years to working on scientific
problems. He used to spend hours talking to Carrel, the two of
them all alone with the sound of the wind and the sea around them.
Dr. Simon Flexner, the late director of laboratories at the Rockefeller Institute, said, on the occasion of Carrel's retirement from the
Institute in 1938, "The career which you will be leaving is one
of the remarkable achievements of our period in the

domain

of

experimental surgery and biology." The Lindbergh pump enabled
Carrel to push forward his work into the study of living cells and
tissues grown outside the body, and into viruses.

Dr.

Raymond

C.

Parker,

director of the

Connaught Medical

Research Laboratories of the University of Toronto, said recently
that Carrel's tissue studies "formed the basis of all of the more recent
work on cell nutrition." Carrel was also able, with the Lindbergh
pump, to show how cancer cells grow, to measure their rate of
growth, to show differences in their food requirements, and to
illustrate

adds,

how they could often look like normal cells. Dr. Parker

"None

of the major undertakings of Dr.

Carrel and his

associates has been outmoded."

Carrel was without doubt a remarkably talented scientist and a
most unusual man. He was a dazzling talker who could spin
theories as fast as he could make sentences, and adduce all sorts of
interesting data to back his ideas. He was a loner. He was arrogant,
impatient. A friendly biographer, Joseph T. Durkin, S.J., says, "He
was sometimes too certain regarding his own views. His convictions
easily became prejudices of dogmas stubbornly held."

He therefore made a lot of enemies among pedestrian scientists.
When Lindbergh met Carrel, who was about thirty years his senior,
Carrel had

become much more metaphysician than

physician.

"Carrel's earlier contributions to science were considerable," a doc-

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

236

tor who was closely associated with Carrel said recently, "but later
on he became too philosophical/ " This same man, a scientist, said
that Carrel had long since broken the bounds of scientific discourse:
"His approach to science was a real mixture of originality and
almost charlatanism. He was a very imaginative man, and a lot of
people don't have very much imagination— they judge such a man

harshly. He was a nonconformist."

Lindbergh did not have the background to make this kind of
assessment of Carrel when he met him. Carrel was taking the whole
of mankind and its future as the scope of his work. He had definite

ideas about genetics, diet, religion, morals, ethics, race, biology,

music, motion pictures, education, and any other subject or discipline his

mind chanced to light on. And, as Lindbergh has since

said, his opinions were far from static; they often changed from day

and sweeps might carry a listener
away. But in his book Man, the Unknown Carrel let himself get
carried away by his own emotions and rhetoric into areas in which
he had no competence. The book, published in 1935, was a big bestseller—and a good example of how Carrel's mind worked. It opens
with some disarmingly modest statements. "The author of this book
is not a philosopher. He is only a man of science.
He does not
pretend to deal with things that He outside the field of scientific
to day. Carrel's intuitive leaps

.

.

.

observation.

"In this book he has endeavored to describe the known, and to
separate

it

clearly

from the plausible.

.

.

.

What he describes he

has either seen with his own eyes or learned directly from those

with whom he associates."
Before he got through the preface, however, Carrel had assumed
"the necessity, not only of mental, political, and social changes, but
of the overthrow of industrial civilization

and of the advent of

another conception of human progress."

One example of his combining observable phenomena with unscientific data to reach a baseless conclusion is

seen on a couple of

pages in the middle of the book: [The brackets are not Carrel's.]
Excessive light is dangerous. In primitive surroundings men instinctively

hide from it. There is a large number of mechanisms capable of protecting the organism from sun rays [eyelids, the iris, pigmentation of skin,
etc.]

... It is possible that lessened reactivity of the nervous system

DR. CARREL

237

and of the intelligence may eventually result from too strong a light.
[It is possible. But it may not be true.] We must not forget that the most
highly civilized races— the Scandinavians, for example— are white, and
have lived for many generations in a country where the atmospheric
luminosity is weak during a great part of the year. [A combination of
some facts, some baseless premises, and a non sequitur, leading to confusion. There is no proof that the Scandinavians are a "race" or are any
more "highly civilized" than dark-skinned people from countries with a
great deal of sunlight.] In France, the populations of the north are far

superior to those of the Mediterranean snores.

[Who says so, besides

Carrel?] The lower races generally inhabit countries where light is violent

and temperature equal and warm. [What is a lower race? What is

a

race?] It seems that the adaptation of white men to light and to heat takes

place at the expense of their nervous and mental development. [Q.E.D.]

Some of Carrel's ideas (not the ones on light) can be found in
Lindbergh's later writings, and can be discerned in his behavior as a

They have even cropped up

father.

in

Lindbergh's professional

preoccupations. In 1954 Lindbergh served as a member of a three-

man Air Force Academy Site Election Committee. When it came
to setting

up the Academy, Lindbergh tried to put forward his

ideas of cadet behavior and marriage, according to one Air Force
general.

"He had some notion that the Air Force ought to screen
"He

the girls Cadets wanted to marry," the officer said recently.

seemed to think that the cadets were of a different breed."*
This kind of thinking might stem from Carrel's idea of an elite.
"We ought to try to produce a certain number of individuals above
the mental stature which we observe in the best," Carrel wrote in
his Reflections on Life, a fragmentary work published after his
death. "No modern man has sufficient intelligence and courage to
attack the great problems of civilization.

"Instead of encouraging the survival of the unfit and the defective,"

Carrel also wrote, "we must help the strong: only the

elite

makes the progress of the masses possible. Hitherto, no scientific
devoted itself to the formation of men of superior
For this reason, it is urgent to found an organization
directed not by specialists in biology, psychology or any other
science, only [by] men of very comprehensive intelligence, free
from all doctrine or prejudice
entirely concerned with indiinstitute has

quality.

.

.

.

.

* The same officer said Lindbergh no longer held these ideas.

.

.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

238

viduals belonging to the races
tion.

who produced Western civiliza-

."
.

.

one were to take this seriously, how would one go about it?
First would come the problem of identifying the elite. By whose
standards would they be selected? Then comes the problem of
encouraging and perpetuating the desirable qualities of mind, spirit,
health, or what have you, supposing one knows what they are.
There is no known way of doing this genetically in human beings at
the present time. Certain physical characteristics can be bred in
plants and animals; Carrel himself tried to raise a higher breed of
dog. He came out with a bunch of oversized, stupid animals, and
gave up in disgust. If he couldn't improve a controlled population
of beasts, all of a carefully selected stock, how could he breed
moral and intellectual superiority in men and women?
There is a persistent belief that Carrel was a Nazi, or pro-Nazi.
This idea rests on some of Carrers expressed ideas which paralleled
those of Fascist theoreticians, as for example his ideas about the
elite. He was also a strong believer in state censorship of movies and
radio; thought that the majority of dance halls, cabarets, and bars
should be closed; and had rigid ideas about how children should be
reared. Father Durkin says Carrel never perceived "how his theories
concerning the improvement of the white race could be and were
If

actually used

by Hitler's followers for the support of their own

brutal aims."

However, one cannot select merely the similarities between Carrel's ideology and that of the Nazis without examining the many
divergences. Carrel was a devout, uncompromising Roman Catholic, which put him into opposition against the Nazis. He could also
write, "The human being has incomparably greater value than the
huge inanimate mass of the cosmic world," and, "Each human being
is a unique event in space and time," hardly Fascistic statements.

He never displayed anti-Semitism but, in fact, wrote appreciatively
of Cardozo, Einstein, and other Jews he considered worthy men.

Carrel had to leave the Rockefeller Institute in 1938 because of its
rule about retirement at the age of sixty-five. He was still energetic

and went to France in 1941, when part of the countiy was theoretically controlled by the Vichy Government, to make a study of the
effects of malnutrition on children in Europe. He was so appalled
by the privations of his fellow-countrymen that he decided to stay

DR. CARREL

239

in France and work as a physician to alleviate suffering.* His letters

of 1939-40 make it clear that he hoped the United States would aid

France to repel the Nazis; in this, he differed sharply with Lindbergh, who was by then making speeches against any assistance to

European countries. When the Nazis occupied the rest of France in
1942, Carrel did not leave, although he could have.
The Vichy regime offered him a chance to establish his Fondation** for combining all scientific disciplines to study human problems. He accepted, and set up the foundation according to his own
ideas. This inevitably put him in the position of working with Vichy.
However, there is no evidence that he shared their politics; he was
misled perhaps by "naivete," as Father Durkin believes, or by
arrogance, or by ambition. But Durkin insists that he "was oblivious
to the real political issues involved in the Petain government's

relationship with the Nazis." The evidence is that his Fondation did

not serve either the Nazis or Nazi ideas, but did some very useful

work in nutrition and in trying to eradicate diseases among children
transmitted by animals, such as tuberculosis in cows. He was making a genuine attempt to help humanity, albeit on his own rigidly
moralistic terms.

In December, 1939, he had appealed to the French people from
Paris by radio to win the war against the Nazis. In 1940 he wrote an

attack on both Bolshevism and National Socialism, ending with "Still

more than Marxism, National Socialism ... is radically opposed to
the fundamental principles of Western civilization." Also in 1940, he
wrote that if the United States would give two or three thousand
planes and aviators to France, they might beat the Germans.
There was a rumor that he was going to become Minister of
Health in the Laval government, which proved baseless but tarred
him as a collaborationist. And when he took over the Paris building
of the Rockefeller Foundation for his Fondation, he created much
bitterness against himself in America. He was apparentiy unaware of
this.

Carrel endured a good deal of privation living in Occupied
France. At his age the stringencies of daily existence— lack of heat,

improper nourishment— probably shortened his life. Yet it had been
* He had gone back to France during World War I to serve the country. The
Carrel-Dakin treatment for war wounds, developed then, is credited with saving many men from amputations.
* * Fondation Francaise pour l'Etude des Problemes Humains.

240

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

his choice to stay with his people although he could have had

an

easier life in the United States.

In February, 1944, General J. Bentley Mott, of the United States
Battle Monuments Commission, managed to see Carrel in Paris. He

wrote to a mutual friend: "Any foolish talk of Doctor Carrel being
in sympathy with the Nazis is sheer nonsense. He is devoting his
whole time and effort to developing his laboratory and to helping
abate illness and disease in France."

By this time Carrel was a sick man. He died in Paris in November, 1944, in undeserved disgrace.

A disinterested observer of both men says, "Lindbergh was
obviously fascinated by the complex, intuitive Carrel from the start,
as many more sophisticated people were." (The fascination has
lasted to this day. When Yale University had a special celebration in

honor of Carrel a few years ago, Lindbergh made one of his rare
public appearances; when Harper & Row were working on the
galleys of a book by Father Durkin about Carrel in 1965, Lindbergh
made several visits to the office to give his comments on the work.
He also keeps in touch with Mme. Carrel, who lives in Buenos
Aires.
is no doubt that Lindbergh was rather vulnerable to
charm and brilliance. Carrel with his dashing scientific
exuberance was somewhat like Lindbergh's Grandfather Land, and
his ideas about morality, young people, motion pictures, night
clubs, and so on, were the sort of thing that Lindbergh had had
drummed into him from both the Lindberghs and the Lands.
Congressman C. A. Lindbergh had talked about the flabby morality
of Americans; so did Carrel. Charles A. Lindbergh had been made
aware of the contradictions between science and religion by Grandfather Land. In his youth, Lindbergh had chosen the scientific
over the religious, but he often wondered if there wasn't something
just beyond death's door. This mystical yearning in Lindbergh was
evoked by Carrel's own attempt to bridge the teachings of Catholicism and the precepts of science. Carrel managed to alienate both
the Catholic Church and the scientists by telling the Church that it
was not nearly scientific enough in its appraisal of miracles, and at
the same time stating that medical miracles had undoubtedly taken
place at Lourdes. "Some cases of suppurating fistula, chronic ulcer,

There

Carrel's

DR.

CARREL

tuberculosis of the lungs, bones, joints

241

and spine, and of cancer

have been almost instantaneously cured at Lourdes," he wrote. He
believed that the subject-patient at Lourdes "does not need to have
faith," but "must be surrounded by an atmosphere of prayer." There
was a bit of an echo of C. A. Lindbergh's experience in his scolding
of the hierarchy in America and a somewhat similar reaction.
"Carrel/' wrote Lindbergh, in the preface to Carrel's book, The
Voyage to Lourdes, "was a man who spanned extremes in thought
and action. As he could act with the precision which won him the
Nobel Prize in surgery, he could act with an abandon which laid
him open to the thrusts of enemies he both tactlessly and fearlessly
created." This description is reminiscent of Lindbergh's father and
grandfather Lindbergh. Carrel also had the same kind of digital deftness as Grandfather Land. Carrel was, in fact, so adroit that within

the thickness of a piece of paper he could make tiny stitches that

could not be seen from either side. Lindbergh has always admired

people who were skillful with their hands.
Carrel, the surgeon skillful and brilliant enough to win the
Nobel Prize, had been unanimously rejected for the job of house
surgeon when he was a young man in a Lyons hospital. The reason
was that he refused to abide by the rules of rote learning; just as
Congressman Lindbergh had had trouble in law school because of
his refusal to accept the "precedent" approach of jurisprudence.
If Lindbergh was conditioned to be receptive to a man like
Carrel, he was also trained to think for himself. He tempered his

admiration of Carrel with a realistic assessment of Carrel's freewheeling blend of the real and the nominal. "Carrel spoke and

wrote more freely than many scientists can think," Lindbergh
stated. "At times, he used such sweeping statements to emphasize
his points that only those who knew him well were able to draw the

kernels of fact from the husk of fantasy

and apply them to the

instance he had in mind."

Lindbergh's rational mind could thus divine the instability of
Carrel's thought. Yet, at the same time, he could not wholly escape

was an older man, with a high position in
science; he was undeniably brilliant; he was extremely persuasive.
He was authoritarian, but not tyrannical. He felt that science had
been put to work mainly for industry and commerce; that its
potential for serving man had not been explored or exploited.

its

influence. Carrel

242

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

To reject Carrel as a scientist would be foolish. His work is
unassailable; it has stood the test of time. As a philosopher he was

often silly, but not wholly wrong.

One can demolish parts of his

philosophy without destroying the basic gestalt: he was a highly
imperfect human being, but he was on the side of humanity. He

was certainly not evil. No matter how many ridiculous prejudices he
held about elites and races and skin color, he was a consistent
opponent of tyranny in real life.
He had a tremendous influence on Lindbergh, not all for the good
but not all bad either. And influence does not mean domination.
Lindbergh showed in his comments that he felt he could pick what
was sound from what was not in Carrel's thinking. Perhaps the
largest benefit that he got from Carrel was the stimulation to think
and learn. He has gone on widening his horizons of thought and
scholarship constantly since Carrel's death nearly a quarter of a
century ago. There are undoubtedly echoes of Carrel in Lindbergh
today, but they are also echoes of attitudes that Lindbergh had
inherited from his family and of ideas that he has tested for himself.

19

DR. GODDARD

IN 1929, WHEN LINDBERGH WAS WORKING FOR TWA AND

Pan American, and was a trustee of the Guggenheim Aeronautics
Fund, he had to do a lot of flying. "Flying cross country in good
weather in those days/' he recalled recently, "you had plenty of
time to think." It was already obvious to him that airplanes were
going to develop to the point where they would fly as high and as
fast and carry as many passengers as one could wish. Then, Lindbergh speculated, men would not be satisfied just to travel in the air;
they would want to try interplanetary space. "I realized the limits of
the propeller," Lindbergh says, "and this led me into the field of
rockets and jet propulsion."

That summer,

this

line

of

reasoning prompted him

to

seek

out the du Pont Company in Wilmington, Delaware, which made
the black powder used in certain types of rockets. Lindbergh did

du Pont with his fantasies. He presented

more
practical problem. "Couldn't we develop a rocket that could be
not approach

a

attached to a plane for the purpose of giving it one minute of thrust
in case of engine failure on take-off, thus avoiding having to land it
in a city or trees?" he asked.

Eventually he got a definitive answer from du Pont by letter: the
idea seemed impracticable because "to equal the thrust for one

minute of a Wasp [airplane] engine would require about 400 pounds
of black powder, and the heat would be so intense that the powder
would have to be burned in a fire-brick combustion chamber." This
would make the rocket so heavy that its thrust would be canceled

by its own weight.
Lindbergh was disappointed. He talked about this one fall after243

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

244

noon in 1929 with Harry Guggenheim at Guggenheim's house on
Long Island. As he recalls it, "Carol, Harry's second wife, was with
us.

Naturally she wasn't interested in our technical discussion, so

she was sitting over to one side, reading a newspaper. I thought she

was paying no attention to us at all but suddenly she said, 'Listen to
you two/ and proceeded to read aloud an article from a back
page of the newspaper."

this,

Part of the article dealt with the events of the previous July 17,
1929, in a cow pasture in Auburn, Massachusetts.
sor

A physics profes-

named Dr. Robert H. Goddard had fired a liquid-powered
air. Coming down, the rocket had

rocket nearly 100 feet in the
started a brush fire

and had attracted considerable (and sensa-

The papers referred to it as a
"Moon Rocket," which it was not— it was a twelve-foot-long affair
designed to test certain new concepts in center of gravity— and
tionally inaccurate) press coverage.

jeered at

it

as

having missed its target "by 238,799/2 miles." Ac-

tually, it was probably the first rocket ever to carry aloft recording

instruments; it had a camera, barometer, and thermometer.

When Carol Guggenheim finished reading aloud the somewhat
humorous account of the flight, Harry Guggenheim said to Lindbergh, "May be the answer to our problem. Why don't you check up
on Goddard? Go have a talk with him, if you think it's worth while."
Lindbergh visited the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in
Boston later that month to find out what the scientists there thought
of Goddard, who was professor of physics at Clark University in
nearby Worcester. On November 22 he phoned Goddard from his
rented farmhouse in Princeton, New Jersey.

Goddard, an unknown inventor ( except for those pejorative press
comments), had been doggedly developing rocketry with almost no
money, practically no help, and against an almost universal skepticism that amounted to disbelief in his work.
He knew that Lindbergh had been asking about him. Still, when
Lindbergh announced himself on the telephone, Goddard thought it
was a practical joke. It took Lindbergh a little time to convince
Goddard who he was. He asked if he could come up to Worcester
the next day for a visit.

When Goddard told his wife that evening that Lindbergh had
telephoned him, she had the same initial reaction as her husband:

DR.

GODDARD

245

"Of course, Bob," said Mrs. Goddard. "And I had tea today with
Marie, the Queen of Rumania."
Lindbergh drove up the next day (Saturday, November 23, 1929)
from Princeton. He met Goddard at his office in Clark University.
Lindbergh told the professor about du Pont's judgment regarding
the need for a firebrick burning chamber for their solid propellant.
Goddard said that he wasn't using solid fuels. He was using liquids,
like gasoline, which burned air or liquid oxygen carried by the
rocket. In neither case was the combustion chamber of his rockets
made of brick, but of an extremely lightweight metal, Duralumin,
only Y32 of an inch thick. His "birds" were thus light enough to fly
many miles above the earth.
Goddard, a very thin, balding man, was extremely secretive
about his work. Partly this was due to the ridicule he got in the
press when his first monograph on rockets was published in 1920. In
that monograph he had stated the theory that the moon might be hit
with a rocket which could be seen because it would carry a small
flash bomb in its nose that would explode on impact. From then on
he was known as "the Moon Man."
Actually, this monograph, which he wrote in 1916, was largely a
summary of his original findings on rockets, among them his discovery that a rocket could be fired in a vacuum, thus making it
possible to travel through airless space. In the monograph, titled A
Method of Reaching Extreme Altitudes, Goddard described a step
or multistage rocket, on which he had taken out a patent in 1914.
This was, of course, the basis of all the giant multistage rockets that
the United States and the Soviet Union have fired into space.

Except for this monograph, prepared for the Smithsonian Institution to gain funds for his experiments, Goddard had published little
of his work. He had the notion that his ideas would be stolen if he
did. And he wouldn't work with other scientists— not only because
he didn't trust them but because he was too impatient to join a
team. Yet the secretive Goddard did not hold back with Lindbergh.
There was something about the flier; his manner was extremely
open and direct. As others had noted, he had an air that bred
confidence.

Goddard talked and talked all afternooon: about the advantages
would boost

of liquid fuel; about giant multistaged rockets that

246

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

themselves out of the earth's atmosphere, dropping off the empty
fuel cells as they went.

He took Lindbergh home for coffee. Mrs.

Goddard saw that Lindbergh looked tired and was carrying his
right arm in a sling. When she asked him about it, he told her he
had thrown it out of joint crawling under a bed to retrieve a puppy.
It was the same shoulder that he had dislocated in 1925 in an
emergency parachute jump.
Later, Lindbergh asked Goddard what he most needed to carry
forward his experiments. The inventor replied carefully, according
to Lindbergh, "that, more than anything else, he wanted to be free
of the classroom duties [at Clark University] which took so much of
his time. Then, he would look for a place where he could set up a
laboratory and launching tower and test his rockets without worrying his neighbors or being restricted by the police."
Goddard thought if he could get $25,000 a year for four years,
this would cover all his expenses— his salary, those of his assistants,
materials, and so on. Thus $100,000 would buy in four years what
he could not otherwise hope to accomplish in a lifetime. He had a
small grant from the Smithsonian Institution which was almost used
up, and no hope of more money.
Lindbergh was favorably impressed, so much so that he offered
help. Goddard accepted, and Lindbergh began setting up meetings
with possible sources of aid before going to the Guggenheims.
He took Goddard to Wilmington to meet the du Pont people.
They asked too many questions, Goddard thought, and in the end
they offered no money. Next Lindbergh introduced the inventor to
the Carnegie Foundation, with whom Lindbergh had already established contact for archaeological exploration. There they had a small
success. The Carnegie Foundation gave Goddard a grant of $5,000,
and apologized that it wasn't larger.
Goddard knew that other countries, particularly Germany, were
more anxious to delve into rocketry than was the United States. He
was getting inquiries constantly from German scientists. This was
one area of military research that was open to them. The Versailles
Treaty had not mentioned rockets, and had thereby neglected to
prohibit them among the weapons forbidden to Germany. As early
as 1930, the Wehrmacht appropriated $50,000 for research in rocket

weapons; there was no appropriation at that time for rocket research in the U.S. Army or Navy.

DR.

GODDARD

247

Lindbergh could have asked the Guggenheim Fund (for the
Promotion of Aeronautics ) for money. But, as a trustee of the Fund,
he hesitated to use his influence there. However, he had come to
know the Guggenheim family well. In the spring of 1930, Lindbergh
wrote to Harry Guggenheim, who was then the United States
Ambassador to Cuba, asking if he had any objection in Lindbergh's
approaching Harry's father, Daniel Guggenheim, to talk about
financing Goddard's work. Harry replied promptly telling him to go
ahead.

Lindbergh called on Daniel Guggenheim, the hardheaded paterhome, known as Hempstead House. He told
Daniel about his conversations with Goddard, and his estimate of
familias, at Daniel's

the rocket experiments.

Lindbergh recalls that the conversation went like this:
Daniel Guggenheim: "Then you believe rockets have an important future?"

Lindbergh: "Probably. Of course one is never certain."
Guggenheim: "But you think so. And this professor, he looks like a
pretty capable man?"
Lindbergh: "As far as I can find out, Mr. Guggenheim, he knows
more about rockets than anybody else in the country."
Guggenheim: "How much money does he need?"
Lindbergh: "He'd like to have $25,000 a year for a four-year
project."

Guggenheim: "Do you think he can accomplish enough to make it
worth his time?"
Lindbergh: "Well, it's taking a chance, but if we're ever going
to get beyond the limits of airplanes and propellers, we'll probably
have to go to rockets. It's a chance but, yes, I think it's worth
taking."

Guggenheim: "All right, I'll give him the money."

He pledged $50,000 of his own money to support Goddard's work
two years. After that an advisory committee, set up by Clark
and Lindbergh would review Goddard's work and decide if he merited the second $50,000.
Lindbergh telephoned Goddard to say that he had found a
supporter willing to put up all the money Goddard had asked for.
He said he would write and confirm the details in a few days.

for

University,

248

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

Goddard couldn't quite believe it. He had been scrounging and
scrimping and had finally run out of money altogether; the future
had seemed hopeless. And here was rescue, just as he was clinging
by his fingernails to the edge of the cliff.
Guggenheim followed through on his decision. Not long before
his death in 1930, he put up $50,000 for Goddard to use without
restriction. The money was channeled through a corporation set up
and administered by Clark University. Now Goddard had enough
funds to get himself a proper space to work, to locate his work in a
sunny, clear climate that allowed him to shoot rockets almost at will.
He moved his laboratory and staff to Roswell, New Mexico. He
made progress there, but the work did not go as quickly as he had
hoped. Two years later, in 1932, he went before the Guggenheim
committee to ask for the second $50,000. The committee examined
his work and approved his request. But Daniel Guggenheim's estate
was still being settled, so the money was not immediately available.
Also its assets had been depleted by the sharp drop in the stock
market. Goddard was forced to close down his New Mexico operation and return to Massachusetts.

Lindbergh next tried to get the U.S. military establishment to aid
Goddard; they were interested but not helpful. Lindbergh went
back to the Guggenheims, this time to the Daniel and Florence
Guggenheim Foundation.* The Foundation came up with $2,500
for 1933, $18,000 for 1934.

Goddard moved his rocket laboratory

back to Roswell, New Mexico.
Soon afterward, Lindbergh and his wife flew in to Roswell for a
visit and inspection. It was a gala day for the little New Mexico
town, and an encouraging one for Goddard.

A year later Goddard was able to report a vertical rocket flight of
7,500 feet. He was concentrating on accuracy, a parachute return of

and other items. He invited Lindbergh and Harry
Guggenheim to come and see for themselves. This was during the

the rocket,

time when the Lindberghs were living through the last months of
the Hauptmann case. Lindbergh and Guggenheim arrived in September, 1935, to watch a test flight. On two separate days Goddard
tried out two liquid-fueled rockets and both failed. Lindbergh said
Goddard "was as mortified as a parent whose child misbehaves in

front of company/'
* There have been five different Guggenheim family foundations.

DR.

GODDARD

249

But Goddard's faith in his work was so strong that Lindbergh and
Harry Guggenheim promised to return. Lindbergh assured Goddard that rocketry in 1935 was about where aviation had been in
1912. Then the two visitors flew back; Lindbergh wrote Goddard
an encouraging letter. He said that he considered the visit useful,
in spite of the fact that there had been no successful rocket launching. He went so far as to say that such a flight wasn't really important, although he knew how much it would have meant to Goddard.

This kind of empathy is not shown to strangers by Lindbergh, but
often given to friends and colleagues. He aided the inventor
through years of tests that did not work, rockets that did not fly,
developments that did not quite come off. He got Goddard to write
a second paper, in 1936, on his work, for publication by the
Smithsonian Institution— the only such revelation the inventor had
made since 1920. This brought him some important recognition for
is

his many pioneering contributions to rocketry.

But the work was far from perfected. Would the Guggenheim
money continue when results were still more theoretical than practical? A few months later, Lindbergh, who by then was living in
England, wrote Goddard asking in a casual way how long it would
take to have a really successful high-altitude flight. Such an achievement, Lindbergh said, would be very good for everybody's morale.
Goddard went all out to perfect a new, large rocket that might
soar many miles into the atmosphere. He wanted it, he needed it, to
demonstrate that he was worthy of further support. But he couldn't
get the new engine to work in time for the demonstration. He asked

humbly for another years support from the Guggenheim Foundation and, at the same time, wrote to Lindbergh that he felt that the
Foundation had already done more than they had to.
Lindbergh, from England, wrote to Harry Guggenheim that
Goddard would not feel ill used if the Foundation stopped his
grant, but he reiterated his faith in the future of the work. He told

Guggenheim that if he really wanted to promote aviation, no other
He said he was certain Goddard
would be the first to send rockets to very high altitudes, and that
his work would be scientifically valuable.
Guggenheim agreed to continue Foundation support for another

project held greater promise.

year— a $20,000 appropriation. And he said, generously, that he did

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

250

not want Goddard to waste his time on a spectacular demonstration.

In 1938 Lindbergh made an unexpected public gesture by writing a letter of appreciation about Goddard's work, and its future
possibilities, to

be read

at the

commencement exercises of Clark

University. Among the things Lindbergh said in the letter were that

observations taken through rocketry

would become important to

astronomy, meteorology, and terrestrial magnetism.

He also pre-

dicted that rockets might one day carry explosives farther and faster

than any other device. In a bit of lighthearted prescience he even
spoke about interstellar flight. Goddard did not know of this letter
until

it

was read aloud at the exercises. He usually masked his

emotions, but on this occasion he seemed visibly moved.

By 1938, $148,000 of Guggenheim money had been invested in
Goddard's work, and Harry Guggenheim was wishing plaintively
that there was just a bit more to show for it. Guggenheim tried to

get Goddard to work with Cal Tech scientists, but Goddard was too

much the lone wolf for that. Nevertheless the Guggenheim Foundation continued to support his research.

After Lindbergh returned to the United States in 1939, he made a

survey of American air power for the Army. On this trip he flew his

Army P-36 into Roswell, New Mexico, to visit Goddard. He had
other things on his mind, and he intended to move on quickly, but
Goddard had so many interesting things to say that Lindbergh
spent the night. He wrote to Guggenheim a few days later, saying
that it seemed to him that Goddard had made more progress during that year than in any other. He said Goddard seemed to have
better control over his rockets, and that the inventor felt that he
could get them to much higher altitudes.
Lindbergh told Goddard about the secrecy he had encountered in
Germany on rockets. He had been lunching with Adolf Baeumker,
the Luftwaffe chief of research and development, he recalled, and
the conversation had been easy until they touched on the subject of
rocketry. Then Baeumker abruptly stopped talking. Both Lindbergh
and Goddard guessed that the Germans had a rocket; they did not
know that the Soviet Union was also far advanced in military
rocketry. But they agreed that it was high time the U.S. military got

involved in the subject.

On May 28, 1940, a meeting was arranged between Goddard,

DR.

GODDARD

251

Guggenheim, and various Army and Navy officers, including Brigadier General George H. Brett. Brett was sitting in for General Henry
H. Arnold, Chief of the Army Air Force, who had promised to attend but had to drop out. The officers were all rather tense. This
was the second day of the famous British Army evacuation of
France from Dunkirk. Worried by the defeat of France and the near
disaster to the British, on whom U.S. strategy depended, they were
too preoccupied with their

own problems to give much attention

to Goddard's novel ideas about the development of rockets in mili-

tary operations.
Actually, he had demonstrated as long ago as November, 1918, a

small rocket in a recoilless barrel, and had so impressed the military
with the potentialities of this weapon (later developed into the ba-

zooka and other similar weapons ) that he had been promised development support. But his timing had been unfortunate; the Armistice
of World War I came four days after his demonstration and nothing
was ever done with his invention. Now, in 1940, the officers were
not much interested in the fact that Goddard had knocked out tanks
with rockets in 1918. Besides, they all had other meetings to attend.
They told Goddard that if he could develop a rocket to assist
airplanes on quick takeoffs, they might be interested. But as for
using the rocket as a missile, one officer said, "The next war will be
won with the trench mortar." The meeting broke up without taking
time to look at Goddard's movies of successful rocket launchings.
Later, Goddard was taken on by the government to develop
liquid-fuel rocket motors to assist heavily loaded aircraft to take off
in short distances and climb fast, a project known as JATO

assisted takeoff )

.

(

for jet-

Dr. G. Edward Pendray, co-founder of the Ameri-

can Rocket Society, has said it was "like trying to harness Pegasus
to a plow." Goddard stayed in one or another branch of government

research during the war; to keep going, he had to borrow $10,000

from Harry Guggenheim. Then Goddard got sick, a recurrence of
the tuberculosis he had suffered as a young man, plus cancer of the
throat. While he was in the hospital, Harry Guggenheim telephoned

Goddard: "I want you to tell Bob that I will finance him
after the war is over for whatever he wants, as much as he wants, as
long as he wants." But Goddard died on August 10, 1945, before his
work was ever truly recognized.
to Mrs.

Of course, the Germans knew about it. A liquid-fueled rocket that

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

252

Goddard shot 9,000 feet into the air in New Mexico in 1941 contained almost all the features later incorporated into the German V-

2 rockets, Dr. Pendray said. Wernher von Braun, one of Hitler's
rocket experts at the Peenemiinde laboratories during the war, said,

"Every liquid-fuel rocket that flies is a Goddard rocket."

When Goddard died, he left more than two hundred patents on
rockets and rocketry. Says Dr. Pendray, "Practically every one of the

ideas that have since been developed successfully in large rockets

and guided missiles, including gyro-controls, clustered rockets, research instrumentation, turbopumps for propellants and gimbalmounted tail sections capable of being moved in flight for steering,"
had been tried out first by Goddard.
The federal government recognized this in 1960 by settling with
Mrs. Goddard and the Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Foundation for infringement on the Goddard patents. The joint patent
owners won an administrative award of a million dollars, the largest
given up to that time.
Lindbergh's part in the Goddard story did not come to general
attention until 1963 with the publication of Goddard's biography.*

Lindbergh contributed information to this work, and helped the
author through the more difficult moments of creation. And, as he
has often done for books of other authors he has aided and with
whose subjects he is sympathetic, he wrote the preface.
"This is a story of individualism," Lindbergh wrote of Goddard,
"of one mans effort and almost superhuman vision in a field of
science so fantastic in his day that anyone venturing much confidence in its future was considered unscientific by most scientists.
Robert Goddard's dual approach to astronautics is a fascinating study, now cautious and realistic, now adventurous and fictional." His assessment of Goddard is strikingly like his judgment of
Carrel in his preface to The Voyage to Lourdes. Both were men of
science who also ranged far afield from science: Carrel into religion,
mysticism, and philosophy; Goddard into science fiction and projections of rocket travel to outer space, colonizing distant planets with
men from earth, and so on. Both were men of great accomplishment; both were loners; both were mavericks.
In the Goddard preface, Lindbergh quoted an ancient Chinese
.

.

.

* Milton H. Lehman, This High Man-The Life of Robert H. Goddard ( New
York: Farrar, Straus & Co., 1963).

DR.

GODDARD

253

poem: "Am I a man who dreamed of being a butterfly, /Or am I a
butterfly dreaming myself to be a man?" It is a question Lindbergh
might have asked about himself. "One is constantly aware of the
fact," he wrote, "that we live in a world where dreams and reality
interchange."

The relationship with Goddard reveals a great deal about LindHe met Goddard as the result of a logical progression of

bergh.

attempts to solve a problem far in the future. His dreaming in the
airplane in the summer of 1929 about the future of flight was like

musing in the mailplane in September, 1926, which led to his
he brought together all the current
factors in a situation and estimated future possibilities, then sought
a solution. Once committed to Goddard, he stayed committed as
long as Goddard lived; he helped the man through sixteen years of
constant frustration and disappointment. He had nothing to gain
from this except the intellectual satisfaction of following through on
a judgment he thought correct. His support of Goddard also
involved strong personal sympathy. Goddard was a highly emotional man and a highly secret one. He was an originator, a pioneer,
and a recluse. He had self-doubts but never showed them. He was
the sort of man who appealed to Lindbergh, because he was very
his

transatlantic flight; both times

much like Lindbergh.

20

THE AIR MAIL CONTROVERSY

CHARLES LINDBERGH S FATHER HAD TAKEN ON THE ECOnomic establishment, the press, and other powerful opponents and
had often lost; Lindbergh fought the popular President of the
United States, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and won a telling victory
over him.
It started in

1933 with an investigation of subsidies awarded by

the Post Office Department to airlines for carrying air mail. Former
President Herbert Hoover's Postmaster General, Walter F. Brown,
considered to be one of the ablest members of the Hoover Cabinet,

had had the power to award such contracts. As already mentioned,
theory of making the awards was the same as that of his
predecessor, Harry S. New: that they should be used to consolidate
American commercial aviation, which was then in a state of chaos.
As a consequence, he did not hand out the contracts on the basis of
competitive bidding but gave them to large air carriers he held to
be worthy of support. This shut out the smaller lines that were, to
Brown, annoyances.
A Hearst reporter named Fulton Lewis, Jr., got wind of the fact
that in 1930, while Hoover was still in office, Brown had awarded an
air-mail contract between New York and Washington at three times
the rate proposed by a company which did not get the contract.
his

Lewis's employers, the Hearst newspapers, refused to print his
information. He continued, however, to dig for more facts. In 1933

the Senate voted a special committee, headed by Senator Hugo
Black of Alabama, to investigate the subsidy mail contracts given to
shipping companies and airlines. By this time, Lewis had compiled
extensive

files

and many leads

to information,
254

and was able

to

THE AIR MAIL CONTROVERSY

255

supply Black with some of the background he needed for his
hearings. Painstakingly, the Black committee elicited testimony of
"immense salaries, bonuses and speculative profits [in the airlines];
dubious relations between the industry and the government officials

who dealt with it; the avoidance of competitive bidding; the covert
destruction of official records," according to historian Arthur

M.

Schlesinger, Jr.

The Black committee made telling use of a closed meeting of
certain airline officials at the Post Office Department in 1930. At this

discussion with the Superintendent of the Air Mail, one of the
airline executives present wondered if they weren't violating the
Sherman Anti-Trust Act. "If we were holding this meeting across
the street in the Raleigh Hotel," the executive said, "it would be an

improper meeting; but because we are holding it at the invitation of
a member of the cabinet, and in the office of the Post Office
Department, it is perfectly all right."

The Senate hearings revealed that Brown's policy had resulted in
concentrating twenty-four out of twenty-seven air-mail contracts in
three large holding companies: United Aircraft, Aviation Corporation of Delaware, and North American-General Motors.

"The control of American aviation," Black said, 'lias been ruthlessly taken away from the men who could fly and bestowed upon

bankers, brokers, promoters and politicians, sitting in their inner
offices, allotting

among themselves the taxpayers' money."

Lunching with President Roosevelt in January, 1934, Black told

him that it was within the Postmaster General's authority to cancel
contracts obtained by fraud or conspiracy. Roosevelt asked his
Attorney General, Homer Cummings, for a legal opinion; Cummings reported that the evidence turned up by the Black committee
could justify cancellation of the air-mail contracts.
Roosevelt decided that if the contracts were crooked they ought
to be canceled immediately. The Post Office Department wanted to

delay until June, when they could advertise for new bids and thus
avoid interruption of air-mail service. But Roosevelt insisted on

immediate action.

An Assistant Postmaster General asked General Benjamin D.
head of the Army Air Corps, whether Army pilots could

Foulois,

take over delivery of air mail immediately. Foulois said they could

—a serious mistake of judgment.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

256

Then the cancellation of private air-mail contracts was announced
by Presidential order on February 9, 1934, to take effect on February 19.

new Postmaster General, James A. Farley, said in
who had held contracts from Postmaster General Brown had overcharged the government by nearly
$47 million between July, 1930, and January, 1934. He also said that
a sizable part of this money had gone to Transcontinental &
Western Airways (TWA), known as "The Lindbergh Line."
Roosevelt's

explanation that the airlines

TWA had hired Lindbergh in their takeover of TAT. The terms of
Lindbergh's TAT contract had called for a $250,000 payment to him

committee of the company. The contract
committed him to endorse this check to buy 25,000 shares of

as head of the technical
also

TAT stock at $10 a share. When TWA took over TAT, they exchanged Lindbergh's TAT shares for TWA shares.
(Lindbergh, as a consultant to Pan American Airways, had accepted stock warrants in that company which had profited him by
$150,000 and which he had reinvested in the company.)
All of this was a matter of public record.

Some of it had come

out in the Black committee hearings. The committee had asked Lindbergh for details and he had supplied them with a full report of the
transactions.

t

Consequently, when the President canceled the air-mail contracts

on February 9, 1934, charging fraud, Lindbergh's reputation was
involved. He did not take long to react to the cancellation. The next

day, Saturday, February 10, he began to make notes for a reply. He
went to his office in New York City on Sunday, February 11, and
worked out a telegram to Roosevelt with Colonel Henry Breckinridge. He sent the telegram to the White House on Sunday night,
simultaneously releasing it to the Monday morning newspapers on

February 12. It made headlines.

The telegram read, in part:
YOUR ACTION OF YESTERDAY AFFECTS FUNDAMENTALLY THE INDUSTRY
TO WHICH I HAVE DEVOTED THE LAST TWELVE YEARS OF MY LIFE.
THE
PERSONAL AND BUSINESS LIVES OF AMERICAN CITIZENS HAVE BEEN BUILT
AROUND THE RIGHT TO JUST TRIAL BEFORE CONDEMNATION. YOUR ORDER
OF CANCELLATION OF ALL AIRMAIL CONTRACTS CONDEMNS THE LARGEST
PORTION OF OUR COMMERCIAL AVIATION WITHOUT JUST TRIAL.
AMERICANS HAVE SPENT THEIR BUSINESS LIVES IN BUILDING IN THIS COUNTRY THE
.

.

.

.

.

.

THE AIR MAIL CONTROVERSY

257

FINEST COMMERCIAL AIRLINES IN THE WORLD.
THE GREATER PART OF
THIS PROGRESS HAS BEEN BROUGHT ABOUT THROUGH THE AIRMAIL.
CANCELLATION OF ALL MAIL CONTRACTS AND THE USE OF THE ARMY ON
COMMERCIAL AIRLINES WILL UNNECESSARILY AND GREATLY DAMAGE ALL
AMERICAN AVIATION.
.

.

.

.

.

.

Lindbergh's reputation for integrity and knowledgeability in aviation was great. His swift public opposition to the air-mail contract

shook Roosevelt. Roosevelt's press secretary, Steve
by pointing out that telegrams to the President
released simultaneously to the newspapers were sent for publicity
purposes. Senator George W. Norris, who had stood with Lindcancellation

Early, hit back

bergh's father against America's entry into World War I, said, "Now

Colonel Lindbergh has earned his $250,000."
Farley went along with the administration, although he had
privately told his predecessor, Brown, that he felt the Black commit-

and he wrote later that he was "hurt"
weight of the cancellation fall on his
( Farley's ) shoulders. Publicly he said to Lindbergh, however, "I am

tee was hunting headlines,

that

Roosevelt

let

the

certain that if you were in possession of all the facts that you would

not feel that any injustice had been done or will be done."

A committee of a tri-state Federal Bar Association resolved that
Lindbergh had allowed himself to be exploited for publicity purposes by the airlines "in an undignified, disrespectful, absurd and
presumptuous attempt to discredit the President of the United
States."

Lindbergh had tremendous editorial support, however. The New
York Times denied that he could be a tool of corrupt interests. The
paper also published Lindbergh's judgment that the real issue was
the lives of Army pilots who were being called on to do a job they
hadn't been trained for, in planes and on airfields that were not
equipped for flying the mail.
But these were only words. The real test was what was happening
in the air. The Air Corps had begun flying the mail under the worst
possible circumstances. February was a savage month in 1934,
particularly so to Army fliers who were supposed to meet mail
schedules in spite of storms and who had to fly at night without
proper training, equipment, or night landing lights.

The first Army air-mail pilot was killed within a few days of the
start of operations; he crashed in flames in Idaho. At the end of the

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

258
first

week of Army air-mail operation, five pilots had been killed, six

pilots injured, eight planes wrecked.

Eddie Rickenbacker, of East-

ern Airlines, called it "legalized murder."

Arthur Krock wrote in the New York Times that the Roosevelt
administration which had been riding a high tide of popularity was,
for the first time, on the defensive. Roosevelt told Secretary of War

George H. Dern that "the continuation of deaths in the Army Air
Corps must stop."
Night flying of the mail was ended, but the Army air-mail planes
continued to crash. Service was curtailed, even interrupted for a
week to allow time for installation of new safety equipment. But
nothing, it seems, could stop the series of tragedies. In less than two
months there were twelve Army dead and forty-six forced landings.
Crashes were not uncommon in commercial aviation in those
days, either. United Air Lines had four crashes within four months,
killing eleven crew members and eleven passengers, for example.
Yet the dramatic circumstances that had forced the Army into
taking over from the commercial lines front-paged their fatalities
and made the government seem reckless.
Colonel Billy Mitchell castigated the commercial airlines in a
private speech. He said the law should have permitted the government to take over private planes and radio services. He also said
that the Army should continue flying the mails; it would be excellent training for pilots and would "result in a much more efficient
Air Corps.
The Army has lost the art of flying," he said. "It
cant fly. If any Army aviator can't fly a mail route in any sort of
weather, what would we do in a war?" And Mitchell attacked
Lindbergh, saying that he had "disclosed himself as the 'front man
of the Air Trust," called him "a commercial flier," and said his
.

.

.

"motive is principally profit."

But Lindbergh's reputation was unshakable. And nothing could
make the government seem right against his unquestionably accurate prediction of Army disaster.

Secretary Dern asked Lindbergh to serve on a committee to study
the Air Corps performance in carrying air mail. Lindbergh refused,

and reiterated his stand in another publicized telegram:
I BELIEVE THAT THE USE OF THE ARMY AIR CORPS TO CARRY THE AIR
MAIL WAS UNWARRANTED AND CONTRARY TO AMERICAN PRINCIPLES. THE

THE AIR MAIL CONTROVERSY

259

ACTION WAS UNJUST TO THE AIRLINES WHOSE CONTRACTS WERE CANCELED
WITHOUT TRIAL. IT WAS UNFAIR TO THE PERSONNEL OF THE ARMY AIR
CORPS, WHO HAD NEITHER EQUIPMENT DESIGNED FOR THE PURPOSE NOR
ADEQUATE TIME FOR TRAINING. ... IT HAS UNNECESSARILY GREATLY DAMAGED ALL AMERICAN AVIATION. I DO NOT FEEL THAT I CAN SERVE ON A
COMMITTEE WHOSE FUNCTION IS TO ASSIST IN FOLLOWING OUT AN EXECUTIVE ORDER TO THE ARMY TO TAKE OVER THE COMMERCIAL Am MAIL SYSTEM OF THE UNITED STATES.

Dern tried to persuade Lindbergh to change his mind, and got
another refusal.

Hearings were held in March, 1934, on a Senate bill designed to
return the air mail to the airlines. Lindbergh testified for two hours,

was treated respectfully, and made no concessions. The Neiv York
Times reported that "whenever his face flashed in the familiar,
winsome smile, a murmur of approval ran through the hall." He
restated his charge about the unjustness of the government's contract cancellation.

He attacked a provision in the pending bill that

would refuse contracts to any company suing the government for
revenue losses on the canceled contracts. He also opposed a provision that would require an Army, Navy, or Marine co-pilot in all
private planes flying the mail.

Senator Kenneth D. McKellar asked him if he knew anything
about the making of the contracts, and he said, "Very little."
"If

they're honest, you're for them,

condone them?"
"My answer to

that,

and

if

not you wouldn't

Senator," said Lindbergh,

"is

that these

contractors should have been given the right to trial before being

convicted.

."
.

.

Senator Jeremiah T. O'Mahoney attacked from another angle, with
the same objective, and got the same response. Then he tried a new
assault. "If an officer of your company testified under oath that his
concern paid $1,400,000 to persuade another company not to bid

O'Mahoney was charging that TWA had done], and if it were
established in the terms of the contract, would you consider that
[as

proof of the charge?"
"That's a hypothetical question and out of my field," Lindbergh
said. "I don't want to answer that."
It was not long before the commercial airlines were flying air mail

again.

Some of them had had to reorganize, and the amounts of

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

260

government mail subsidies dropped to some extent. But over all the
effect was one of defeat for Roosevelt and his new administration. It
was, in

fact,

the

first

large-scale public setback Roosevelt

had

received since his election, either politically or personally. And, as

he did with all things political, he took it personally.
Aside from the merits of the controversy and the cancellation, it
had been a test of Lindbergh's integrity, prestige, and judgment
against Roosevelt's. Lindbergh had been proved right by the
grisly results of the Army's attempt to fly the mail. Roosevelt did not
like to be wrong or to seem wrong. He hated people who made him
look wrong in public. Therefore he hated Lindbergh— and he never
forgot his hatred or forgave Lindbergh, as later events proved.

21

ENGLAND, PRANCE, GERMANY

IN 1936, AFTER LINDBERGH MOVED TO ENGLAND, THE AIR

Ministry of the French government invited

him to visit aircraft-

manufacturing plants in France. He was delighted to accept, but he
was appalled by what he saw. Airplane production in that country

was stagnant, a result of official disinterest and the frequent strikes
that plagued all French industry. This was at the time when Germany had violated the Locarno Pact and remilitarized the Rhineland; and already Europe was again vibrating to the hobnail
tread. The threat of war was definitely in the air, but France was
not in the least prepared— or preparing— to fight, at least not in the

The French Air Ministry had deliberately invited Lindbergh to
see just how badly off they were with the hope that he would say so
publicly and perhaps galvanize other branches of government to act
before it was too late. But with French politics in a state of chaos
and with the military thinking as well as the mood of the country
dominated by the Maginot line, nothing that Lindbergh said could
air.

penetrate either public indifference or the hardened military mind.

One day, about the middle of May, 1936, Major Truman Smith,
the United States military attache in Berlin, Germany,* was having
* Smith had been a Captain and Assistant Military Attache in Berlin in

1922

when the United States Embassy had sent him to Munich to check up on an
obscure political agitator named Adolf Hitler. Smith noted in his diary at the
time that Hitler was "a marvelous demagogue." He reported to his superiors
that Hitler's National Socialist Labor Party "must be considered the Bavarian
counterpart to the Italian fascisti ... a political influence quite disproportionate to its actual strength." Of Hitler he said, "His ability to influence a popular
assembly is uncanny." William L. Shirer says in his The Rise and Fall of the
Third Reich that Smith "had a remarkable bent for political analysis."
261

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

262

breakfast in his Berlin apartment with his wife, Kay. Mrs. Smith

noticed a small item about Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh in the
Paris Herald. He had visited some airplane factories in France with
his wife.

Mrs. Smith mentioned to her husband that the Lindberghs evidently felt secure enough to leave their son Jon at home in England

with the servants in spite of the murder of their first-born in the
United States.
A few days later, Smith was mulling over his air-intelligence
problems. He himself was an infantry officer. He had no background in aviation, and no way of judging developments in that
area. His chief air attache was popular with the German Air
Ministry but, according to Smith, "lacked intelligence training and
skill

in

preparing aviation reports."

The air attache also had
own) point of view: he

other deficiencies, from Smith's (and his

was a pilot, but lacked deep knowledge of air science and engineering, and his connections with the German Air Ministry stopped at
an echelon below the top.
Smith saw evidence of tremendous military aviation activity in
Germany, although the Versailles Treaty had prohibited Germany
from building warplanes. Smith wrote later, "Everywhere one
Ever-increasing
turned one saw airfields under construction.
numbers of officers in their new blue-gray uniforms could be ob.

.

.

served in the streets of Berlin." He knew of new factories, too,
but had visited only one of these places, the Henschel airplane works at Schoenefelt, near Berlin, in 1935. Here, strangely
—in a group of very modern buildings, carefully dispersed against
bombing, each containing its own power plant— the most obsolete
airplanes were being produced. Goering's Luftwaffe was equipped
only with such fighters as the HE (Heinkel)-51 or the AR (Arado)55—wooden biplanes with top speeds of 204 m.p.h. and 180 m.p.h.,
respectively— both far slower than comparable American fighters.
Bombers were mainly the JU( Junkers) -52, with a speed of 150
m.p.h. None of these was any threat to the United States or even to
Europe, yet Smith knew that the Germans were designing much
faster,

more modern aircraft secretly in contravention of the Ver-

sailles

Treaty— and besides there were all those pilots in uniform,

and the new factories.

ENGLAND. FRANCE, GERMANY

263

Air intelligence in those days was, like the Air Corps, part of the

Army, and the U.S. Army was not air-minded. Smith had no man
power to do a proper air-intelligence job, and no money to spend
for it.

In this situation, he began thinking about Lindbergh, remembering what Mrs. Smith had said. If Lindbergh could leave his son in
England while he visited French factories, why could he not come
to Germany to inspect the Luftwaffe? Lindbergh was not only
technically knowledgeable; he also had the prestige to tempt the
Germans to invite him. Furthermore, Berlin was seething with
preparations for the Olympic games, and the Germans wanted as
many foreign celebrities on hand as they could snare.
Smith was aware of certain other probable predispositions among
the Germans to invite Lindbergh. Hermann Goering, the head of
the Luftwaffe, was extremely vain and loved celebrities. He was, of
course, an airman himself, and shared in the camaraderie of pilots.
General Milch, his second in command, was pro-American, as were
many other Luftwaffe people. Smith began to work on getting the
German government to invite Lindbergh to inspect the Luftwaffe.
His first move was to mention the idea of a Lindbergh visit to his
top contact in the Luftwaffe, Colonel F. K. Hanesse. The same day,
Hanesse broached the idea to his superiors, Milch and Goering, and
got an immediate and enthusiastic approval. But before going
further, Smith sat down with Hanesse and worked out a list of the
places he wanted Lindbergh to see— a number of installations
which had not been shown to any American.
When the two men had agreed on the list, they initialed it and
Smith felt free to invite Lindbergh; the Germans could not use the
flier only as a celebrity to dress up the Olympic games. He also felt
free for another reason. The American Ambassador, Dr. William E.
Dodd, a former University of Chicago historian and a strong
pacifist, although friendly toward Smith was unsympathetic with
the military. He had never asked for any data on German rearmament. However, Dodd was on leave in the United States and his
charge d'affaires, Ferdinand Mayer, was receptive to the idea of a
Lindbergh visit.
Smith did not know Lindbergh or where he was living in England
but wrote him a letter as a fellow-officer and sent it with a personal

264

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

note to Colonel Scanlon, the United States Assistant Air Attache in
London, asking Scanlon to forward the letter.

American Embassy
Office of the Military Attache

Tiergartenstrasse 30.
Berlin

May 25, 1936
Colonel Charles Lindbergh
My dear Colonel Lindbergh:

Although I have not had the pleasure of your personal acquaintance, I
my position in corresponding with you with respect
to a possible desire on your part to visit Germany.
[I have been] requested to extend to you in the name of General Goering and the German Air Ministry an invitation to visit Germany and inspect the new German civil and military air establishments.
I was further instructed by General Goering to inform you that the
strictest censorship would be imposed
with respect to your visit
and that they would not allow even the slightest notice to appear
except with your distinct approval.
I need hardly tell you that the present German air development is very
imposing and on a scale which I believe is unmatched in the world. Up
until very recently this development was highly secretive, but in recent
months they have become extraordinarily friendly to the American representatives and have shown us far more than the representatives of other
powers. General Goering has particularly exerted himself for friendly relations with the United States.
From a purely American point of view, I consider that your visit here
would be of high patriotic benefit. I am certain that they will go out of
their way to show you even more than they will show us.
Furthermore, if this program interests you, they assure me that immediately permits will be issued for you to fly your plane to Berlin and for
accommodations at all the German military airfields, where you can preserve your incognito better than on civil fields. During your stay in Berlin
your plane will be kept at the Staaken airdrome of the army in a Western
suburb of Berlin.
Mr. Mayer and myself will arrange furthermore that no mention of
your visit reaches either the American or German press. As a matter of
fact, a large part of your time here will be spent in the provinces far from
Berlin, as few of the new and large German air stations are located in the
immediate vicinity of the capital.
I personally suggest as a time for your visit the period of June 26feel free on account of

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

ENGLAND. FRANCE. GERMANY

265

July 3. This may be extended, however, to the 6th or 7th, in case such
would seem desirable to you.
With very best wishes, and with those of my wife added, who is extremely hopeful that Mrs. Lindbergh will come with you, I am,

Yours very sincerely,

Truman Smith
Major, G.S.,
Military Attache

"In the light of events which transpired," Smith wrote later,
referring to himself in the third person, "the military attache showed
himself, in this letter, far too optimistic of his ability to shroud with

secrecy a Lindbergh visit to Germany. When the visit actually took

place it proved to be the most publicized intelligence operation the
military attache was ever connected with."

On June 5, Lindbergh replied from France, giving as his return
address the Nicolson house he had rented in England:

Long Barn,

Weald, Sevenoaks. He responded warmly to Smith's suggestion,
saying he could come to Germany between July 21 and August 5
or any time after August 25. He and his wife would fly in their
new plane, a Miles "Mohawk," then under construction. He doubted
that his visit could be kept secret from the press, he said, but hoped
only to avoid the type of publicity and intrusions by the public he
had experienced before. He asked Smith to convey his thanks to
General Goering for the invitation, and added that he wanted no
special entertainment— he was coming to look into aviation developments, and if he could do this it would occupy his time and
satisfy his interest.

The details of the visit were arranged. Lindbergh would come
from July 22 to August 1, the day the Olympic games were to start.
Hanesse insisted that Lindbergh attend the opening ceremony as
Goering's special guest. It was also decided that during the whole
trip Lindbergh would be a civilian guest of the Lufthansa commercial airline, rather than a military guest of the Luftwaffe. He and his
wife would stay at the Smiths' apartment; the Smiths had a spare

bedroom belonging to their daughter who was in school in Switzerland.

In his memoir of this period, which he wrote between 1954 and
1956, Smith summarized his reasons for inviting Lindbergh to
Germany. Again speaking of himself in the third person, he wrote:

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

266

(1)

He desired to build up

.

.

.

[the]

prestige

[of

his

office]

with

the Luftwaffe and the German aeronautical world.
(2)

He wished to have Lindbergh

.

.

.

see as

many air factories and

other establishments as possible in the limited period of the

visit.

(3) He wished to bring Lindbergh together with the elite of Germany's

aeronautical scientists, designers, engineers and air officers and to

have [the

air

attache]

always at Lindbergh's side during these

meetings.
(4)

He desired Lindbergh's considered opinion as to the quality of the
German air rearmament.

To set Lindbergh's visit in the general perspective of the time, it
be remembered that while the Nazi government was
and the Nazi party violently so, some Jews
were still able to live and work in, and leave, Germany. The United
States was uneasy about Germany, but the governments were on
fairly good terms. The fact that the Olympic games were to be held
in Berlin in 1936 gives some idea of the willingness of our people
and of other peoples to maintain normal relations with the Gershould

strongly anti-Semitic,

mans. Political leaders in the United States, as well as in Europe,
believed that however much Germany might fret under the strictures of the Versailles Treaty, Hitler did not have the military or

economic power to implement his announced (in Mein Kampf)
objectives in the world.

Under these circumstances, and with the urging of his own
military attache, Lindbergh's visit to Germany was accepted at the
time without criticism.

Smith knew he was using Lindbergh's public prestige to open
doors, and he had an idea that Lindbergh was well versed in aviation. What he did not know was that Lindbergh was an extremely
keen observer. He saw more than either Smith or Goering had
expected. And he was able to analyze what he saw, and draw useful
conclusions from it.
He brought to the survey his own original way of evaluating
things. For example, in one place he and an American officer were

presented with eight new prototype airplanes drawn up for their
inspection.

Lindbergh turned
plane?"

to the officer

and said, "Which is the best

ENGLAND, FRANCE. GERMANY

267

The officer, not an aviator, said, "How in the hell would I know? I
haven't got the technical ability to figure that."

Lindbergh said, "Then which is the most beautiful plane?"
The officer looked them over and picked one out. "That one over
there," he said.
"Of course," Lindbergh said, "it's the most beautiful and it's the
best. Because in aerodynamics, the line of beauty and the line of
greatest efficiency parallel each other. Of course, engines will make
a great deal of difference

."
.

.

In telling this story the officer said, "Who in hell would have said
anything like that but Lindbergh? No other officer ever made a

remark like that to me."
Dr. Igor Sikorsky, the airplane designer, also held a high opinion
of Lindbergh's analytical ability. He told a woman at a dinner party
that the extraordinary thing about Lindbergh was not that he could
fly any plane, but that he could come

down and correct its mistakes

on the drawing board.
His dinner partner asked, "You mean to say that all of your test
pilots can't do that?"

Sikorsky said, "None of them. They can fly anything, and when

they bring it down they can tell me how it handles, but they don't
know why it behaves a certain way. Charles will know where the

mistake is and have a suggestion about correcting it."

These talents were to prove extremely useful to Lindbergh in
Germany. He and his wife arrived in Berlin in their newly built
plane on July 22. On hand to greet them at the well-protected
Staaken military airfield were the Smiths, Luftwaffe officers, and
other Germans and Americans.
The Germans adhered to their agreed schedule. The day following his arrival, Lindbergh was taken to visit General Milch, State
Secretary of the Air Ministry. Milch told him without equivocation
that "Germany intended to create an Air Force second to none."
Lindbergh was invited to a large lunch at the luxurious Air Club,
in Berlin, with top German Air Ministry officers. He came prepared

with a speech, in which he showed a willingness to speak his mind,

even at the risk of offending his hosts.
He offered a sobering statement on the responsibility of airmen
to protect their countries. He pointed out that for the first time
it was no longer possible to safeguard civilian centers witii troops

268

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

alone; that every European city was vulnerable to air attack. This
meant that the families of the men present, as well as the intellectual and artistic and religious treasures of their countries, might be

destroyed in a war.

The speech was printed verbatim in many German, European,
and American newspapers, but there was no editorial comment
within Germany for its statement might make Germany seem
vulnerable to air attack.

Later that day, Lindbergh flew an experimental four-engine
plane, the "Hindenburg,"

which he found inferior in speed and

maneuverability to a similar American plane.

The next day he visited an elite German fighter wing. The pilots
were good, but they flew the obsolete HE-51, powered by a Germanmade Pratt & Whitney Hornet engine. However, the leader of the
wing informed Lindbergh that these planes would soon be replaced
by the ME (Messerschmitt)-109, and gave him what later proved to
be accurate information about the impressive speed, armament, and
ceiling of the 109.

At the Adlershof Air Research Institute, which had been previously closed to Americans, Lindbergh noted that German scientists

would speak freely on any subject but rockets. He told this to
Smith, who failed to pass it along— as Smith notes, "an oversight of

some importance."
That day, Lindbergh flew an HE-111 bomber, which he thought
compared favorably with British and American bombers of that
type and was superior to any similar bomber he had seen in France.
He thought the ME-109 inferior to the British "Spitfire," but was
impressed with the HE-111, the HE-112 fighter (which Ernst Udet,
the German ace and head of development for the Luftwaffe flew for
him), and the HE-118 dive bomber. He reported to Smith that
German aviation design was coming of age: "I have never seen four
planes, each distinct in type, built by one manufacturer, which were
so well designed."

At the Junkers works in Dessau, Lindbergh gathered some interesting information. He saw the new JU ( Junkers ) -210 900-horsepower liquid-cooled engine; the JU-86, a low-wing all-metal bomber
approximately equal to the HE-111; and the JU-87. This was a dive
bomber, later to become well and bitterly known as the "Stuka." It
was to be a major weapon in the Nazi blitzkrieg that overran

.

ENGLAND, FRANCE. GERMANY

269

Europe, but at the time, American and other Western military
leaders were committed to the strategic bombing of cities, although
dive-bombing had been an American innovation. They were not
impressed by the Stuka, which was a short-range plane designed
to support ground troops. (They changed their minds after Poland
and Dunkirk.) Nor could they appreciate why the Germans were
turning out quantities of the obsolete JU-52 bomber. They did not

know then that Goering intended to use these planes for military
transport of parachute battalions

foreign to the Allied military

and airborne troops— concepts

command (although the tactic had

been invented by Billy Mitchell )
These inspections by Lindbergh were of great interest to the
press. To keep newspapermen out of Lindbergh's way, Smith
arranged to brief them each day at 5 p.m. at his apartment on
Lindbergh's activities that day. Almost every morning he would
listen to Lindbergh's report of the visits of the day before, his comparisons of German planes with those of the United States, France,
and Britain, and discuss them in detail, with a stenographer present. It was obvious that Lindbergh was getting what Smith had
wanted— a more complete picture of the Nazi buildup in the air,
and the German capability for the future.
Smith says that he wanted to keep Lindbergh out of touch with
any Nazi politicos, particularly Hitler, whom Lindbergh expressed a
desire to meet, and to keep his visit strictly on a pilot- to-pilot basis.
But the exception to this policy had to be Goering, for he was not
only head of the Luftwaffe but wore so many political hats as well:
Air Minister, Minister President of Prussia, President of the Reichstag,

Commissioner of the Four- Year Plan, Minister of Forests, and

Director of the State Theatre of Prussia.

On July 28, Goering gave a formal luncheon for Lindbergh at his
residence on the Wilhelmstrasse. It was attended by many
famous airmen and leaders of the Luftwaffe and, of course, by
Goering. It gave Smith and Lindbergh a chance to meet and
appraise Goering, the No. 2 Nazi, the man Hitler called "my

official

paladin."

Goering, according to Smith, was a man of wide interests. He was
"magnetic, genial, vain, intelligent, frightening and grotesque." He

and handsome; now he was pig-fat, but
formidable. Unlike some of his Nazi colleagues, he made an effort to

had once been

slim

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

270

behave like a gentleman and, says Smith, frequently succeeded.
Often he was kindly and thoughtful with his subordinates. However, he had an ungovernable temper and could be brutal and
remorseless when he got angry. His generals feared him in these
moods, for he seemed murderous and probably was. Field Marshal
Kesselring, in his memoirs, says that Goering probably seized the
opportunity of Hitler's bloody house cleaning among his own men
(when Captain Ernst Roehm was murdered) to murder his enemy
General von Schleicher.
At the lunch, Goering got out a huge album of photographs and
showed it to Lindbergh. The pictures were of Germany's first
seventy military flying fields. Lindbergh looked at them with interest. He had the same reaction toward Goering as Smith had, but
was able to bridge the gap between those two men. Lindbergh's
appeal lay in his prestige (Goering's vanity was an easy target for
this ) his mastery of air matters, and the fact that he was of Swedish
descent. Goering was quite disappointed to find that Lindbergh
could not speak Swedish, a language he himself spoke fluently. For
Goering was almost desperately devoted to the memory of his late
Swedish wife, a devotion that took the form "of a love of Sweden
and all things Swedish," Smith says. The Nazis treated the Swedish
Ambassador better than any other foreign ambassador. Smith
speculates that it is possible that Sweden was never invaded by
Germany in World War II because of Goering's fanatic senti,

mentality.
If Goering loved Sweden, he worshiped Adolf Hitler. At the end

huge formal banquet hall, lined with Italian Renaissance
paintings, a small water color held the place of honor over the fireplace: it was signed A. Hitler. At the luncheon, Goering remarked,
of his

"Smith, there are only three truly great characters in

all history:

Buddha, Jesus Christ, and Adolf Hitler." Smith recalls that this
statement reduced him to speechlessness.
One result of Lindbergh's first visit was that the American air attache established much better liaison with, and easy entry into, the
Luftwaffe. Too, following Lindbergh's trail came a host of American
airmen to view German aviation. Igor Sikorsky, Glenn Martin, J. H.
Kindelberger, of North American Aviation, and Professor Jerome C.
Hunsaker, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, were only
a few.

ENGLAND, FRANCE, GERMANY

271

On September 8, 1936, the Lindberghs, Mrs. Morrow, and Constance Morrow visited the Nicolsons at Sissinghurst Castle in Kent.

Lindbergh told Nicolson that Germany "possess [ed] the most powerful air-force in the world, with which they could do terrible damage

to any other country,

and could destroy [British] food supplies by

sinking even convoyed ships/' He said the Nazis were a great menace

but that they were not a menace to England. According to Nicolson,
Lindbergh predicted a complete separation between Fascism and
Communism, and said that "if Great Britain supports the decadent
French and the red Russians against Germany, there will be an end
to European civilisation."
Later that year, on December 9, Lindbergh lunched at the House
of Commons with Nicolson, who was then a leading member of
Parliament, Ramsay MacDonald, the former Prime Minister of
Great Britain and the head of the Labour party, and Thomas
Inskip, Minister of Defense. At first Lindbergh was shy, but when
the talk turned to aviation matters, he became quietly impressive.
He told Inskip that there was no known defense against air attack.
He repeated what he had said in Germany: all fortification was
useless; the only protection

was in deterrents. He said that the

develop night bombers as a deterrent weapon,
planes that would fly at 30,000 feet and be guided by the stars. "He
and Inskip get off into technicalities," Harold Nicolson wrote in his
diary that day, "and I observe that Inskip ceases to regard L. as an
interesting person to meet at luncheon, and regards him (as he is)
as a person whom he wants to talk to again."
In February, March, and April, 1937, Lindbergh and his wife flew
British

ought

to

to India and back.

They stopped off in Italy and Yugoslavia. The

made some news, but not of the intense personal nature that
Lindbergh had come to abhor.
Living in England, the Lindberghs had managed to keep so far out
of the public eye that there had not even been a hint in the newspapers that Anne was pregnant. ( In America, Jon's birth had been
predicted four months ahead of time by Walter Winchell. ) On May
12, 1937, the day King George VI was crowned, Charles and Anne
Lindbergh and Mrs. Morrow drove hurriedly from Kent to a
nursing home in London where Anne was registered under an
assumed name. The streets were so crowded with coronation
trip

throngs that they very nearly didn't make it in time; Land Morrow

272

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

Lindbergh, their third son, was born that day. Lindbergh persuaded the English authorities not to make the usual public announcement. Mrs. Morrow couldn't understand why, she told a
friend. "I said to Charles if you want to avoid being bothered by
the press, why don't you simply announce the birth of your child?
After all, he's normal and born within wedlock/' But Lindbergh
held up the announcement for nearly two weeks before telephoning
the news to the American Embassy.

22

AIR POWER

ALMOST A YEAR HAD PASSED SINCE LINDBERGHS FDRST
Germany, and Smith wanted him to return. But
Smith made no move in that direction until he got an invitation
from Colonel Hanesse in 1937. The occasion for the second visit
would be the annual dinner of the Lilienthal Aeronautical Society,
and this time Lindbergh was to be a guest of the German government. More specifically, he went as a house guest of Baron and
fruitful visit to

Baroness Kramer-Klett at their thirteenth-century castle in the
Bavarian Alps. This had been arranged by friends of the KramerKletts to boost their stock with the Brown Shirts. The Kramer-Kletts

were not popular with the Nazis.
Flying his own plane to and within Germany gave Lindbergh a
chance to observe more than he was shown. On a direct crosscountry flight from Munich to Stuttgart, he saw that Goering had
much expanded the number of his military airfields during the year
since the first visit; his plane passed over a military airdrome on an
average of once every ten minutes on a line parallel to and within
easy striking distance of the Swiss and French borders.
One important sortie was to the Bavarian Motor Works (BMW)
plant, producing Pratt & Whitney Hornet engines under license.
This production could be switched quickly to the Junkers or the
Daimler-Benz liquid-cooled engines of much higher horsepower.
Lindbergh judged the potential output of the plant at twenty-four
liquid-cooled engines per day.

Ernst Udet invited Lindbergh to the Rechlin air testing field, in

Pomerania, one of the most secret air establishments in Germany.

There he found seven airplanes drawn up for his inspection:
273

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

274

HE-111 medium bomber

DO (Dornier)-17 light bomber and reconnaissance plane
ME-109 single-engine flighter
Storch infantry artillery-liaison plane

Two-engine Focke-Wulf trainer bomber

HE-123 dive bomber
JU-87 dive bomber
This was the first time an American had had a chance to examine
in detail the ME-109 or the DO- 17. Lindbergh was impressed by
these and the other craft, particularly the Storch, which he thought
ought to be highly useful. And he speculated that the next plane the
Germans would develop would probably be a twin-engine fighter,
powered by two 1,200-horsepower Daimler-Benz liquid-cooled
engines, and that this plane would probably be identified as the
ME-110. It turned out that his deduction was accurate. The
ME-110, built as Lindbergh had guessed, was the standard twoengine German fighter plane in World War II.
Lindbergh was also the first American to inspect Focke-Wulf
helicopters. He estimated that these might replace standard airplanes in many functions.

Before Lindbergh left, he helped Smith prepare a report entitled
"General Estimate of Germany's Air Power" as of November 1,
1937. This document, signed by Smith alone, contained a number of
startling

and disturbing statements about German air progress— or

at least it would seem so to many people in the United States.

M.I.D.

REPORT

9180
General Estimate as of
Nov. 1, 1937

Germany is once more a world power in the air. Her air force and her
air industry have emerged from the kindergarten stage. Full manhood will
still not

be reached for three years.

The astounding growth of German air power from a zero level to its
present status in a brief four years must be accounted one of the most

important world events of our time. What it portends for Europe is something no one today can foretell and must be left as a problem for future
historians.

... It is difficult to express in a few words the literally amazing size
of the German air industry. The twenty-three known plants have a poten-

AIR POWER

275

annual plane production of probably 6,000 planes. There is every
reason to believe that the plants identified only give a part of the picture
tial

and that the truth, could it be known, would show a still higher potential
production. The scale of the German airplane motor industry is no less
impressive. It is ever and again the size of this industry, which forces the

who is accustomed to think in big
terms— to pause, ponder and wonder as to the future.
Behind this industry stands a formidable group of air scientists, with
large and well equipped laboratories and test fields, constantly pushing
forward the German scientific advance. This advance is remarkable. The
fact that the United States still leads in its air science and manufacturing
skill must not be allowed to overshadow the German achievements between 1933 and 1937 and above all, not to lead to an underestimate of
foreigner— and even the American

what Germany will achieve in the future.
The extraordinary technical excellence of American aviation has
been built up as a result of 19 years' uninterrupted progress since the
Armistice. To equal this accomplishment in 48 months would be miraculous. In truth, it has not been achieved. Yet, because on November 1,
has not been reached is no
1937, the American technical level
.

.

.

.

.

.

ground for the United States to adopt the British policy of smugness. If
so, we shall be doomed to the same position of air inferiority with respect
to Germany, as France now finds herself in and which Great Britain just
as certainly will find herself in

shortcomings.

.

.

tomorrow— unless she realizes her own

.

In general, the German air power has now reached a stage where it
must be given serious consideration as a powerful opponent by any single
nation. Qualified officers who have had the opportunity to inspect recently
the British, German and French air forces, believe that:
1.

Technically

Germany has outdistanced France in practically

all

fields.

2.

Germany is on the whole superior to Great Britain in the quality of
her plants, but is still slighdy inferior to Great Britain in motors, but
rapidly closing the gap.

3.

Both Great Britain and France are still superior to Germany in the
training levels of their respective Air Forces, but Germany has cut
down greatly the gap separating her from these rivals, during the
past 12 months.

A highly competent observer,* well acquainted with both American
and German

air developments, estimates that if the present progress
curves of these two nations should continue as they have in the past two
* Lindbergh.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

276
years,

Germany should obtain technical parity with the USA by 1941 or

1942. If, however, America makes a single blunder, or if some important
incident, whether political or a conflict of views within the armed forces,

should slow down her present development, German air superiority will

be realized still sooner.
In November 1937 it appears that the development of German air
power is a European phenomenon of the first diplomatic importance. The

upward movement is still gaining momentum.

Truman Smith,
Major, G.S.
Military Attache.

Report 15, 540

The U.S. General Staff took the Smith report seriously, as did the
Air Corps, but Smith says that politicians did not. Their impression
of Germany, based on news stories from Berlin at the time, was of a
weak and divided country whose army and air force were not nearly
ready for war. Smith's "General Estimate" of German air power did

not shake this false confidence.

Returning to England, Lindbergh asked for and got an appointment with Stanley Baldwin, Prime Minister of Great Britain. (He
had met Baldwin on his first visit to England in 1927. ) He tried to
warn Baldwin about the tremendous power of the German Air
Force. He argued that England should speedily build up her own
air force for her own safety. Britain had some excellent aircraft— the
Spitfire was, for example, faster than the fastest Messerschmitt— but

there were not enough Spitfires or even slower craft. Furthermore,

England had too many different types of aircraft, which complicated maintenance. Too, British air production was low compared

with Germany's.

Baldwin listened politely, but was not convinced to act. This
warning was the same sort of thing he was hearing regularly
from Winston Churchill, and he had no use for Churchill or his line.
He certainly wasn't going to change his policy because of the
personal opinions of an American aviator.
In May, 1938, Lindbergh told Harold Nicolson, still a member of
Parliament, that Britain could not fight Germany, since defeat would
be inevitable. He said, according to Nicolson, that the German
Luftwaffe "is ten times superior to that of Russia, France and
Great Britain. [English] defences are simply futile and the barrage

AIR POWER
balloons a mere waste of money.

277

He thinks [Britain] should just

give way and then make an alliance with Germany." Discounting

Lindbergh's views as colored by his emphasis on air power, Nicolson
gloomily concluded that Lindbergh was probably right in saying
Britain was outmastered in the air.

Later that year, after more than two peaceful years in England,
the Lindberghs moved to France, first to the Channel Island of Iliec

and later to an apartment in Paris.
Alarmed by the fantastic progress in German military aviation,
which seemed all the more remarkable when it was measured
against the lethargy of England, France, and the United States in
this area, Lindbergh determined to make a thorough study of air
power in other European countries. With the help of military
attaches in several U.S. embassies, he gathered data on air strength
in their countries. With his wife he made survey trips to Poland,
Rumania, Czechoslovakia, and the Soviet Union.
This was his third visit to the Soviet Union. The first was during
his China trip in 1931; the second came in 1933 as a side excursion
during the Atlantic survey flight. On the second trip the Lindberghs
spent a week in the two most important Soviet cities, Moscow and

Leningrad.

On that trip Lindbergh had had a chance to estimate
He found the Russians copying

the quality of Russian aviation.

planes designed in other countries, and not doing it well.

During their third trip, which was made in August, 1938, the Lindberghs saw more of Soviet air power. The Russians had bought
aircraft-manufacturing plants from other countries, and were turning out planes and engines. But the rate of production was far
below the plants' potential. And the maintenance of existing planes
seemed to Lindbergh extremely poor. He could get no figures on the
number of aircraft the Russians had. But in his judgment the
organization of production and of the Soviet air force was so
muddled, and the quality of maintenance so low, that numbers of
planes made no difference. He concluded that the Russians were
not a significant power in the air.
His assessment of the overwhelming power of the Luftwaffe as
opposed to the French, British, and Soviet air forces led him to
continue to warn leaders in both countries, as he helped warn those
of his own country, about the dangers they were facing.

He did this in off-the-record discussions. One of these led to the

278

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

first American press attack on Lindbergh's politics. This Week
magazine ran an article stating that Lindbergh had made pro-Nazi
and anti-Russian remarks at a private dinner at Cliveden, the
famous house belonging to the late Lady Nancy Astor. Lady Astor
denied that this had happened. The truth of the matter was that
Lindbergh had conferred with a group of members of Parliament,
at their request, on the relative strengths of the air arms of England,
Germany, and the Soviet Union.
What Lindbergh told these people was what he had concluded
after investigation: that the Russian Air Force was ineffectual. This
was a tremendously explosive opinion in Great Britain, because
British foreign policy was based in part on a militarily strong
Russia. On this basis, many British politicians had dragged their
feet over rearming their own country. If they were wrong, it meant
not only political defeat for themselves but could mean disaster for

the British Isles.

In the Soviet Union, where the Lindberghs had been the honored

was widely denounced in the
newspapers for his ingratitude.
Actually, his judgment of the Russan Air Force later proved
uncomfortably accurate. Without air superiority, the Germans could
never have got so far so fast as they did before they were stopped
on the ground in Russia.
Leakage of this story embarrassed United States missions in
England and the Soviet Union. Our military attaches in both
countries asked Lindbergh to deny the This Week report to smooth
relations with the two countries. But, according to Smith, Lindbergh decided to follow his "long-established policy of never either
confirming or denying press reports."
Lindbergh made one more visit to Germany at Smith's request, in
1938. It was during this visit that he was awarded a medal by the
Nazi government, an incident that, more than any other, helped
change the picture of Lindbergh from the ail-American hero to a
pro-Nazi, a Nazi, or a defeatist. The circumstances are worth
examining in detail.
In 1937, Ambassador Dodd, who left no doubt of his strong antiNazi views, had been replaced as U.S. Ambassador to Germany by
Hugh R. Wilson. Wilson was a more pragmatic type who was
willing to try to deal with the Nazis. Like Smith, he saw in Lindguests of the Russian aviators, he

AIR POWER

279

bergh a bridge to Goering, and he accepted the Smith-Lindbergh
evaluation of Goering as a man who might be dealt with. During
Lindbergh's third visit to Germany (October 11-29, 1938), Wilson
set up a small stag dinner at the American Embassy to which he
invited Goering and several key Nazis. The purpose of the dinner
was, according to Smith, to persuade Goering to allow Jews who
were forced to leave Germany to take some of their assets with
them. Smith says that it was reasonable to assume that Goering
could be persuaded on this— that, in fact, he had helped many Jews
to escape and probably without any financial gain to himself
( although Smith thinks that men close to him made money on these
transactions). Of course, if Goering could be won over, then he
could use his influence with Hitler.
The dinner was held on October 18, 1938, at the American
Embassy. About four o'clock that afternoon an officer of the attache
section of the German Air Ministry telephoned the American Embassy—a time when no American officer was in the office— and left
a message with a secretary that Goering intended to confer a
German decoration on Lindbergh at the dinner that night.
The message was not delivered to either Smith or his air attache
until the following morning— after the event had taken place.

Even

had it been delivered in advance, Smith thinks it was probably impossible that anything could have been done gracefully to prevent

the presentation.

Among those present at the dinner were Hugh Wilson; the Italian
and Belgian ambassadors; various American officials, Dr. Igor Sikorsky; Professor Dr. Heinkel, German aircraft manufacturer; Professor

Baeumker, chief of the

air

research division of the Air

Ministry. Goering arrived later with several aides and adjutants.

He greeted his host and shook hands with the other guests. Then
Goering went over to Lindbergh and began making a speech in
German, a language Lindbergh did not understand. Goering held in
his hand a small red box which his aide-de-camp had given him.
Since it could be seen that Lindbergh did not know what was
going on, Wilson, Smith, and the American Consul-General, stepped
forward to translate. Raymond Geist told Lindbergh that Goering
was about to decorate him with the Verdienstkreuz der Deutscher
Adler (Service Cross of the German Eagle), a high civilian medal.
This was being given to Lindbergh for his services to aviation and

280

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

particularly for his 1927 solo flight from New York to Paris— for
which he had been decorated by many governments, but never by
Germany.
"Under the circumstances/' Smith wrote, "there was of course no
possibility for Lindbergh to reject the decoration, even if the attache's secretary had properly transmitted the Air Ministry's message. ... To have done so would have been a personal affront to
Ambassador Wilson
and to Minister Goering, who in a sense
was his host in Germany."
Wilson said as much in a letter to Lindbergh from Vermont on
August 4, 1941:
.

.

.

Neither you, nor I, nor any other American present had any previous
hint that the presentation would be made.
I have always felt that if you had refused the decoration, presented
under these circumstances, you would have been guilty of a breach of
good taste. It would have been an act offensive to the guest of the Ambassador of your country, in the house of the Ambassador.

"At the moment," Truman Smith wrote, "the award of the medal

October 1938 was a month of much
diminished international tension. Europe, after the Munich accord,

seemed quite natural.

.

.

.

was relaxing. The prospect of war had receded into the background.
The notorious anti-Semitic riots of November 9, 1938, which were to
shock the world, lay still some weeks away."
However, when Lindbergh and Smith brought the medal home
that night, both their wives instantly and almost instinctively reacted against it. Lindbergh silently handed the box to his wife.
She opened it and glanced at the medal and looked away. Then
she said without the slightest trace of emotion, "The albatross," a
prescient description. Lindbergh gave the box to Mrs. Smith, asking, "Kay, exactly what did I get this for?"
Mrs. Smith read the German words written on the paper inside
the box and repeated what the consul-general had said: that it was
for his services to aviation and for the Paris flight. Later that
evening, she said several times to her husband, "This medal will
surely do Lindbergh much harm." Lindbergh never wore the medal,
but sent it to the Lindbergh collection of the Missouri Historical
Society in St. Louis, along with his other decorations, awards,
trophies, and presents.

Although the award was reported by newspapers the next day,

AIR POWER

281

there was not much criticism of Lindbergh for accepting it until

government-organized anti-Semitic riots, which were followed by new, fierce, repressive measures by the Nazi government
against the Jews. Then many newspapers in the United States made
strong attacks on Lindbergh for accepting and, even more, for
after the

retaining the medal.

Wilson and Smith were disturbed by these

attacks,

but after

talking it over they decided not to explain the circumstances sur-

rounding the giving of the award. To do so, they felt, would have
revealed their ulterior purposes in bringing Lindbergh and Goering
together, an obviously impolitic act.
Lindbergh wrote Smith about the medal in 1953. The medal had
never worried him, he said, and he doubted if it had added to his
later troubles—when he was involved in anti-interventionist politics
during the America First period. It had been just an excuse for attacking him. As he has since told other friends, if it hadn't been
the medal, his enemies would have found something else.
Lindbergh is demonstrably wrong in this opinion. The medal was
a most redolent albatross to hang around his neck, and most useful
to cast doubt on his motives, his honesty, his integrity, and even his

Between November, 1939, and December 7,
1941, the Nazi medal was mentioned in scores of speeches and
articles, and many deductions were drawn from it about Lindbergh's politics. The damage that the albatross did to Lindbergh's

loyalty to his country.

reputation is incalculable.
If Lindbergh had

given the medal back after Germany declared

war on the United States, he might have retrieved some good will
from the press and public over the matter. In 1942 an occasion
presented itself for doing just that. Mayor Fiorello La Guardia, of
New York City, planned an anti-Fascist demonstration. La Guardia,
who had been a military pilot in Italy with U.S. forces during World
War I, recruited a group of veterans of that theatre of war to meet
at the New York City Hall and throw their Italian medals into a pot.
The medals would be melted down and delivered to Italy in the form
of bullets.

La Guardia asked Harry Bruno to invite Lindbergh to throw his
Verdienstkreuz into the pot. Bruno passed the suggestion along to
Deac Lyman. Lyman relayed the reply that Lindbergh would not
participate in the ceremony.

Lindbergh's reason for not doing so is his own secret. But one of

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

282

his friends says, "It would be entirely contrary to his nature to take

part in a stunt designed to curry public favor." That, coupled with
his stated notion that he regarded the whole thing as

to begin with,

is

as near as we can come to

unimportant
an explanation of his

intransigence.

The medal aside, just reporting Nazi progress in air power was,
in 1938, equated with being pro-Nazi or untruthful, or both.

When

Lindbergh dined that year in England with the British Ambassador
to Germany, Sir Nevile Henderson, the Ambassador asked him to
arouse England to the "quality and magnitude of the aviation
program in Germany." Henderson told Lindbergh, "They do not
believe me when I describe it."

In the United States, generals George C. Marshall and H. H.
Arnold were also uneasy about German air power, but were unable
to get Congress or the administration to set a new U.S. air program
in motion until after the fall of France in 1940.
Truman Smith's recollection of Lindbergh's views of Germany
resulting from his visits in 1936, 1937, and 1938 were:
1.

Lindbergh distrusted the Nazi government and found its anti-

Semitic policies abhorrent. He did not want to return to Germany
after the November, 1938, riots but did make two subsequent visits,
without his wife, not for the United States.

Lindbergh admired most of Germany's aviators, scientists, and
whom he had met. His views on Goering were mixed,
as were Smith's.*
3.
He believed that a war in Europe would be a catastrophe for
Western civilization, and thought that such a war would result
either in a German victory or in Russia's becoming the dominant
2.

industrialists

power of Europe.
4. Lindbergh hoped that if Hitler did launch a war it would be
against the Soviet Union.

He thought that France, Great Britain,

and the United States should remain neutral and build up their
military strength, so that they could dictate terms of peace to an

exhausted Germany and Russia.
Lindbergh's

last

two

visits

to

prewar Germany in December,

* So were others'. Albrecht Bernstorff, a German diplomat in the London Embassy who was later murdered by the Nazis, thought (in 1937) that Goering
was "an adventurer, pure and simple," and that if he were asked to shoot at
Sandringham he might become a friend to England.

AIR POWER
1938,

283

and January, 1939, had nothing to do with American intelli-

gence. They were, in fact, missions whose purpose was kept secret

from Smith at the time. Lindbergh assured Smith that knowledge of
his goal might be embarrassing to the military attache.

The purpose of the visits was to buy aircraft engines for the
French government to install in French fighter planes. Returning
from Germany, where he had seen the JU-88 bomber with a top
speed of 310 m.p.h., Lindbergh learned that the fastest military
pursuit airplane in France was the Morane, which could not top 297
m.p.h. And this was only an experimental ship, not yet in production. Even the German bombers which were slower than the JU-88
were fast enough so that the Morane would have been ineffective
against them.

Armed with this information, Lindbergh prodded French officials
at a number of secret conferences in Paris with American Ambassa-

dor William C. Bullitt. At one of these meetings in Bullitt's house
—at which Premier Daladier, M. Jean Monnet, and French Air
Minister Guy Le Chambre were present, along with Bullitt and
Lindbergh— the question came up of how the French might obtain
aviation engines in the 1,000-horsepower range. British engine
production was being totally absorbed in Britain; American production was insufficient to meet both domestic and French needs.

At this conference, which took place on October 3, 1938 (the
Lindberghs were living in a Paris apartment near the Bois de
Boulogne at the time), Lindbergh suggested that the French might
buy the high-powered Junkers or Daimler-Benz liquid-cooled engines he had seen. Daladier and Le Chambre were doubtful that
the Germans would sell them such engines, but after subsequent
conferences with Lindbergh, at which he was the only foreigner
present, they asked him to explore the possibility of buying four
hundred engines. Le Chambre felt that the French public would
never accept a purchase of German airplanes, but German engines
in French airframes was a different matter.
Lindbergh said he would undertake the mission, providing that
'lie receive no remuneration whatsoever, regardless of the outcome." On December 19, 1938, Lindbergh flew to visit General
Ernst Udet at his home in Berlin and broached the proposition.
Udet took no stand on the idea, but said it was obviously political
and would have to be taken up with General Milch. The next day,

284

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

with Udet present, Lindbergh again stated the French proposal.
Milch asked only if the French were serious. Being assured that
they very much wanted to buy engines, he said he would take the
matter up "at least with Goering." Later the same day, Milch called
Lindbergh and asked him to return to the Air Ministry; he said he
thought it best to wait to approach Goering until after the Christmas holidays. When the time was right, Lindbergh would receive,
in Paris, a dinner invitation from Milch.

Lindbergh left his plane at Tempelhof Airport because of bad
weather conditions ( and because it would be an excuse to return to
Germany) and took the train to Paris.
The dinner invitation from Milch arrived in Paris around the
middle of January, 1939. When Lindbergh got off the train in Berlin
on January 16, he was met by Smith but decided to stay at the
Hotel Esplanade.
That afternoon, Udet telephoned asking Lindbergh to meet Milch
at the Air Ministry at 6:00 p.m. Milch told Lindbergh that Germany
was prepared to sell the French an unspecified number of DaimlerBenz liquid-cooled engines of 1,250 horsepower. These would have
to be paid for in foreign currencies. He told Lindbergh to keep the
matter secret and to use the ostensible purchase of a Storch liaison
plane as a cover story.
On January 18, Lindbergh flew out of prewar Berlin for the last
time. The next day he called on Minister Le Chambre and told him
of the German offer. Le Chambre related the information to Daladier, who let Lindbergh know that he was greatly pleased.
The deal fell through when Germany occupied the rest of
Czechoslovakia. Le Chambre later told Lindbergh that negotiations
had started well with the Germans but that the French Foreign
Office killed the plan as a result of the worsening of relations with
Germany. Colonel ( later General ) Hanesse recalled in 1954 that he
had heard of the airplane engine negotiations, and that the purchase
had been approved by Goering but without consulting Hitler.
Hanesse said that if Hitler had known about it, he would not have
approved the deal.

With the collapse of negotiations, Lindbergh had no reason to
return to Germany. He did not go back until after the war.

23

SPEAKING OUT

LINDBERGH S JUDGMENTS OF NAZI AIR STRENGTH AND OF
the air power of other countries had been given to U.S. military
attaches. But his private opinions voiced to various French and
British political leaders were having civilian reverberations. Joseph
P. Kennedy, United States Ambassador to Great Britain, heard of
Lindbergh's appraisals and wired him in France, asking him to
come to London to discuss them.
Lindbergh visited Joseph Kennedy in London on September 21,
1938. He also met John F. Kennedy, who was serving as bis father's
aide in the Embassy.
Lindbergh followed up the visit with a letter to Ambassador
Kennedy, probably at Kennedy's request. In this letter, Lindbergh
sharpened and strengthened certain opinions he and Smith had
worked out in Smith's estimate of German air power. The letter reveals the extent of Lindbergh's observations, and embodies the
judgments which informed his actions during the next three years.
In it he stated that the German air force was without question the
strongest in the world— stronger than that of all other European
nations combined— and that German production potential was on
the order of twenty thousand aircraft a year. While the United
States had once held the lead, Germany was catching up and had
already outdistanced us so far as fighting planes were concerned.

Germany's main point of vulnerability in wartime would be in obtaining raw materials.

Lindbergh said he thought that civilization had never been in
Europe were threatened with

greater danger; the great cities of
285

286

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

extinction. France's air fleet was pitiful; England's was better, but
no match for Germany's. He estimated that France was building
a mere fifty aircraft a month, the English about two hundred a

month.

He dismissed the Czech air force as negligible, its only up-to-date
planes being Russian made, but thought that the Czechs had good
antiaircraft and machine guns.

He found Russian air strength to be an unknown quantity. While
Russia had enough planes to make her air force felt in any war, he
felt little reliance

could be placed on it. As for airplane manufac-

ture, the Russians had American machinery and copies of American

factories, but their production was inefficient.

Lindbergh concluded that it was imperative to avoid a war in
Europe because such a war might wipe out civilization. He was not
sure that England and France could beat Germany, but even if
they could, it would be at great cost. The result would be a Europe lying prone at the feet of Russia; from his observation of life
in the Soviet Union, he felt that anything was to be preferred to
that. As an alternative to war with the West, he advised allowing
Germany to expand to the east.
He ended by repeating that German strength must be reckoned
with, that the Germans were a great and able people, and that
England and France were too lacking in air power to defend themselves.

Kennedy sent a long cable to Cordell Hull, the United States
Secretary of State, the same day, saying, "you may feel that this

CONFIDENTIAL EXPRESSION OF HIS PERSONAL OPINION MAY BE OF INTEREST TO THE PRESIDENT AND TO THE WAR AND NAVY DEPARTMENTS,"

and quoted the paragraphs from Lindbergh's letter which pertain to
his judgment of air power of the various countries. The telegram
was signed "kennedy." It omitted Lindbergh's warnings about the
consequences of a European war and his political judgments.
"Despite Ambassador Kennedy's specific request [suggestion?],"
Smith writes, "there is no evidence in the State Department files
that the cable was ever shown to the War Department, nor has any
copy of this cable been found in War Department files. There is also
no notation on the copy in the State Department files that this cable
was ever shown, as Kennedy requested, to the President. Therefore,
it would seem that however wide a distribution the cable may have

SPEAKING OUT

287

had within the State Department, Colonel Lindbergh's views could
have exerted only a small influence on the American foreign and
aviation policies."

Lindbergh wrote again to Joseph Kennedy on November 9, 1938,
when he returned to his Channel Island home, of his plan to take a
house for his family in Berlin for the winter "to learn more about
Germany."
In this letter he reiterated his concern about the air situation. He
said that the Germans were making faster progress than he had
reckoned and that German air supremacy had become as much a
fact of politics as English sea power. And he said again that a
general war would make the future of Western civilization very
doubtful.

Around the same time, Lindbergh also wrote directly to General
Arnold, Chief of the Air Corps of the U.S. Army, urging him to visit
Germany immediately. He said Arnold ought to see for himself
what was being done there not only in aviation but in other areas.
Arnold answered him a week later that he was "100% in favor of
making the trip just as you outlined. As a matter of fact it is to be
noted that a mission headed by the undersigned was scheduled to
go to Germany about 3 months ago, but for diplomatic reasons it
was called off. Upon receipt of your letter, the matter was reopened
and taken up with the Chief of Staff and the Secretary of War, who
stated that due to the political situation at this moment it was not
deemed advisable that the Chief of the Air Corps go to Germany at
this

time."

But he asked Lindbergh

to

keep sending whatever

information he could about Germany.

Lindbergh agreed with this judgment, but he said that it was
advisable to keep abreast of German aviation, which was undoubt-

edly the leader in Europe and was even ahead of the United States
in certain areas.

Lindbergh wrote to Arnold again emphasizing the need for developing extremely high-speed

aircraft,

planes that could

fly

at

hundred miles per hour at altitude. He said that European
bombers were now flying at speeds above three hundred miles per
hour and that speeds of more than four hundred miles per hour
were attributed to new pursuit craft. The whole thrust of military
aircraft abroad was toward extremely high speeds, he said, even
at the sacrifice of range and bombload.
five

288

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

Arnold never did make his

visit to

Nazi Germany. TTie same

made it inadvisable for him to go there also
caused Lindbergh to cancel his plans to live in Germany that
considerations that
winter.

From the surveys Lindbergh made, U.S. intelligence had knowledge of the existence and approximately correct characteristics of all
German aircraft plants (Lindbergh and Smith missed a couple of
engine factories in Austria); they knew where most German airfields were located, the approximate type and number of aircraft in
the Luftwaffe; they were aware of the personnel difficulties encountered by a rapidly expanding German air force. They had learned
the useful fact that the Luftwaffe was designed "for close support of

the German armies in Europe, rather than as a long-range air force

constructed primarily to bomb objectives far behind the front lines."

24

AMERICA FIRST

LINDBERGH S ASSESSMENTS OF AIR POWER IN EUROPE HAD
developed the data that Smith wanted. But Lindbergh was not just
a passive observer. What he saw and learned led him to conclude
that war was inevitable in Europe. He knew that the Luftwaffe was
designed to help conquer Europe swiftly, and he estimated that the
Germans could do what they planned.
He did not think that the United States could thwart a German
victory. Our production of military planes was small. We had no
excess fighter craft to bolster French and English defenses, or extra

bombers that could help them counterattack. The only way we
could help the Allies in the air would be to strip ourselves of
strength. This, Lindbergh thought, would weaken this country to no
avail.

His observation that the Luftwaffe was meant mainly for close
support of ground troops convinced him that once the Germans had
secured victory they would be no threat to the United States. Their

bombers were not designed to cross the Atlantic. If the Nazis tried
to establish bases in this hemisphere, we could fight them off. Their
navy and air force were a threat to a sea power like England, but
not to a self-contained continental power like the United States.
And besides, Lindbergh thought, they really had no designs on this
hemisphere.

He was in a unique position. On the one hand, he could talk the
language of pilots, mechanics, and designers, and at the same time
speak to the military as an officer. On the other hand, he could tell
what he learned and say what he thought to leading politicians,
generals, and heads of state.
289

290

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

His thinking was conditioned by his father's experience in World

War I. His father had been right about that war: it did lead to a
suppression of civil liberties in the United States and had settled

nothing in Europe. Professional historians in the United States after
the war tended to the view that the Germans had not been so wrong
in the first place and that behind the front of a war for democracy

the Allies were also preserving the French and British empires. The

United States had helped them win their war (it was "their" war)
but the peace had turned into something other than Wilsonian
ideals had adumbrated. Both liberals and conservatives could agree
on that. But they split on whose fault it was. The liberals believed
that it was partly the fault of the United States that Versailles and
postwar European policies were not better managed. The conservative view was that Europeans were decadent and untrustworthy
and that we should have nothing to do with them. Oceans were very

wide in those days.
Lindbergh sailed for the United States in April, 1939. His wife
and two sons were to follow. The family was moving back to the
United States permanently.
While he was aboard ship, Lindbergh got a radiogram from
Major General Arnold asking for a meeting. Lindbergh called
Arnold within an hour of his arrival, from the Morrow house in
Englewood. They arranged to meet the next day at a hotel in West
Point. There they talked for three hours, then adjourned to the
Academy baseball field where a game was in progress. They kept on
talking. Arnold told of the incident in his book Global Mission,
describing how Lindbergh filled him in on the Luftwaffe while they
sat unnoticed in the grandstand.

Lindbergh was then a colonel on the inactive Reserve list. Arnold
asked him to take a two-week refresher course in the Air Corps, and
then to go on "extended active duty," which meant remaining in
uniform for a year. Lindbergh refused but agreed to continue at his
own expense to work for the Air Corps and for the National
Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, a civilian agency assisting
U.S. Military Air Development, of which he had been a member
since 1928.

major assignment was to confer with various
procurement officers and others in the government connected with
aviation. He attended the vital conference of the National Advisory
Committee for Aeronautics on April 20. The upshot of this conferLindbergh's

first

AMERICA FIRST

291

ence was a recommendation to Congress for a program to accelerate
and expand aircraft design and production. This was almost immediately translated by Congress into an appropriation of $46
million. The money was quickly spent by the War Department for

more airplanes.
In May, 1939, Lindbergh made two transcontinental inspection
tours in an Army P-36 pursuit plane. (It was on one of these trips
that he dropped in at Roswell, New Mexico, for a day with Dr.
Goddard.) He visited almost every aircraft-manufacturing plant in
the United States. He made his findings known to a military aviation
board— that U.S. military planes did not equal the performances of
European combat planes, but that U.S. industry had the capability
to design and build the best aircraft in the world. He had joined
this board, consisting of Colonel (later General) Carl ("Tooey")
Spaatz, General W. G. Kilner, and two other officers, at Arnold's
request. Their findings were of "inestimable value," Arnold said
later, in getting new planes designed and built for the U.S. Air
Corps. These were the planes that helped win the war.
Lindbergh also began telling his observations of European air
power to American industrialists and politicians in private. His
factual, eyewitness reports had a devastating effect on most of his
listeners, and generally they agreed with his conclusion that our
best course was to stay out of Europe's affairs. However, Vannevar
Bush, a leading scientist, was moved to action by one of Lindbergh's reports. After listening to Lindbergh, he got together with
James B. Conant, of Harvard University, Karl T. Compton, of
M.I.T., and Frank B. Jewett, of the Bell Telephone Laboratories.
They worked out a plan to mobilize American scientists to overtake
the head start of Nazi technology in weaponry. The result was the
National Defense Research Committee, which was ultimately responsible for the invention of the atomic bomb.
In July, 1939, Lindbergh was introduced to Fulton Lewis, Jr., by
a mutual friend at a small private dinner. (Lewis was the former
reporter who had provided the ammunition for the Black committee
hearings on air-mail contracts.) Lindbergh told him how he felt
about the various air forces, and about politics in general. Lewis, a
radio commentator and a strong right-wing opponent of the Roosevelt administration, was delighted with what he heard.
He said, "Colonel, I am going on vacation soon and a number
of prominent people are going to fill in for me as guest commentators

292

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

on the air. Why don't you take over for an evening and tell the
American people how you feel about things/'
Lewis is reported to have expected Lindbergh to decline quickly.
But Lindbergh did not reply for a minute or so, and when he did, it
was to ask for a rain check on the invitation.
Early in September, 1939, after the German invasion of Poland
and the quick declaration of war on Germany by England and
France, Lindbergh called Lewis at his Maryland farm to say he
wanted to talk about the radio broadcast Lewis had suggested.
Until that time, Lindbergh had drawn a sharp line between his
public aspect, as a colonel in the Air Corps Reserve, and his private
aspect, as an independent observer of European politics and air
power. But with the war declared between most of the major
powers of Europe, he put ( as he said ) his rights as a private citizen
above his duty as a military man; he chose to speak out in public on
a matter that crossed the frontiers between his military and private
obligations.

As long as he held an Army commission, he was subject to the
wishes of his Commander in Chief, and President Roosevelt let him

know this quickly, albeit behind the scenes. Roosevelt's wishes were
conveyed to Lindbergh by various emissaries in quiet ways as soon
as Roosevelt learned that Lindbergh was going to speak in public.

Secretary of war Harry Woodring reported to Roosevelt that Lindbergh was going ahead with his plan to talk on the radio, and had
refused to show a copy of his speech to the War Department in
advance. Harold L. Ickes, Secretary of the Interior, wrote in his
diary, "Woodring was sure that he was going to take a stand against

the neutrality legislation that the President wants. [This legislation

was an amendment of the Neutrality Act.*] He sent word to
Lindbergh that there was likelihood of his losing his position and
* The Neutrality Act of 1937 attempted to legislate the United States out of
a future war by restricting the sale of arms to belligerent nations and preventing
the United States from trading with belligerents. The President was empowered to declare when a state of war existed between other countries and to forbid export of arms, ammunition, and implements of war to the warring nations.
Other trade with belligerents was prohibited, too, unless carried in foreign ships.
It was the first of these provisions that Roosevelt wished to change. The new
Neutrality Act was to relax the Arms Embargo and permit any country,
whether at war or not, to buy materiel and remove it from the United States
in foreign ships. The effect of this would be to allow France and England to
buy arms from the United States.

AMERICA FIRST

293

rank as an officer in the Reserve Corps. But Lindbergh continued to

be obstinate."

And Roosevelt continued to be cautious. Lindbergh's image was a
tarnished by his acceptance of the Nazi medal from Goering,
but it was still magnetic. Roosevelt knew from experience that
Lindbergh was a hard man to handle, and he wasn't going to give

little

him the easy gift of martyrdom by cashiering him.
Roosevelt was sure that Lindbergh was after power—why else
would he risk his commission and his good name by fighting the
administration? According to C. B. Allen, the ex-New York World
reporter and old-time friend of Lindbergh's, Lindbergh was visited
by a man who said he had a message that originated in the White
House. The message was that the administration was going to
create a separate Air Force, a new department as important as War

and Navy, and a new Cabinet post to go with it. The first Secretary
of Air could be Lindbergh if he would support Roosevelt's position

of aid to France and England "short of war."

Lindbergh refused, and kept silent on the offer for more than a
year.

The size of the bribe was a clear indication that Roosevelt was
worried— before Lindbergh had said a word in public— about the
strength of his appeal. It was also an index of the lack of domestic
support for Roosevelt's posture of pro-Allied neutrality.

When Lindbergh did not prove vulnerable to the offer of power,
He gave

Roosevelt decided to try to reach him in another way.

Revenue Service to go into Lindbergh's
tax returns. According to one Lindbergh friend, the order was to
"get Lindbergh." A newspaperman tipped Lindbergh that the story
would break in the press that the government was looking into his
tax returns. Would he care to comment?
Lindbergh unexpectedly said he would be delighted to talk to the
press about the subject. He said he would make a statement, and
that he had copies of all his income-tax returns to back it up. The
newspapermen thought that at last they had Lindbergh on the
orders to the Internal

defensive.

Lindbergh told the reporters that he had always felt it was a
privilege to be an American, no matter what tax you paid. If you
paid what you owed, you weren't really paying for the privilege of
being a citizen. And, he said, he'd realized it was often difficult to

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

294

figure out

what you really owed for income tax. So after he had

calculated his tax each year, he had made it a practice to add 10 per

cent to what he thought he owed, and pay it.

He'd been doing this for many years and he'd never heard any
complaints from the Internal Revenue people. He didn't expect any
rebates either, he said, deadpan.
This was the end of what had seemed a promising scandal.
This was during the eight months in 1939-40 known as "the
phony war." Hitler had attacked Poland; the Soviet Union had also
gone into Poland and was fighting in Finland; but France and
England had only declared war on the Axis without fighting it.
Harry Hopkins, who became Roosevelt's most trusted confidential
aide during the war, wrote to his mother in October, 1939, "The
only interest here [in Washington], as everywhere, is the war and I
believe that we really can keep out of it. Fortunately, there is no
great sentiment in this country for getting into it although I think
almost everyone wants to see England and France win." Robert E.

Sherwood, who quoted this letter in his biography of Roosevelt and
Hopkins, commented, "In those two sentences Hopkins unconsciously stated the greatest problem Roosevelt

had to face in his

entire Administration."

Roosevelt in 1939-40 was certain that the French and British
fleets

were vital to United States defenses; he felt bound to help

those two countries for that reason alone. His knowledge of geog-

raphy told him that United States outposts on the Atlantic side were
the British Isles, France, the Iberian Peninsula, and the north and
west coasts of Africa, and, in the Pacific, the Netherlands East
Indies, the Philippines, and the Marianas. If these fell, United
States shipping was threatened, and that meant economic strangulation. So, he "risked political suicide," says Sherwood, in 1939 to get
Congress to repeal the Arms Embargo provision in the United
States Neutrality Act. At the time he had to say, "I hope the United
States will keep out of this war. I believe that it will. And I give you
my assurance and reassurance that every effort of your Government
will be directed toward that end." Repeal of the Arms Embargo
enabled the United States to sell "cash and carry" arms to the Allies
in November, 1939.
After France fell in 1940, Roosevelt broadened his concerns to
meet what he could see as the long-range threat: a Nazi attack

AMERICA FIRST

295

against the Western Hemisphere.

The one thing he feared was a
negotiated peace in Europe. This would give Hitler time to prepare
for an assault on Latin America. The Axis would have all the
shipbuilding facilities in Europe and Japan to draw on. Roosevelt

was also sure that, given time to consolidate his gains in Europe,
Hitler would go after Africa and the Middle East.
It was obvious to Roosevelt that this was no mere European war,
but total world-wide war. Oceans were no barriers except in some
people's minds. Everybody was in it, like it or not.
There is no question that Roosevelt was years ahead of the great
majority of Americans in his realization of the meaning of total war
and of what had to be done to protect the United States. But one of
the things he had to do first was to get re-elected in 1940. And in
September, 1939, the majority of American voters were still about
two decades off the pace of events.
Roosevelt read cables every day that told of an increasingly
desperate European situation, but he could also read the Gallup
Poll of September, 1939, which showed that a full 30 per cent of
Americans wanted nothing to do with any warring country— not
even trade on a cash-and-carry basis. Another 37.5 per cent wanted
to take no sides, to stay out of war, but would sell to any nation
cash-and-carry. Only 8.9 per cent were willing to supply England,
France, and Poland while excluding Germany, and a slender 14.7
per cent would help England and France and would go to war if
those countries were in danger of losing. Thus, in 1939, close to 70
per cent of our population were strongly pacifist, of which nearly
half were completely isolationist.
The combination of Lindbergh's prestige and the firm popular
base of his isolationist position could have been insurmountable.
Roosevelt had to fight, but he could not afford to respond openly to
the direct challenge of Lindbergh. In fact, he could not afford to tell

the whole truth to the American public— not if he wanted to be re-

The Republican candidate, Wendell Willkie, was in the
same fix.
Lindbergh had no such inhibition. His first speech on the war was
made over the radio from a Mutual Broadcasting station in Washington, D.C., on September 15, 1939. It was carried by all three
networks: Mutual, National Broadcasting, and Columbia Broadcasting, and was beamed by short wave from WIXL in Boston. It had
elected.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

296

probably the biggest single audience of any private radio broadcast
of the time— even larger, probably, than some of Roosevelt's Fireside Chats.

He said on the radio, in his high, rather tense public voice, "I
speak tonight to those people in the United States of America who
feel that the destiny of this country does not call for our involve-

ment in European wars." He went on to say that we should never
enter a war unless it was "absolutely essential to the future welfare
These wars in Europe are not wars in which
of the nation.
our civilization is defending itself against some Asiatic intruder.
There is no Genghis Khan or Xerxes ." His main argument was
that our entrance into a European war was against our interests and
he made the cost plain. America would have to do more than
merely ship armaments abroad— she would have to send her men.
.

.

.

He predicted that "We are likely to lose a million men, possibly several million," and that we would

be "staggering under the burden

of recovery during the rest of our lives."
If Lindbergh overstated his case, he was at least stating it. Roosevelt,

who saw the cost of entering the war clearly, had to pussyfoot

through the 1940 Presidential campaign against Willkie. Willkie
predicted that if Roosevelt were re-elected, we might be in the war
by April, 1941. And Roosevelt could not truthfully contradict him;
he could only fudge and hedge. Roosevelt's biographer, Robert E.
Sherwood, says that "This was a fight ( against Willkie ) that he despised. It left a smear on his record which only the accomplishments
of the next five years could remove."
In his first speech Lindbergh made points that he was to reiterate
in his subsequent addresses: that America did not have to enter the
war to protect herself— the great oceans that surrounded her did
that; that once we became involved in the war, America would
have to remain forever involved in European affairs. "If we enter
the quarrels of Europe during war, we must stay in them in time
of peace as well. It is madness to send our soldiers to be killed as
we did in the last war if we turn the course of peace over to the
all

greed, the fear, and the intrigue of European nations."

He warned his listeners against the insidious effects of propa-

We must learn
to look behind every article we read and every speech we hear. We
ganda: "Much of our news is already colored.

.

.

.

must not only inquire about the writer and the speaker— about his

AMERICA FIRST

297

personal interests and nationality, but we must ask who owns and
who influences the newspaper, the news picture, and the radio station."

He ended by saying that the future of Western civilization might
lie in

America; that the war might destroy it in Europe. "Let us

look to our own defenses and to our own character. If we attend to

them, we have no need to fear what happens elsewhere. If we do
not attend to them, nothing can save us."

His first speech was received with great acclaim, and a barrage of

from a wide variety of people— ranging from liberal but
normally isolationist Midwesterners to rabid Roosevelt haters to the

letters

German-American Bund, Father Coughlin, and the Fascist Silver
Shirts. He was also strongly attacked by the national administration,
although still not directly by Roosevelt. And he was immediately
forbidden active duty in the Army, but allowed to retain his rank.
He quickly established himself, Sherwood said, as "undoubtedly
Roosevelt's most formidable competitor on the radio." Fulton Lewis,
Jr., and his friends wanted Lindbergh to continue broadcasting, and
he did. He made five radio addresses over the different networks,
mobilizing such support— although he had no organization behind
him— that Roosevelt finally had to take overt notice.
In his second speech Lindbergh made it clear that he was not a
pacifist, but that "we must draw a sharp dividing line between
neutrality and war.
The policy we decide upon should be
as clear cut as our shorelines, and as easily defended as our con.

.

.

tinent."

He came out unequivocally for hemisphere defense, although
Canada "to draw this hemisphere into a
European war simply because they prefer the Crown of England to
American independence."
He also stated his belief that "our bond with Europe is a bond of
race and not of political ideology. We had to fight a European army
to establish democracy in this country. It is the European race we
must preserve; political progress will follow. Racial strength is
questioning the right of

vital— politics, a luxury."

He translated his isolationism into four points of policy:
1.

An [export] embargo on offensive weapons and munitions.

2.

The unrestricted sale of purely defensive armaments.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

298
3.

The prohibition of American shipping from the belligerent countries
of Europe and their danger zones.

4.

The refusal of credit to belligerent nations or their agents.
In his next speech over the C.B.S. network, he said that neither

the United States nor South America was threatened by air attack.

Bombing planes could be built to cross the Atlantic and return, and
either side could build them. "But the cost is high, the target [the

U.S.] large, and the military effectiveness small. Such planes do not
exist today in any air force.

."
.

.

On the political front he said, "Regardless of which side wins this
war, there is no reason ... to prevent a continuation of peaceful
relationships between America and the countries of Europe."

was known that Lindbergh was a good friend of Colonel
Truman Smith, who was now in the United States. Because of the
close collaboration between the two, and also because Lindbergh
stayed with the Smiths whenever he was in Washington, the War
Department got the idea that Smith must be writing Lindbergh's
It

speeches, or at least helping write them. So after Lindbergh's third

radio address Smith was banished to Fort Benning, Georgia, for a
tour of duty. However,

when Lindbergh went on making new

speeches without Smith being anywhere near,
that Smith was not writing the speeches.

it

became obvious

He was brought back to

Washington where his expertise in European military matters overrode the suspicions of his politics.

The French Army was defeated in 1940. The British were able to
salvage an army-in-being through the magnificent rear-guard action
at Dunkirk, but it cost them dear in materiel. And British gold re-

serves were falling fast. Under an obscure statute of 1892, it was
found that the Secretary of War has the power to lease Army
property "when in his discretion it will be for the public good." By
this authority, the U.S. transferred munitions worth more than
$43,000,000 to the British in June, 1940, to replace the mountain of
supplies the B.E.F. had had to abandon in Dunkirk. The War Department did this because it was U.S. strategy to keep Britain fighting as long as possible now that France had fallen.
Roosevelt stretched the 1892 law to enable him to transfer fifty
overage U.S. destroyers to the British Navy in September, 1940. These
ships had cost $75,000,000 when new, and were valued at $20,000,000 for loan. Actually, Roosevelt drove a pretty hard bargain for

AMERICA FIRST

299

them. He secured U.S. rights to air and naval bases in Newfoundland, Bermuda, the Bahamas, Jamaica, St. Lucia, Trinidad, Antigua,

and British Guiana.
During this time, the Battle of Britain was being fought in the air,
and on and under the sea. Roosevelt was re-elected in November,
1940, for a third term, unprecedented in American history. In
December he went off on a seemingly carefree fishing and inspection cruise among the new U.S. bases in the Caribbean.

During the trip he received a very long letter from Winston
Churchill which turned the lighthearted cruise into a time for
serious thought. Churchill outlined the position of England as
desperate, and asked for more destroyers, more aid. A few days
later, on December 19, Roosevelt held a press conference at which
he outlined a new idea. He told the reporters that the best safeguard for the United States was to support Britain's war, and that
the cash-and-carry approach was not enough. He made it very
simple: "Suppose my neighbor's home catches fire, and I have a
." In other words, money was no longer to
length of garden hose
the
be
criterion for aid to Britain.
Out of this came the Lend-Lease bill. Some unknown genius
titled it H.R. 1776. What this bill proposed to do was to give the
President tremendous powers to make available to governments
whose defense he deemed vital to U.S. security just about anything
they needed, from war materiel to civilian supplies. And he could
do this on any basis he thought fit— "payment or repayment in kind
or property, or any other direct or indirect benefit."
This was a revolutionary conception, and a complete commitment
to the British cause, for Roosevelt had made no bones that they
were the neighbors we must help. He made a famous speech
supporting the bill, calling the U.S. "the arsenal of democracy." For
the first time he named the Nazis as the real enemy of this country.
"A nation can have peace with the Nazis only at the price of total
surrender," he said. "Such a dictated peace would be no peace at
all.
All of us, in all the Americas, would be living at the point of
a Nazi gun."
The lines were sharply drawn. Roosevelt was now supported by a
united Cabinet (even former isolationists like Henry A. Wallace
had been won over) strengthened by two prominent Republicans,
Henry L. Stimson as Secretary of State and Frank Knox as Secretary
.

.

.

.

.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

300

of the Navy.

He was also fresh from a smashing popular electoral

victory over Willkie in which he had received 27 million votes.
Still,

getting H.R. 1776 through Congress was no easy matter. The

most powerful isolationists in the country had just organized themselves into the America First Committee, forming a strong pressure
group. Such leading Senators as Burton K. Wheeler opposed Roosevelt. He said that the Lend-Lease bill "would plough under every
fourth American boy," a reference to a New Deal farm policy. The
fight went on through January and February in 1941. Public hearings were held on the bill and Lindbergh was among those who
testified. He was asked which side he would like to see win the war,
and replied, "I want neither side to win," an almost exact repetition
of what his father had said a quarter of a century earlier.

His assessment of Great Britain was not much different from
that of William Allen White, the newspaper editor, who later took
a position almost diametrically opposed to Lindbergh's. White
wrote in 1940, "What an avalanche of blunders Great Britain has let
Unless a new govloose upon the democracies of the world!
.

.

.

ernment takes the helm in Britain, the British empire is done."
But not long after this diatribe, White came out for U.S. aid to
keep the British fleet intact, to buy time for our defense.
Lindbergh, in testifying against the Lend-Lease bill, in 1941, said,
"Personally, I do not believe that England is in a position to win the
war. If she does not win, or unless our aid is used in negotiating a
better peace than could otherwise be obtained, we will be responsible for futilely prolonging the war and adding to the bloodshed
and devastation of Europe, particularly among the democracies."
In spite of the strong opposition of Lindbergh and other isolationists, the Lend-Lease bill was passed by Congress on March 11, 1941.
Aid under the bill was not limited to belligerents, but eventually

went

to

thirty-eight

countries in

all,

including

many

in

Latin

America. Through this new channel, fifty billion dollars' worth of

equipment and supplies was eventually loaned to friendly powers, of
which more than thirty-one billion went to Great Britain and
eleven billion to the Soviet Union. Without this aid it is generally
agreed that neither country could have resisted Germany.
Lindbergh's opposition to the bill, particularly on the grounds he
gave, was galling to the British, as he had sought asylum in their
country only five years before. His statement aroused a good deal of
resentment there. Harold Nicolson is quoted as writing of Lind-

AMERICA FIRST

301

bergh: "It was almost with ferocity that he struggled to remain

and in the process of that arduous struggle his simplicity
became muscle-bound, his virility-ideal became not merely inflex-

himself,

but actually rigid; his self-control thickened into arrogance,
and his convictions hardened into granite."
H. R. Knickerbocker, the war correspondent, said that Lindbergh

ible,

saw nothing to be ashamed of in allowing Britain to fall, which made
him sincere. But that this was nevertheless a policy "as cynical as
any Nazi could invent."
These were some of the milder attacks on Lindbergh. He was a
prime target of men in the administration and of their supporters in
the press. He was called everything from "ignorant," ''blind," and a
"coward" to our "number one fifth columnist," and worse. Robert E.
Sherwood castigated him as "a Nazi with a Nazi's Olympian contempt for all democratic processes." Harold L. Ickes, who stated in
his diary that he never liked Lindbergh, berated him in public as "a
peripatetic appeaser who would abjectly surrender his sword even
before it is demanded."
There were other, more sober criticisms of Lindbergh's politics.
Walter Lippmann wrote in April, 1941, "A day or two after Colonel
Lindbergh had announced that Britain was defeated and the war
practically over, Hitler in his birthday proclamation to the German

people announced that 'a year of heavy conflict stands before us' in

which Tiistoric decisions of a unique scale will be made entailing
immeasurable demands once again on our men folk, our people of
the German homeland/ In the difference between these two estimates of what lies ahead there is all the difference between those
who, like Col. Lindbergh, have never understood this war and those
who, like Hitler himself or his great antagonists— Churchill and
Roosevelt— actually do understand this war." Lippmann pointed
out what has since been widely documented by historians from
German documents as the true war aim of Hitler; namely, world
conquest.* Lindbergh continued to regard the conflict as only
another European struggle.

The names Lindbergh was

called got stronger.

Harold Ickes

* Lippmann himself had been a strong advocate of isolationism. As late as
1940, according to the biography of General George C. Marshall, the Supreme
U.S. Commander, Marshall was alarmed at a Lippmann column that said: "All
popular doubts, political confusions, all ambiguity, would be removed by a clear
decision to shrink the Army and concentrate our major effort upon the Navy, the
air force, and lend-lease."

302

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

began referring to him

as a

"Knight of the German Eagle," an

allusion to the medal given by Goering. He used this phrase in three

successive speeches around July, 1941, and provoked a reaction from

Lindbergh. "Up to that time," Ickes wrote, "I had always admired
Lindbergh in one respect. No matter how vigorously he had been
attacked personally he had never attempted an answer. ... I had
begun to think that no one could get under his skin enough to make
him squeal. But at last I had succeeded."

What gave Ickes this satisfaction was an open letter Lindbergh
wrote to President Roosevelt.
It was mailed from Lindbergh's rented house at Lloyd's Neck,
Long Island; copies were also given to the newspapers by Lindbergh's secretary. "For many months, and on numerous occasions,"
Lindbergh wrote, "your Secretary of the Interior has implied in
public meetings that I am connected with the interests of a foreign
government, and he has specifically criticized me for accepting a
decoration from the German government in 1938.
"Mr. President, is it too much to ask that you inform your Secretary of the Interior that I was decorated by the German government
while I was carrying out the request of your Ambassador to that
Government? Is it unfair of me to ask that you inform your
secretary that I received this decoration in the American Embassy,
in the presence of your Ambassador
?
"If I have any connection with a foreign Government, the American people have a right to be fully acquainted with the facts.
"Mr. President, I give you my word that I have no connection
with any foreign Government. I will willingly open my files to your
investigation ... if there is a question in your mind. I ask that you
give me the opportunity of answering any charges."
The letter was, Ickes wrote, "a whining one. Instead of striking at
me boldly and sharply, he complainingly asked the President to [set
.

.

.

.

.

.

things right]."
Ickes' analysis of the letter was on the mark. Lindbergh's declara-

though true, made him suddenly appear vulnerable, where he
had always seemed unassailable.
The Lindbergh letter made the front pages. Ickes was questioned

tion,

about it at his regular press conference. He piously denied calling
Lindbergh a Nazi agent. His denial was technically true. Then he

opened the wound a little wider. Ickes reiterated his belief that "in

AMERICA FIRST

303

preaching defeatism and helping to bring about disunity he [Lindbergh] was doing what a certain foreign government, namely,

Germany wanted." He also said that "it did not matter how or
when ... he had received the Nazi decoration. The point was that
he should have returned it long ago."
Ickes recorded in his diary that his exchange with Lindbergh had
been widely publicized and that as a result Lindbergh had "slipped
badly. He has now made it clear to the whole country that he still
clings to this German decoration. He is now in a position where he
is damned if he gives it back and damned if he doesn't.
[Instead of writing to Roosevelt] he should have slammed right back
at me. For the first time he has allowed himself to be put on the
defensive and that is always a weak position for anyone."
However, Lindbergh continued to be an effective opponent of
Roosevelt's. Roosevelt was finding it increasingly difficult to get his
aid-short-of-war bills passed by Congress, particularly with Lindbergh talking to huge radio audiences over the N.B.C. network
against them. "There is a saying that grew in the old west to the
effect that a man who enjoys life should never touch his gun unless
he means business," Lindbergh said, "that he should never draw
unless he is ready to shoot, and that he should never shoot unless he
is ready to kill.
Our present danger results from making gestures
with an empty gun after we have already lost the draw." He spoke
about "mortgaging the lives of our children and our grandchildren";
he saw the need for hundreds of thousands of airplanes, if we entered the war, of millions of men in the Army, of a huge Navy, and
.

.

.

.

.

.

of other expensive armaments.

Lindbergh also referred to "an organized minority in this country"
which "is flooding our congress and our press with propaganda for
war." He would spell this out in embarrassing detail a few months
later.

Nevertheless, as the interchange with Ickes demonstrated, Lindbergh was not only creating pressure; he was feeling it. His
speeches and his articles became progressively less temperate during his isolationist campaign. For example, in his early speeches he
called England and France democracies. Later, he used "democratic" in quotes and referred to the "so-called democratic nations."
He said he had seen "the military strength of Germany growing like a
giant at the side of an aged and complacent England. France was

304

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

awake to her danger, but far too occupied with personal ambitions,
... In England there was
organization without spirit. In France there was spirit without
organization. In Germany there were both."
In 1940, Lindbergh's wife published a small book called The
Wave of the Future— A Confession of Faith. It is worth mentioning
here because the book's thesis has become identified in the public
mind with Lindbergh's thinking. He has never affirmed or denied
this. The Wave of the Future is an odd little book, different from
industrial troubles, and internal politics.

anything else Mrs. Lindbergh has published. It is a kind of manifesto,

but rather tentative and cloudy. The most memorable thing about it
is its title, which comes from a sentence near the end: "The wave of
the future is coming and there is no fighting it." What she meant by

would be hard to define, ecxept that some kind of revolution
was taking place. She stated that she did not embrace Nazism,
Fascism, or Communism but regarded them as inevitable manifestations of the "wave of the future." She spoke of the "spirit" of
Germany as being as important as its mechanized might. She hoped
that America could stand aside from the war and build a new kind
of society, peaceably, that could be able to deal with the "new
this

order."

"We have waked from one [dream]," she wrote, "and not yet

We still have our eyes, our minds, our hearts, on
dream that is dying— How beautiful it was, tinting the whole
sky crimson as it fades into the west. But there is another on its way
started the other.

the

in the gray dawn. Is it not, perhaps, America's mission to find 'the

dream that is coming to birth'?"
The criticism one might make of the book is that it is muddled. It
takes so astral a view of the world that it makes the crimes of the
Nazis seem to bulk no larger than the inadequacies of the "democracies." (Mrs. Lindbergh never used the word without the quotation marks.) She makes it clear that she does not excuse the
Germans, but she never specifically denounces anything they did.
There was a distinct parallel between the book and her husband's
views when he said, "There is a proverb in China which says that
'when the rich become too rich, and the poor too poor, something
happens.' This applies to nations as well as to men. When I saw the
wealth of the British Empire, I felt that the rich had become too

AMERICA FIRST

305

When I saw the poverty of Central Europe, I felt that the poor
had become too poor."
Much was made of the fact that Lindbergh's statements were
sometimes like those of Axis leaders. For example, Goering announced, after Lindbergh had said the same thing, that "America
simply cannot be invaded by air or sea. That is particularly true if
her armaments and national defense are appropriate to or commensurate with the country's size. ... If America's air force is
properly developed, built up, organized and strategically based,
America can defy any group of powers."
A Lindbergh supporter said, at the time, "I presume that [Lindbergh's critics] would have to call Christ a Nazi if Hitler happened
rich.

to quote the Bible."

Nevertheless, one cannot beg the question of the quality of

Lindbergh's influence. As observers had noted ever since his first
public appearance at the American Embassy in France, in 1927, his

presence had a kind of hypnotic effect on people. His utterances,
therefore, had more force than those of others. It was not enough

for him to say, as he did to friends, that he

was "Just a private

citizen" expressing his opinion. He had charisma, like it or not, and

he must have known it.
Certainly the Germans and Japanese knew it. Translations of his

speeches were sometimes circulated in Latin America by the Nazis.
The Japanese rained copies of a Lindbergh speech on Chungking,
China, along with incendiary bombs. The German military attache
in Washington, General Friedrich von Boetticher, mentioned Lind-

bergh often in his dispatches to Germany. "July 20, 1940: ... As
the exponent of the Jews, who especially through Freemasonry
control the broad masses of the American people, Roosevelt wants

England to continue fighting and the war to be prolonged.
The circle about Lindbergh has become aware of this development
and now tries at least to impede the fatal control of American policy
by the Jews. ... I have repeatedly reported on the mean and
.

.

.

vicious campaign against Lindbergh, whom the Jews fear as their
most potent adversary." On September 18, 1940, Hans Thomsen, the
German charge d'affaires in Washington, reported on what (he
said) Lindbergh told several American General Staff officers. According to Thomsen, Lindbergh thought that England would soon
collapse under German air attacks. However, the officers to whom

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

306

he spoke did not agree that German

air

power would be the

decisive factor, Thomsen said.

For eighteen months Lindbergh continued to make his speeches
unaffiliated. This period started with the Nazi invasion of Poland on
September 1, 1939.
Meanwhile, as noted, an organization of prominent Americans
was formed to promulgate ideas similar to those Lindbergh was
advocating.

mittee to

It was called, in the beginning, the Emergency ComDefend America First, and later the America First

Committee.
America First is generally remembered in the distorting mirrors of
polemic or advocacy. There was much criticism of America First
while it existed. ( Its short life ran only from September, 1940, until
December 7, 1941.) But much of the contemporary criticism was
leveled at personalities rather than policies, and the organization
was tarred by associations with groups it repeatedly tried to avoid

and disown.*
History provides a clearer picture. To see this, it is necessary to
know who belonged to America First, what their policies were, what

they said, and what they did.

The Committee was organized after the fall of France by R.
Douglas Stuart, Jr., who had studied at Princeton and Yale and was
the son of a vice-president of Quaker Oats. The money to start the
organization was put up by General Robert E. Wood, chairman of
the board of Sears, Roebuck & Company; by William H. Regnery,
president of the Western Shade Cloth Company, and others. Senator Burton K. Wheeler consulted with Stuart on organizing the
Committee.
When the organization was announced on September 4, 1940, its
national committee consisted of Wood; Regnery; General Thomas S.
Hammond, president of the Whiting Corporation; Jay C. Hormel,
Laura Ingalls, convicted in 1942 for failure to register as a German agent
was an America First speaker. Frank B. Burch, similarly convicted, was a sponsor of the Akron, Ohio, chapter of the organization. Ralph Townsend, later
convicted for failure to register as a Japanese agent, spoke at two meetings of
America First on the West Coast. So far as is known, these were the only Axis
agents who penetrated America First. Says Professor Cole, in his authoritative
study "America First," of Miss Ingalls, "For every meeting addressed by this
Gennan agent during the Committee's history, patriotic America First speakers
addressed dozens."

AMERICA FIRST

307

president of Hormel Meat Packing Company; Hanford MacNider,

former national commander of the American Legion (the Legion
later denounced the Committee ) Mrs. Janet Ayer Fairbank, author
and former National Democratic committeewoman; Edward L.
Ryerson, Jr., of the board of Inland Steel Corporation; Sterling
Morton, of the Morton Salt Company; Mrs. Alice Roosevelt Longworth, daughter of Theodore Roosevelt; John T. Flynn, author and
;

adviser to the Senate Investigating Committee on munitions; Edward Rickenbacker, the aviation expert; Louis Tabor, Master of the
National Grange; Bishop Wilbur E. Hammaker, head of the Methodist Church in the Denver area; Thomas N. McCarter, president of

New Jersey; Avery Brundage,
Olympic Association; Dr. Albert W. Palmer,

the Public Service Corporation of

president

of

the

president of the Chicago Theological Seminary; Mrs. Burton K.

Wheeler; Dr. George H. Whipple, a Nobel Prize winner in medi-

Oswald Garrison Villard, former editor of the Nation; Ray
McKaig, head of the Grange in Boise, Idaho.

cine;

Others associated with local chapters of the organization, or
advisers or members of the national committee, were Samuel
Hopkins Adams, Irvin S. Cobb, Henry Ford, William Benton, then
vice-president of the University of Chicago, and Benton's former
advertising partner Chester Bowles. Philip La Follette was an
influential adviser, as were Senator Wheeler, Senator Bennett
Champ Clark, Senator Gerald P. Nye, Congressman Karl Mundt,
and Robert M. Hutchins. Others who joined the national group
later, or belonged to local chapters, were George N. Peek, former
head of the A.A.A.; Kathleen Norris; Lillian Gish; General Hugh S.
Johnson (first head of NRA); Amos R. E. Pinchot.
Some, but certainly not all, of these people were reactionary in
their politics. But there seems to be no evidence that the Committee

stood for anything more or less than its stated principles:
1.

The United States must build an impregnable defense for America.

2.

No foreign power, nor group of powers, can successfully attack a prepared America.
American democracy can be preserved only by keeping out of the

3.

4.

European war.
"Aid short of war" weakens national defense at home and threatens
to involve America in war abroad.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

308

The Committee's statement of objectives:
1.

To bring together all Americans, regardless of possible differences on
other matters, who see eye-to-eye on these principles.

2.

[It specifically

excluded Nazis, Fascists, and Communists, or other groups "that place
the interest of any other nation above those of our own country."]
To urge Americans to keep their heads amid rising hysteria in times of
crisis.

To provide sane national leadership for the majority of the American
people who want to keep out of the European war.
4. To register this opinion with the President and with Congress.
3.

The Committee kept to its principles. It rejected membership of
and money from known Fascists or Fascist groups, but the national
organization was not always efficient in policing contributions to
local chapters. Some America First leaders, such as John T. Flyrm,
denounced in public, to their faces, the Silver Shirts, the GermanAmerican Bund, and followers of Father Coughlin, the jingo priest,
who attended America First public meetings in large numbers.
However, denunciation did not dissuade these Fascist types from
attending the meetings, and their presence gave the gatherings an
atmosphere that clouded the reputation of America First. Lindbergh once offered to go into the audience and personally throw
Joe Williams, head of the Silver Shirts, out of Madison Square
Garden, but was persuaded not to do so. There is no evidence that
the Committee did anything, openly or covertly, to encourage
Fascist support. In fact, it had a well-enforced policy of keeping
itself nonpartisan, even as between Democrats and Republicans.
America First did, in fact, include many prominent— even liberalDemocrats. Once, John T. Flynn wanted the Committee to sponsor
an anti- Roosevelt (but not pro- Willkie ) broadcast, and he was
turned down by the board of directors. The Committee's effect was
not felt as a political machine taking active part in local, state, or
national politics, but more as an organizing voice of public opinion,
the major portion of which was certainly noninterventionist at the
time. (It should be remembered that both Roosevelt and Willkie
were avowedly noninterventionist, too. Their differences with
America First were on Lend-Lease, guarded convoys, and similar
policies.

The Committee scotched attempts by members to try to impeach

AMERICA FIRST

309

There was talk of mass marches on Washington
(America First had perhaps 850,000 members, most of them within
a 300-mile radius of Chicago ) but no actual demonstrations of this

Roosevelt.

,

type took place. One influential member summed up the prevailing
attitude of the group when he said that America First should not

take sides in the Presidential election, since "the Committee

is

concerned with the establishment of a principle and not with the
election of candidates/' Besides, most America Firsters felt there

was little choice between Willkie and Roosevelt.
The Committee later entered politics in a
deciding to use

its

tentative

way by

influence in the 1942 Congressional elections.

The Selective Service Act had been renewed by a margin of a single
vote in Congress. Other measures were passed by narrow margins.
There was thus a possibility that, given enough time, America First
might have decisively affected this country's foreign policies by its
political activity.

However, the Committee never became that effective. It never
succeeded in stopping any of Roosevelt's important prewar measures. But it did help to fight him to a standstill. In 1941, Roosevelt
had become listless and dispirited at the opposition he could not
fully answer or squelch. Robert Sherwood writes that "as the world
situation became more desperately critical, and as the limitless peril
came closer and closer to the United States, isolationist sentiment
became ever more strident in expression and aggressive in action.
And Roosevelt was relatively powerless to combat it. He had said
everything 'short of war that could be said. He had no more tricks
left. The hat from which he had pulled so many rabbits was empty."
In short, Roosevelt could get no nearer to war than war itself.
Lindbergh was invited to head the America First national committee in April, 1941, a year and a half after he had started his oneman isolationist movement. He turned down the chairmanship, but
joined the board and began speaking under Committee auspices.
His first major address for the group took place on April 17, 1941. In
this speech he predicted that Britain would lose the war, and

reiterated his opposition to aiding her.

He made another speech a week later expanding on these themes.
He pointed out that France had been defeated and said again that
Britain

was losing

(in spite of British victories over the Italians

in the Mediterranean and North Africa).

He said that the British

310

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

had only one last desperate ploy: "to persuade us to send another
American Expeditionary Force." He went into the military difficulties of landing on a hostile coast and maintaining an army
there. Our air force "might be based on the British Isles; but it is
physically impossible to base enough aircraft in the British Isles
alone to equal in strength the aircraft that can be based on the
continent of Europe." This was one of his military analyses that
turned out to be wrong. It may be said in justice that he was not
always so far off the mark, but he was certainly fallible— even in his
own specialty— as on the day he derided Franklin Roosevelt's call
for 50,000 warplanes as "hysterical chatter."

However, Lindbergh made it plain that he would consider
defeat a tragedy, and said he was not for a German
victory. But he wanted us to stay out of war, a wish shared by other
Americans of as varied opinions as Norman Thomas, the GermanAmerican Bund, Harry Elmer Barnes, Charles A. Beard, Stuart
Chase, John L. Lewis, and— until June 22, 1941, when the Soviet
Union was invaded— the Communist party of the United States.
Norman Thomas appeared on several platforms with Lindbergh at
America First rallies, although he was not a member of the Committee; his affiliation was with a pacifist group called Keep America
Out of War.
With Lindbergh focusing isolationist sentiment like a burning
glass, the America First Committee kept growing stronger, and the
administration seemed feeble by comparison. Roosevelt was frustrated, maneuvering by ear in a fog of discontent.
He vented his anger against Lindbergh at a press conference on
Friday, April 25, 1941. It was recognized, a reporter said, that
Lindbergh was the spiritual leader of isolationist sentiment. Then,
asked the reporter, since Lindbergh was an Army officer, why
wasn't he called into uniform by his Commander in Chief?
Roosevelt was reported as obviously ready for this question about
Lindbergh; like many press conference questions, it may well have
been planted. At the time, Presidential remarks at press conferences
were paraphrased, not quoted, in newspapers. During the American
Civil War, Roosevelt said, liberty-loving people had fought on both
sides; but there were some people who were deliberately ignored.
They were not asked to serve in the war for the very good reason
that they were defeatist. He mentioned the name of Vallandigham,
Britain's

AMERICA FIRST

311

referring to an Ohio congressman of the era named Clement L.
Vallandigham, who had made violent speeches against Lincoln and

had said the North could never win. He was the chief spokesman of
the group known as Copperheads, people who thought as he did

and opposed the war. The name of the group was that of a
poisonous snake: "A rattlesnake rattles, a viper hisses, an adder
spits, a black snake whistles, a water-snake blows but a copperhead
just sneaks!"

Thus the anti-war Democrats of the time were also

called "sneak Democrats."

The Copperhead movement in its worst phases was ritualistic,
and paramilitary; it employed terrorism. Vallandigham was

secret,

and deported to the Confederacy. He finally returned to
the North by way of Canada and continued his anti-war speecharrested

making. There were demands that he be jailed for treason, but
Lincoln did not do this.
Roosevelt did not give all this background about Vallandigham
but let the reporters dig it out themselves. He did say that there
were people at Valley Forge who wanted Washington to give up,
and he referred to the famous Tom Paine pamphlet about "summer
soldiers and sunshine patriots."

He was asked if he was still talking about Lindbergh. And
Roosevelt said that he certainly was.

The story made the front pages; with very little distortion headhad called Lindbergh a

line writers could say that the President

Copperhead, in effect a traitor.

The Copperhead attack was perhaps triggered by an article
Lindbergh had written in Colliers the month before, as well as by
his joining the America First Committee's board.

In Colliers, Lindbergh had published "A Letter to Americans"
which said, in part, "While our leaders have shouted for peace, they
The men who entice
have consistently directed us toward war.
us on to war have no more idea of how that war can be won than
the governments of France and England had when they declared
war on Germany."
The America First Committee came to Lindbergh's support:
"President Roosevelt's remarks about Colonel Lindbergh today do
not exhibit the spirit of tolerance, or of respect for freedom of
conscience and freedom of belief that the American people have
admired in him.
Colonel Lindbergh is an American first, last,
.

.

.

.

.

.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

312

and always." Roosevelt's statement was also criticized by the New
York Times and by many other newspapers.
Three days later, Lindbergh sent a letter to the White House,
simultaneously releasing it to the newspapers:

Your remarks at the White House press conference on April 25 involving my reserve commission in the United States Army Air Corps have of
course disturbed me greatly. I had hoped that I might exercise my right

an American citizen to place my viewpoint before the people of my
country in time of peace without giving up the privilege of serving my
as

country as an Air Corps officer in the event of war.

But since you, in your capacity of President of the United States and

Commander in Chief of the Army, have clearly implied that I am no
longer of use to this country as a reserve

officer,

and in view of other

implications that you, my President and superior officer, have made con-

cerning my loyalty to my country, my character, and my motives, I can
see no honorable alternative to tendering my resignation as Colonel in

the United States Air Corps Reserve.
I

.

.

.

take this action with the utmost regret, for my relationship with the

Air Corps is one of the things which has meant most to me in my life.
I place it second only to

countrymen. ...

I

my right as a citizen to speak freely to my fellow
my country to the best of my

will continue to serve

ability as a private citizen.

Lindbergh continued to speak. He did not submit his speeches to
America First leaders for approval before he made them. Thus
when he spoke in Des Moines, on September 11, 1941, at an
America First rally, no one but Lindbergh knew what he was going
to say. It, more than any other of his speeches (and his speeches
were the most important ones made by any America Firster, invariably drawing overflow crowds), smeared his reputation and
that of America First.
In this speech Lindbergh, who had been referring darkly for
many months to "powerful elements" which were trying to lead the
United States into war, identified specifically the interventionist
groups. These groups, "responsible for changing our national policy
from one of neutrality and independence to one of entanglement in
European affairs
are the British, the Jewish and the Roosevelt
administration," he said to the enthusiastic Iowans. "Behind these
.

groups,

.

.

but of lesser importance, are a number of

capitalists,

Anglophiles, and intellectuals who believe that their future, and the

AMERICA FIRST

313

upon the domination of the British
minority
control ... a tremendous

future of mankind, depends

Empire.

.

.

.

[This]

.

.

.

.

.

.

influence."

Then he went on to speak his mind, with the same kind of
pointless "courage" his father had used to "help" the Catholics— the

land of bluntness that gave their enemies a bludgeon with which to
beat them into impotence: "It is not difficult to understand why

Jewish people desire the overthrow of Nazi Germany. The persecution they suffered in Germany would be sufficient to make bitter

enemies of any race. No person with a sense of the dignity of
mankind can condone the persecution the Jewish race suffered in
Germany. But no person of honesty and vision can look on their prowar policy here today without seeing the dangers involved in such a
policy, both for us and for them.
"Instead of agitating for war the Jewish groups in this country
should be opposing it in every possible way, for they will be among
the first to feel its consequences. Tolerance is a virtue that depends

upon peace and strength. A few farsighted Jewish people realize
this and stand opposed to intervention. But the majority still do not.

Their greatest danger to this country lies in their large ownership

and influence in our motion pictures, our press, our radio, and our
government."
Professor Wayne S. Cole, in his detailed book America First, the
Battle Against Intervention, 1940-1941, says, "It would be difficult to

exaggerate the magnitude of the explosion which was set off by this

Undoubtedly much of this uproar was due to genuine
disapproval of Lindbergh's key statement regarding the Jews. Many
may have denounced the speech publicly to protect themselves
from any possible charge of anti-Semitism. But there can be no
doubt that interventionists exploited this incident."
In an editorial, the Des Moines Register said, "It may have been
courageous for Colonel Lindbergh to say what was in his mind, but
it was so lacking in appreciation of consequences— putting the best
interpretation on it— that it disqualifies him for any pretensions of
leadership in policy-maldng." There were pamphlets, statements by
such men as Willkie and Thomas E. Dewey, speeches by opposition
groups— all aimed at Lindbergh. He was called everything from a
Hitlerite to a fool; even many of America First's leading members
speech.

.

.

.

disapproved publicly.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

314

However, Norman Thomas said in his defense that Lindbergh
was "not as anti-Semitic as some who seize the opportunity to
criticize him." This was a tack taken by several people who disliked
Lindbergh's statement but felt the attacks on him were extreme.
Professor Gregory Mason, of a Connecticut America First chapter,
pointed out that "Many
supporters ... of the Committee to
Defend America by Aiding the Allies and of the Fight for Freedom
Committee
belong to
social clubs from which Jews are
strictly barred,
and that money for six English ambulances was
raised in a part of Greenwich (Connecticut) "which opposes rent.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

,,

ing or selling houses to Jews."

The national committee of America First did not repudiate the
speech, in spite of some agitation by Committee members to do so.

But they felt compelled to say that "Colonel Lindbergh and his
fellow-members of the America First Committee are not antiSemitic.

We deplore the injection of the race issue into the discus-

sion of war or peace."* Lindbergh was even defended publicly by a

prominent Jewish physician, former B'nai B nth president Dr.
Hyman Lischner of San Diego, California. Dr. Lischner said that the
Jewish group was pressing toward war.
Lindbergh himself did not attempt to explain or amplify his
statement, and he never made another like it. However, a few days
later in Fort Wayne, Indiana, he said that he had always spoken
what he believed to be the truth, and that his statements had been
distorted and his motives and meanings "falsely ascribed." He also
said he did not "speak out of hate for any individuals or any
people."

This did not wash away the stain, a stain that is still implicit in
the wrongheadedness of some of his Des Moines statements.

That speech destroyed Lindbergh's effectiveness for America
First and greatly damaged the organization and its cause.

Between
September and December 7, 1941, America First was shrill but less
and less effective.
Roosevelt had announced his "shoot-on-sight" order (that American ships should immediately fire on any hostile vessel) on September 11, 1941, the same night as Lindbergh's disastrous speech. Such
* Anti-Semitism was constantly associated with America First. Many local
chapter leaders were guilty of openly anti-Semitic remarks, and were often
reprimanded but never expelled by the national committee.

AMERICA FIRST

315

men as Philip C. Jessup, Edwin S. Corwin, Ray Lyman Wilbur,
Charles A. Beard, and Igor Sikorsky signed a statement that called
Roosevelt's new policy "a grave threat to the constitutional powers

of Congress and to the democratic principle of majority rule." However, the order stood.

In October, with the war at sea getting hotter, Roosevelt asked
Congress to repeal more of the Neutrality Act. He wanted the right
to arm U.S. merchant vessels, and to send our ships into war zonestwo things expressly prohibited by the act. America First put all the
weight it could muster against these revisions. But it lost when
Congress gave Roosevelt what he wanted in November. However,
the anti-administration vote was larger against this measure than it

had been against Lend-Lease; a shift of ten votes in the House of
Representatives would have meant defeat for Roosevelt.
The closeness of the vote on this measure encouraged the
America First Committee to take up an earlier Lindbergh suggestion: to participate actively in elections. They came to this decision
on December 1, 1941, having made some movements in that direction while the Neutrality Act was still being debated in Congress.
However, the decision, like America First, had only a few more days
to live. When Japan attacked Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941,
she also effectively torpedoed the Committee. There was some
intramural debate about whether the Committee should stay alive,
but most of its leaders believed it should not. The board issued a
statement on December 11, 1941, that said: "Our principles were
right. Had they been followed, war could have been avoided. No
good purpose can now be served by considering what might have
been.
We are at war
the primary objective is
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

victory.

"Therefore," the statement concluded, "the America First

mittee has determined immediately to cease

all

functions

Com-

and to

dissolve as soon as that can legally be done. And finally, it urges all

those who have followed its lead to give their full support to the

war effort of the nation, until peace is attained."
The Committee organization was dismantled, was almost nonexistent by February, 1942, and the Committee was at last legally
dissolved on April 22, 1942. (The members had had legal advice
that to end their corporate life precipitately would allow the Committee name to be used by other groups.) A number of prominent

316

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

members

of America First joined the Roosevelt administration
during the war. Lindbergh was not among them, but not out of

choice.

It is interesting to

speculate on what might have happened if the

Japanese had not attacked the United States, and/ or if Hitler had
not declared war on the United States. Certainly, the mood of the
electorate being what it was, no leader could have taken us into a
declared war against Japan without a Pearl Harbor. And any

problem we might have had in deciding what to do about Germany
and Italy was decided for us. There was actually no compelling
reason for Hitler to declare war on the United States. His commitment to Japan was against aggression, not to support Japan in an
attack, as British historian A. J. P. Taylor has pointed out. Moreover, he was not known to be punctilious about treaty obligations
when they did not suit his immediate purposes. If Hitler had not
declared war on the United States, it is questionable whether
Roosevelt could have procured a declaration of war from the
Congress against Germany, even after Pearl Harbor. And what
would Roosevelt have done if Hitler had used the occasion of Pearl
Harbor to disown Japan and throw in with the United States
against the yellow peril? This would have been a logical stroke on
Hitler's part, and one that would have furthered his interests. We
are fortunate that Hitler wasn't always logical.

Lindbergh's fight against intervention in what he considered
"Europe's war" and for isolationism doubtless had its roots in his

during World War I. C. A. Lindbergh had
been convinced that we could stay out of war were it not for certain
sinister interests. He was sure that war would bring out the worst
side of America, that it would result in the suppression of free
speech and other civil liberties. He did not suffer less for being right
father's isolationism

about this.
Lindbergh had seen the same strain of barbarism in his own time.
He had felt its force in his private life. He had seen what antiSemitism could do in Germany. There was certainly reason to fear it
in the United States. His warning to the Jews could be read, in this

context, as the advice of a friend, not the threat of an enemy.

In a critical article published in Life magazine some months be-

AMERICA FIRST

317

fore the Des

Moines speech, Roger Butterfield reported that Lindbergh "believes Jews will be blamed for American entry into the
war and will suffer for it. If that happens, he has said, the antiJewish outbreaks that will occur here will surpass those in Nazi
Germany, for Americans are 'more violent' than the Germans.
"Yet [the Butterfield article continued] Lindbergh is not antiSemitic. In personal conversation he has expressed indignation over
the German treatment of Jews in Europe." But Butterfield pointed
out that Lindbergh had never condemned these persecutions publicly. When friends and associates pleaded with him to do so, Lindbergh invariably refused, saying, "I must be neutral/'
Much later, after the war, one of Lindbergh's daughters was
dating a Jewish boy. The boy's parents made him stop seeing the

Lindbergh girl because they said her father was an anti-Semite. The
girl, naturally troubled by this, asked Lindbergh about it.
Lindbergh told her it was not true. He had never been antiSemitic. It was just a convenient peg for his enemies to hang their
attacks on, he said.
Lindbergh, in his Des Moines speech, had identified the Jews as a
"race," though there is no scientific definition of race that would
encompass all Jews. Further, he had assumed that Jews needed
"tolerance" to exist. This could seem like a threat: behave or you
won't be tolerated. Yet it could also be traced to Lindbergh's
firsthand experience with the lack of tolerance in this country and
the Nazi demonstration of what this could mean to the Jews. His
assumption that Jews controlled the press, movies, and radio, and
were using this control to push the country toward war to get even
with the Nazis, was certainly erroneous. Jews did not exert nearly as
much control of the press and radio as he said, and they were
certainly not united on interventionism. The Keep America Out of
War Congress had at least four Jews on its governing committee.
Lindbergh had used some of the language of anti-Semites, but
this does not make him an anti-Semite. His own private statements
exculpate him of the charge; it would be out of character for him to
lie on a subject as vital as this. His actions before and since do not

add up to bigotry.
Nevertheless he suffered because he got the reputation of an antiSemite, and also because of his isolationism.
friends, both Jewish

Some of his closest

(Harry Guggenheim) and Christian (Colonel

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

318

Henry Breckinridge), stopped seeing him for a time. Mrs. Dwight
Morrow took a strong public stand against her son-in-law and her
daughter by supporting the Committee to Defend America by
Aiding the Allies, and Anne Lindbergh's sister Constance Morgan*
opposed Anne and supported her own husband, who was head of
British Information Services in New York.
At this time, the Lindberghs lived in Long Island with their three
children; a daughter, Anne Spencer ("Angie"), had been born in
1940. The neighbors were not sympathetic; when they drove by the
Lindbergh gateway, they tooted their horns in the "V" signal— the
opening four notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony made popular

by the British.
But personal affront was something Lindbergh had expected. One
him why he persisted in speaking in public
when each appearance caused him almost physical agony. He
replied, "There are some things you have to do no matter what the
consequences." The same idea could be extended; he knew from his
father's experience that speaking forthrightly in politics was not
likely to elicit gentle treatment. He knew that he had entered a
dangerous area, and he was aware he would be exposed again to the
public and to the press.
Actually, he minimized his physical exposure. He traveled privately and stayed in private houses or clubs. He appeared in public
only long enough to make his speeches, and then vanished. He
wrote his speeches himself, in a lonely battle with rhetoric, using a
pencil and scratch paper. There were rumors, still current today,
that his wife wrote the speeches for him. But Lindbergh has never
employed a ghost, not even one as close to his thinking as his
of his friends asked

wife.

Others questioned Lindbergh's motives. To explain himself, in
1941 Lindbergh gave to Larry Kelly, of Hearst newspapers, his first
personal interview in ten years.
"I

stopped talking for publication ten years ago because the

attendant publicity made it impossible for my family and myself to
lead normal lives," Lindbergh said. "I had about made up my mind

then to make no more radio addresses or public appearances.

"But no one can predict the progress of the world.

.

.

.

The

* Married to Aubrey Morgan, the widowed husband of her sister Elisabeth.

AMERICA FIRST

319

thought that I might be of some aid in doing what I believe is right
for our country led me to agree to this talk.
"These are not normal times," Lindbergh continued. "We are in
the midst of the greatest crisis this country has faced since the Civil

War. In such a case we give up our normal desires, do what we
conceive as our duty to our country, no matter what the personal
cost may be. I knew what I was getting into. I knew that I would be
accused of many things, and that my personal life would be
dragged into the open again/'
"Then why are you doing it?" Kelly asked.
"The answer to that question depends upon your values in life,"
Lindbergh said. "To me, the most important element in this situation is the future welfare of my country, my family, my friends, and
my fellow-citizens. In relation to these things, the names one is
called make very little difference, after all."

No doubt Lindbergh's calculation about war and peace in Europe
was limited by his information and by the range of his interest, both
of which were largely in military aviation. He was no global
strategist. His political judgments were narrowed by his airman's
frame of reference.

On the other hand, he was never a pacifist. He came home to help
his

county prepare for war, and took an active and useful part in

that effort.

He had often stated that we should be prepared, and

said we should fight

if

any part of the Western Hemisphere was

attacked, including Greenland.

One cannot avoid the conclusion, on balancing the evidence, that
Roosevelt built Lindbergh up as a pro-Nazi so he could break him.

Lindbergh was a strong and dangerous political antagonist, never a
potential traitor. But Roosevelt had to get rid of him at any cost.
Lindbergh was so influential that his opinions might have created
the very conditions he sought to avoid.

The old isolationist-interventionist argument is past, "except from
an academic viewpoint," Lindbergh said in 1945. At the same time,
he refused to renege on his actions or convictions. "I have not
changed my belief that World War II could have been avoided," he
said in his last public statement on the subject. He still says this to
his friends.

However, Lindbergh pointed out in 1945 that the atomic bomb

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

320

and the development of transoceanic rockets that could carry the

bomb made a "world organization for the control of destructive
The only alternative is constant fear and
eventual chaos/' He said at that time that he would support the
Truman administration as long as he believed its policies were "to
forces

.

.

.

imperative.

the best interest of my country

."

In a speech to the Aero Club of Washington the same year, he
exhibited a philosophical attitude far different from his prewar
polemics. "There is little satisfaction in spending one's life develop-

ing machines which are likely to bring ruin to one's own people,"

he said. "The ghost of Lilienthal* must glide uneasily over German
cities.

The devastation that the Nazis brought to Europe, carried

on the wings he loved, is a warning to us all."
He spoke then of the need for a world organization, "based on
power." "But," he said, "I must confess to you that I am fearful of
the use of power.
History is full of its misuses. There is no
better example than Nazi Germany. Power without a moral force to
.

.

.

guide it invariably ends in the destruction of the people who wield
it. We need," he said, "integrity, humility, and compassion.
.

.

.

Without them, we simply sow the wind with our aircraft and our
bombs."

* Otto Lilienthal, the great

own gliders.

German aviation pioneer, killed in one of his

25

LINDBERGH'S

PERSONAL WAR

ON DECEMBER 9, 1941, THE DAY AFTER HIS COUNTRY
declared war on Japan, Lindbergh issued a statement:

"We have

been stepping closer to war for many months. Now it has come and
we must meet it as united Americans regardless of our attitude in
the past toward the policy our government has followed. Whether
or not that policy has been wise, our country has been attacked by
force of arms and we must retaliate. Our own defenses and our own
military position have already been neglected too long. We must
now turn every effort to building up the greatest and most efficient
Army, Navy, and Air Force in the world. When American soldiers
go to war, it must be with the best equipment that modern skill can
design and that modern industry can build."
Lindbergh was then a civilian, having resigned his commission
the previous April. He volunteered to re-enlist in the Air Corps in a
letter to General Arnold dated December 30, 1941. Arnold wanted
to accept him, but Roosevelt was implacable. The War Department
said that his statement of support was "not enough." "From
this," his friend Deac Lyman wrote some years later, "he gathered
that he was expected to retract his earlier statements [for America
First]. He did not feel he could honestly do this. He decided then
that he had better turn to the aviation industry for his war service."
He went to see Secretary Stimson and the question was discussed.
Stimson gave it as his opinion that Lindbergh would do better to
contribute to the war effort as a civilian.

Lindbergh then applied to work for the United Aircraft and
Cur tiss- Wright Aeronautical corporations. Both companies requested
321

322

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

clearance from Washington for his employment and, according to

Newsweek, were told that "employing Lindbergh would be frowned
upon."
In a sense, Lindbergh was the J. Robert Oppenheimer of preWorld War II. Both men made real contributions to their country in
their professions. Both were later denied security clearance because

of past opinions and associations. The parallels are not exact, but in

neither case was there any real justification for doubting the man's
integrity or expecting treasonable behavior. Rather, they were both

pawns in the politics of opportunism, sacrifices to the temporary
failure of American constitutional freedoms in the face of irresistible
current political pressures. They were not security risks; they were
security victims.

The Lindbergh case was one of the least attractive manifestations
Norman Thomas
said not long ago— an example of a great leader stooping to petty

of Roosevelt's penchant for personal vendetta, as

revenge and recrimination. In satisfying his desire to frustrate
Lindbergh, Roosevelt nearly deprived this country of the services of
one of our most useful aviation experts.
Nevertheless, Lindbergh managed to make several contributions
to the war. Henry Ford had contracted to turn Willow Run into an

assembly-line plant for B-24 bombers. He invited Lindbergh to go

work at Willow Run without permission from the government.
Lindbergh accepted and there were no government protests. He
suggested improvements in the airplane, adapted it for line production, and helped work out the complicated problems involved in the
first large-scale assembly-line mass production of aircraft. He also

to

flight-tested the B-24.

Lindbergh also became, around the age of forty, a high-altitude
Republic Aircraft Corporation. This was extremely
hazardous work that would have taxed the stamina of a much
younger man. Before undertaking it, Lindbergh, with characteristic
prudence, calculated the risks by having himself put through a
series of tests in an altitude chamber at the Aero Medical Unit of
the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. It was popularly believed
by pilots that a flier could not detect the symptoms of anoxia ( lack
of oxygen), a hazard of high-altitude flying, in time to take corrective action. But Lindbergh, studying his own reactions in the
altitude chamber, noted his symptoms as his consciousness drained
test pilot for

LINDBERGH'S PERSONAL WAR

323

away and counted the seconds before he blacked out. He felt that
within the tiny interval of time between the onset of giddiness and
total loss of control, he could act to save himself.

Working with the Mayo doctors on

this

problem, Lindbergh

contributed to high-altitude flying in general. As a result of his tests,
high-altitude jumping

equipment was improved, enabling many

fliers to survive the descent into air rich enough in oxygen to sustain
life.

When Lindbergh was testing a Republic "Thunderbolt" fighter at
41,000 feet one day, he nearly suffocated. His previous careful
training saved his life. The following is an account of this experience as he published it some years later in a small book called Of

Flight

and Life. It is a good example of the vivid literary style

Lindbergh has developed over the years in order to express the
excitement and danger he frequently encounters in his work:
Forty thousand feet and still climbing. I am running an ignition
breakdown test on the engine of a Thunderbolt [single-place monoplane]
fighter.

Research in the higher air is a relief from my wartime routine of

and bomber shakedown flights. At 41,000
and adjust the turbo. I must hold five
minutes of level flight while plane and engine settle down to normal
conferences, production lines,

feet, I level off, set the trim tabs,

readings.
All goes well until, tests run and readings logged, I start to descend.
Then, at 36,000 feet: something happens to clarity of air, to pulse of life,
perception of eye. I grow aware of that vagueness of mind and emptiness
of breath which warn a pilot of serious lack of oxygen. I force myself
to alertness— I must think or die! The idea lashes brain and body like the
blow of a whip. Mask leaking? I shove it up with my left hand— no,
tight against my face. Out of oxygen? No. (A glance at the gauge shows
50 pounds.) Then something must be wrong with the oxygen system. I
know from altitude-chamber experience that I have about 15 seconds of

consciousness left at this altitude— neither time nor clearness of mind to

check hoses and connections. Life demands oxygen and the only sure
supply lies 4 miles beneath me.
I shove the stick forward. The earth slants upward and the dive begins
the
35,000 feet
34,000 my cockpit roars through the air
earth fades out
breath's thin;
the instrument dials darken
lungs, empty— I'm blacking out— losing sight. ... I push the nose down
farther
the dials become meanfaster
30,000
33,000
ingless
down
down. ... I am dimly aware of a great shriek, as
though a steam whistle were blowing near my ears.
Compressibility
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

324

dive?

.

.

need.

.

.

.

.

I'm not thinking about compressibility
I'm blind ... I can't see the needles

.

.

.

.

.

.

it's

oxygen

I

there are no more

seconds left— it's a razor edge— a race between decreasing consciousness

and increasing density of air
16,000
17,000
15,000
a white needle moves over white figures
it's the altimeter— I can see
—I'm reading its dial again— I'm aware of the cockpit, the plane, the
earth and sky— I've already begun to pull out of the dive— the stick is
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

free; the nose rising; the seat pressing against me.

The air in my lungs has substance. Perception floods through nerve and
tissue.

How clear the sky is above me, how wonderful the earth below.

When he landed, mechanics told him that his oxygen tank had
been empty; it was a faulty gauge that had misled him almost into
death.

United Aircraft Corporation, whose Chance Vought division was
building F-4U "Corsair" fighter planes for the Navy and the Marine

Corps, asked Lindbergh to join them as an engineering consultant.

Lindbergh accepted without official clearance or protest. He acted
as aeronautical engineer, test pilot, and instructor. He demonstrated

the Corsair to pilots in training.

However, he was growing restive at these peaceful activities. He
had been trained as a fighter pilot but had never fought. He began
to test his skill in maneuvers and mock combat. He took his plane
up against two of the best Marine pilots, and, Deac Lyman says, in
a high-altitude gunnery contest, "outguessed, outflew, and outshot"
both of them. This was in 1943, when Lindbergh was forty-one
years old.

The famous Marine ace, Major Joe Foss, told Lyman, "We wanted
him to join the Marines and come right out to the Pacific with us."
Lindbergh could not join the Marines. But he could test aircraft
under combat conditions as a technical representative of a manufacturer. In 1944, he got United Aircraft to appoint him a "tech.
rep.," and had himself sent to the Pacific under Navy supervision.
He spent time with Foss on one of his numerous test programs in
the South Pacific.

His mission was "to study the performance of fighter planes
under combat conditions" with the purpose of improving existing
designs and providing information for new designs. If he was
supposed to study a single-place airplane under combat conditions,
there was obviously only one way to do it: by flying in combat.

LINDBERGH'S PERSONAL WAR

325

Men of Lindbergh's age did not generally have the reflexes
needed to fly fighter planes in combat during World War II. But
since he was not in uniform, he was not subject to the same limitations as men in service. He flew a number of combat missions in
Corsairs, including strafing raids and flying cover for bombers.
But it was in the use of the Corsair as a light bomber that
Lindbergh made an important contribution. The Corsair was rated
as carrying about 2,000 pounds of bombs in addition to the ammunition for its four .50-caliber machine guns.
Lindbergh decided to take the plane up with 4,000 pounds of
bombs— exactly double the rated bombload. When he got to the
airstrip on the island of Roi, he found a 14-knot crosswind blowing,
so he reduced the bomb weight to 3,000 pounds. This was still 1,000
pounds more than the plane was supposed to lift. Lindbergh had to
wait out a rain squall that reduced visibility to nearly zero. As soon
as the squall had passed, he took off.
"Made a curving takeoff," he reported, "because of the cross wind
heading toward a point halfway along and on the windward side of
." Lindbergh handled the
the runway. No trouble getting off
feat deadpan, but the Marines, of whom a large number had
gathered to watch the test, were in open awe of the attempt.
Lindbergh did more than lift the bombs. He climbed until he had
reached the desired altitude, waited his turn in the bombing run on
a Japanese radio station, "maneuvered into position, rolled over at
8,000 feet, and dove on the radio station at an angle of about 60
.

.

degrees."

He released his bombs at about 1,600 feet. He was in a state of
"grayout"— lack of blood in the brain caused by the gravity pressure
of pulling out of a steep dive. When his vision cleared and he could
see his target, he noted an almost direct hit.

However, Lindbergh's original plan had called for a 4,000-pound
bombload. The next day, he took off with one 2,000-pound and two
1,000-pound bombs in a nine-knot crosswind. This was, Lyman
wrote in the United Aircraft house magazine, "probably the heaviest
bombload ever carried up to that time by a single-engine fighter."
With his squadron, he climbed at full power to 11,500 feet to get
above clouds. One of the two squadrons supposed to carry out this
mission was forced to return to the base because of storms.

group with which Lindbergh flew reached their objective.

The

326

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

His personal target was a concrete gun emplacement. He started
his dive at 8,000 feet at an angle of sixty-five degrees— a very steep

angle under any conditions, but one that produced severe stresses
in the plane because it was carrying such a heavy load of bombs.

The two 1,000-pound bombs had to be released manually (the
2,000-pounder had an electrical release ) The extra weight of bombs
.

plus the tremendous force of the steep dive were too

much for

Lindbergh; he simply did not have the strength to hold his sight on
the target. He wanted to drop the entire two tons of bombs on the
objective. But he had little choice.

"With a lighter load," he said later, "I could have pulled out and

made another dive but it seemed inadvisable with 4,000 pounds of
bombs." So he abandoned dive-bombing the primary target.
There were many targets of opportunity in the area, however—
installations and shore activity, all Japanese. Just before Lindbergh
flew over the shore, he pulled the releases and went into a sharp
climb. He could see that his bombs had made a direct hit on the

main naval gun installation. One portion of the gun position had
been wiped out and the gun had probably been dislocated.
The sky was filled with mountainous thunderstorms. Between
huge masses of black clouds there were tiny patches of clear sky.
Lindbergh flew in formation with a photographic plane at 11,000
feet, heading toward Roi Island. They wound their way through
tunnels of light, "like threading a needle at times," Lindbergh later
reported, and finally landed at Roi two hours and twenty minutes
after their takeoff. This drop of 4,000 pounds of bombs completed
the test program he had laid out at Roi. The Corsairs' bomb
capacity had been doubled. That afternoon he flew on to Kwajalein
Island.

Lindbergh was a civilian flying combat missions. Out of uniform
and piloting a warplane, had he been shot down and captured by
the Japanese, he could have been executed as a spy. Because of this,
the Navy did not want the responsibility for his presence in any one
spot for very long. They recognized that this technical work was
valuable. Too, just the sight of Lindbergh had a morale-boosting
effect on personnel. To the youngsters who flew and serviced Navy
and Marine fighters, he was a legend come to life. But his presence

made the men in charge nervous.
The Navy shuttled Lindbergh from base to base lest the Japanese
get wind of where he was and try to shoot him down. Although they

LINDBERGH'S PERSONAL WAR

327

were grateful for his development work, they were nervous about
his safety.

Lindbergh was quite happy as one of the pilots. A photograph
taken of him at a South Pacific airbase during this period shows him

with an unrestrained grin— something the' camera hadn't recorded
for fifteen years. Anne Lindbergh said, when she saw the snapshot,

that she never seen her husband look happier.

Although Lindbergh was in the Pacific as a representative of
United Aircraft, working for the Navy, he was very interested in the
performance of the Army P-38 twin-engine fighter known as the
"Lightning." Without authorization, Lindberg managed to persuade a friendly pilot to drop him off at Nadzab, a P-38 base on
New Guinea, around the end of June, 1944.* The base commander,
General Whitehead, put him up and Lindbergh spent eight hours
having himself checked out in P-38s.
General George C. Kenney, who was in charge of air operations
for the Army in the theatre, heard from I.N.S. correspondent Lee
Van Atta of Lindbergh's presence without orders. Van Atta had
seen Lindbergh at Nadzab. Kenney had Lindbergh picked up and
flown to Army headquarters in Brisbane, Australia. There he took
him to meet General MacArthur, who issued the necessary orders
allowing Lindbergh to stay in New Guinea and fly P-38s. However,
Kenney warned him to keep out of combat.
Lindbergh showed up in Hollandia, New Guinea, in July, 1944.
Colonel Charles MacDonald, of the 475th Fighter Group, one of the
leading American aces of the war, recalled later the entrance into
his tent of a tall, balding, middle-aged gentleman in civilian dress
while he and another pilot were playing checkers. The tall man gave
his name, but MacDonald didn't catch it. The stranger went on to
say that he wanted to learn about combat operations of the P-38.
The two pilots had seen other visitors who had put such questions
and quickly disappeared. They kept on playing checkers. MacDonald asked the stranger his name again, and to state exactly what
it was he wanted.
The stranger identified himself as "Lindbergh" and said he
* From the dates given by various colleagues, it seems that he may have
checked in with the Army and flown P-38s before he did his development work
on the Corsair, although he was an official representative of United Aircraft,
the Corsair's manufacturer and the P-38 was a product of their competitor,
Lockheed. The P-38 had twin Allison engines which were made by General

Motors.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

328

wanted to compare range, fire power, and other characteristics of
the P-38 with single-engine fighters.

MacDonald was appalled by the idea of trying to show a civilian
things that could be learned only by flying the plane. "Are you a
pilot?" he asked.

The tall man said he was.
"Not Charles Lindbergh?"
"That's my name," Lindbergh said.
The day after Lindbergh arrived at Hollandia, MacDonald asked
him if he would like to join a four-plane "anti-boredom" flight to
some Japanese-held territory. Lindbergh said he would like to go
along, and was told to pick up a jungle kit, a .45-caliber pistol, and a
canteen. This would be a sortie on which no Japanese interceptors
were expected, so Lindbergh would be sticking to his word to fly
only "safe" missions. Nevertheless it would be a long flight over
enemy territory. If Lindbergh's engine failed, he would have to take
his chances of parachuting into the jungle and being picked up.
The other pilots on his first flight were dubious about old
Lindbergh's ability to keep up and react properly, particularly as he
had had only a few hours of flying time in P-38s. However, he
acquitted himself well in formation flying and attack, and on
following days, according to MacDonald, was "indefatigable.

He

flew more missions than was normally expected of a regular combat
pilot.

He dive-bombed enemy positions, sank barges. ... He was

shot at

by almost every

anti-aircraft

gun ... in western

New

Guinea."

On one such mission, one of the youngsters flying alongside
Lindbergh noticed that Lindbergh had been a touch slow in retracting his landing gear after takeoff. The other pilot radioed: "Lind-

bergh

.

.

.

Get your wheels up! You're not flying the Spirit of St.

Louis!"

When he returned from missions with the 475th, MacDonald
noticed that Lindbergh's tanks held a great deal more gasoline than
those of the other planes in the squadron. Yet he had been flying

wing to wing with the others, at the same altitude and at the same
speed. The ground crews wanted to know how he managed to use
so little gas.

Lindbergh's answer was that once the formation had attained
altitude,

he would

throttle

back

to

1,600 r.p.m.,

and increase

LINDBERGH'S PERSONAL WAR

329

manifold pressure and propeller bite. In that way, he would conserve fuel while maintaining air speed. These tactics were not
original with Lindbergh, but were thought bad practice. The other
pilots

and the mechanics in the 475th Fighter Group believed that

they would ruin the engines. The only way to prove the point was to

have Lindbergh's engines taken apart, and they showed no more
wear than others that had logged a comparable number of flying
hours. The squadron then adopted Lindbergh's techniques and
immediately added 600 miles ( says MacDonald; Lindbergh claimed
only 500 miles ) to the range of their aircraft.
This not only gave pilots a greater margin of safety but allowed
the planes to fly farther afield; it permitted a change in tactics. The

P-38 could now fly cover for bombing missions hundreds of miles

beyond where the Japanese expected to find them.
Says MacDonald, "Lindbergh had, in effect, redesigned an airplane."

On one of the new long-range missions, Lindbergh was leading a
squadron covering bombers in an attack on Aboina. The bombers
were forced by bad weather to turn back, so the fighters proceeded
to find targets they could attack themselves. As they began to use
up their ammunition, they ran into some Japanese fighters. One
Sonia-type plane escaped from two attacking P-38s and turned to fly
head on at Lindbergh. Lindbergh was in a slight climb. "Of all the
attacks it is possible to make on a Japanese plane, the one liked least
is the head-on pass," MacDonald said later, "for here you and the
enemy approach with tremendous speed, each with guns blazing.
There is always a good chance for collision."
The Sonia tried to shoot Lindbergh down. He fired point-blank at
Then the Japanese tried for a crash at the last split
The planes almost met nose to nose, both firing steadily,
with Lindbergh's just clearing the top of the Sonia's wing as it
smoked into the sea. He reported the kill in his unemotional log
style: "The enemy plane banked right to attack me head on. I fired
a burst of several seconds, observing numerous hits. The Sonia then
flew under me, almost colliding, rolled over, and crashed into the
water." He said later he felt a "bump" in his tail as the planes
passed one another. It was the first plane Lindbergh had ever shot
the Sonia.
second.

down.

The P-38s, trying out their extra range, began flying longer and

330

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

longer missions. Lindbergh apparently forgot his orders to stay out
of combat situations and flew with them. They hit Balikpapan and

Mindanao, and later China and Indochina from the Philippines.
These places had all been outside their old radius.
Over Palau, Lindbergh was returning in a group of four P-38s
headed for their Biak base, seven hundred miles across ocean. They
had just left a fight in which a Zero had got on his tail while he was
attacking another plane. Lindbergh was relieved to see that his
plane carried no bullet holes; the Zero had been scared off by

MacDonald. The sea was smooth, the sky peaceful.
The raid had been successful, Lindbergh was thinking with some
satisfaction. Slipping in at 15,000 feet, they had caught the Japanese
by surprise, for Palau was considered out of range of land-based
fighters. They crossed Babelthuap at almost tree-top level and, off
the eastern coast, shattered the decks of a patrol ship with their
guns. They shot down three enemy planes in flames.*

Then [Lindbergh wrote! our fuel reserves lowering after nearly an hour

we headed toward open ocean. At the same
moment, a Zero dove from a cloud to attack my wingman.
of flying at battle-cruise,

I turn back to his defense five seconds too soon. I should have
climbed and made a wider circle. Seeing a better target, the Jap pilot
whips around in a bank and half rolls onto my tail. There's no use dogfighting with a Zero. I'm too near the water to dive. I jam the throttles
into war emergency power and bank toward the other unit of our flight. I
have speed and I have friends, but both are seconds away— hundreds of
bullets away. I can see the cylinders of the Zero's engine, feel its machine
guns rising into line behind me. It is too close to miss. I pull my elbows
inside the armor plate and brace for the impact of the shells— the rip of
wing covering— the torch of a fuel tank— the jerky clatter of a failing engine. Seconds are frozen; time, eternal.
Why don't the bullets strike? There is no thud, no shattering of glass,
no pain! The twin tails of a P-38 flash by, almost vertical in bank. A Zero
climbs steeply toward the nearest cloud. A second P-38 crosses over.
Tracers are spurting from a third, firing full deflection. A trail of smoke
streaks out behind the Zero and it disappears in the overcast.** The air
behind me is empty. Only four P-38s circle in the nearer sky. The earth
becomes unfrozen. Time and space assume their old dimensions.

* 2 planes destroyed by Colonel Charles H. MacDonald
1 plane destroyed by Lieutenant Colonel Meryl M. Smith.

* * Shot, and probably destroyed, by Captain Danforth P. Miller.

LINDBERGH'S PERSONAL WAR

331

MacDonald's view of this fight was more matter-of-fact. When
MacDonald warned him to turn
right— to bring the enemy within MacDonaJd's range. "The Jap
must not have been too good a shot," MacDonald reported. "I could
see the fire leap from the leading edge of his wings as he shot at
Lindbergh from such a short distance it seemed impossible he could
miss/' The enemy pilot must have lost his nerve, MacDonald
thought. It was as he was pulling away that Captain Miller shot him
down.
On this combat mission (his thirty-sixth), Lindbergh fully appreciated the technical superiority of his country's aircraft. "It was the
last few miles of speed, translated into degrees of aim and inches of
error, that threw the enemy bullets off my plane. It was the last few
hundred horsepower, translated into seconds, that brought three P38s to me in time. It was the final perfection of our guns, the final
training of our pilots, that forced the Zero off my tail and sent it
smoking off for shelter.
That was why the four of us had been
the Zero got on Lindbergh's tail,

.

.

.

able to raid Palau against a reported strength of nearly 200 enemy
fighters/'

In six months in the Pacific, Lindbergh flew a full complement of
50 combat missions as a civilian— the same number that was
demanded of every pilot, navigator, bomber, and gunner in the U.S.
armed services. He put in 178 combat hours. He had compiled a
large, useful dossier on the performance and difficulties of our
fighter aircraft. His personal war was over.
Having completed his self-imposed stint of combat service, Lindbergh returned himself to the States. General Kenney had asked
him not to talk about his experiences as a prerequisite of permission
to fly the P-38. "Lindbergh," says Kenney, "said he had no intention
of telling the story, as he too was anxious not to have any publicity
in regard to his activities in the Pacific, particularly while the war
was on." Lindbergh has, in fact, never told the full details of his war
experiences. He has made only one reference in print to his combat
missions— in Of Flight and Life. This was not published until 1948.
In 1954, as already noted, President Eisenhower nominated
Charles A. Lindbergh, A0215724 (Formerly Colonel, Air Corps
Reserve), for a commission as Brigadier General in the U.S. Air
Force Reserve, a nomination later approved by the U.S. Senate.
General Kenney praised the appointment.

332

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

"When Lindbergh

joined us,"

Kenney

said,

"the

P-38s were

considered to have a range of 400 miles. Under his training P-38s

were able to escort bombers all the way to Balikpapan, Borneo, fight
over the target, and get home with a reserve supply of fuel, for a
950-mile mission." This, said Kenney, let the United States get to
the Philippines much sooner than planned. "Lindbergh's contribution shortened the

war by several months," Kenney said not long

ago, "and saved thousands of American lives."

26

FAMILY LIFE

ONCE, AT A DINNER PARTY IN THE LINDBERGH HOUSE,

Mrs. Lindbergh was talking to Igor Sikorsky about family life. "You
know," she said, "my husband doesn't think a family really exists
unless there are twelve children." Lindbergh was at the other end of

the table, engaged in a conversation of his own. But he immediately

broke off what he was saying to reply to this statement. "Who can
say that a family exists without twelve children?" he asked. Another

member of the dinner party recalls, "You could see that this had
been a subject of family debate for a long time."
It is a debate which Lindbergh has only half won.

He has

fathered six children, five of whom are living. Jon Morrow Lindbergh, born 1932; Land Morrow Lindbergh, born (in England, the

only Lindbergh child born out of the country) 1937; Anne Spencer
Lindbergh, born 1940; Scott Lindbergh, born 1942; Reeve Lindbergh, born 1945.

The first three of these are married, and parents. Jon has four
Land two, Anne one, a total of seven grandchildren.
Grandpa Lindbergh affects a tough, careless attitude toward his
children's children. He refers to them not by name but by the old

children,

Armed Forces phonetic alphabet—Able, Baker, Charlie, Dog, Easy,
Fox, George. (According to the new alphabet, they would be Alpha,
Bravo, Charlie, Delta, Echo, Foxtrot, Golf.) But no matter what
identification

Lindbergh employs, he says he wants twenty-six

grandchildren, one for every letter in the alphabet. This would work

out an average of five and a fifth children for each of his children.

Lindbergh, in these numerical calculations, is, of course, not
He is hardly ever entirely serious with his family.

entirely serious.

333

334

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

But there is more than a grain of sincerity in his hankering for a
large number of children, a comment on his own status as an only
child.

He was an extremely lonely child, emotionally split in his loyalties
to his parents, physically shuttled between residences and so many

different schools in so many different places. In We, he said,
"Through these years I crossed and recrossed the United States,
made one trip to Panama, and had thoroughly developed a desire
for travel, which has never been overcome."
Lindbergh's bland description reveals an unstable childhood environment that can only be characterized as traumatic. It is the sort
of experience that either breaks the spirit or forges an iron will.
Obviously, it didn't break Lindbergh, but it couldn't have been
pleasant. He hasn't wanted that kind of life for his children.
For them he planned a permanent home in a small town and a
continuity of normal public school and social relationships. He and
his wife had considered these relationships basic, and had started
off with these goals in Hopewell. But that home was shattered by
tragedy, and they could not then establish another that would be
safe for children— not in this country. For the next fourteen years,
the Lindberghs lived in various houses and apartments in Europe
and America. It was only after the birth of their sixth child, Reeve,
that they felt they could settle into a permanent home of their
own.
In 1946, Lindbergh bought a large Tudor-style house on several
acres of land in Darien, Connecticut. The house was near that of a
Pan American World Airways vice-president. It was in an area,
marked "Private," known as Tokeneke. This is a secluded piece of
woods and fields south of the right of way of the New Haven Railroad. It borders on Scott's Cove, an arm of Long Island Sound. The
Lindbergh property had its own waterfront; its cost, according to
stamps on the deed, was $85,000.
The house contained a bedroom for each of the five Lindbergh
children and one each for Charles and Anne Lindbergh. There was
also a room for one full-time servant, a cook. A cleaning woman

came in twice a week to help out.

By staying completely out of the news after 1941, the family was
able to achieve the privacy and security they had long sought.

They could settle in Darien, and Lindbergh could blend into the

FAMILY LIFE

335

background of suburban living and commuting to New York. His
children went to the local public schools.* They played with the
neighboring children, made friends with schoolmates, brought their
friends home to play and eat. In short, the family did not have to
live like the families of celebrities. They continued the same sort of
quiet existence they had found in France and England.
When he was at home, Lindbergh worked in a small trailer, a
present from Henry Ford, parked in the back yard. But he was not
often at home; that is, he was not around in the sense that the
average commuting father is there every day for a quick glimpse of
the kids in the morning, a fast good night during the evening
cocktail. When Lindbergh was at home, it might be for days or
weeks at a time. But, absent or not, his presence was felt, his
principles were known. The Lindbergh children never doubted that
they had a strong, demanding, protective father.
His wandering, secretive ways were accepted by the children
when young as normal, although as they have grown older and have
seen how other families live, they have tended to question his
behavior.

away as much as it seemed," one of the
Lindbergh children said recently. "It's just that we never knew
where he was or when he was coming back. He likes to be
"Actually, he wasn't

mysterious"
"He's the original jet-age man," one of his friends says. "He's just
as at

home in Nairobi as New York, and he doesn't see why he

should be in either unless it suits him to be there." Lindbergh does
not believe in writing letters. "If they don't hear from you, they know
you're all right," he says. Not long ago, Lindbergh was in Scotland
at the same time as one of his daughters. But she didn't know where
to reach him, and he didn't even know she was in the country.

His sudden disappearances, unheralded reappearances, and frequent disassociation from the daily routines of family life may even
have sharpened the children's awareness of his presence when he
came home. "It's so nice to go away," he was once heard to say to
one of his children. "You always like me better when I come back."
Lindbergh presented himself in terms of principle, rather than
achievement. His example has been one of individualism, integrity,
self-reliance, and excellence in physical mastery of the environment
* Except Reeve, who went to day-school.

336

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

He never gave the children the idea that they were living in the
shadow of a symbol, or a national hero. In fact, he has never been
one to discuss with his children either his present work or his past
achievements. When one of the children was accosted in the first
grade by a schoolmate who said, "I hear your father discovered
America," the Lindbergh child placidly accepted this statement as
historical fact and added, "Yes, and he flew across the ocean, too."
"There was a chapter in our schoolbook on Father," said one of
the Lindbergh children recently. "We felt kind of funny about it,
but nobody made too much of it. We knew he flew the Atlantic, but
he didn't talk about it much or about anything else seriously." To
his children he seems to be either too serious, or not serious enough.
Believing that all his children should know how to handle firearms, as he has done from the age of six, Lindbergh gave them
target-shooting lessons with a small-caliber rifle. The shooting took
place in the garage at Darien. Once, when it came the turn of young
Anne Spencer Lindbergh to shoot, she pointed the rifle, closed her
eyes, and fired. She scored a bull's-eye. Lindbergh took the gun
away from her. "That's all for you," he said. "You're perfect."
Lindbergh deprecates women's interest in and understanding of
mechanical problems, although he took his wife along as radio
operator on two long flights. "He knew Mother really hated it all.
She likes nothing better than to fly in a Pan American plane
with someone else doing the work," one Lindbergh child said. He
might discuss mechanical problems with the boys, who, he felt,
understood such things.
Back in 1930, Lindbergh told the Pictorial Review magazine that
he didn't want his son to be anything he had no taste or aptitude
for. "I believe that every boy should have complete freedom in the
choice of his life's work," he said.
Certainly he has never encouraged any of his children to follow
his path in aviation and astronautics. He did teach Jon to fly when
the boy was sixteen. He gave him twelve hours of instruction in a
two-place airplane. (Jon says, "This was the first time I had a
chance to admire his ability.") Then one day Lindbergh walked
away from the plane and said, "You go alone today."
Jon soloed successfully. Later he asked if he might try a parachute jump.

"Not try" Lindbergh said. "Make."

FAMILY LIFE

337

He took Jon up to 2,000 feet and then waited for the boy to jump.
Although he was wearing two chutes, Jon couldn't bring himself to
leave the plane. Lindbergh did not look back, but circled the
landing spot a second time. This time Jon was able to jump. He
landed not far from where he was supposed to.
Jon earned a pilot's license, but Lindbergh told him that he
would prefer

it

if

Jon stayed out of

flying.

"It's

become

too

automatic, too push-button," Lindbergh told him. "Find something

new, a field that needs research, and hasn't been well studied.
Without a challenge a man isn't getting the most from his life."
When the children were small, he used to play games with them,
usually animal games. The games would often take place in the
dark, possibly so that the children would not have Lindbergh's early
fear of darkness. He would be a bear, or a lion, or some other kindly
animal, making appropriate animal noises. His children remember
him, too, from their younger days, as a creative storyteller. His
stories, like his games, were mostly about animals. But he had a
disconcerting habit of occasionally falling asleep while he was
telling a story.

The children played baseball without him. He has never been a

man for team activity, his only team sports being the rifle and
pistol

squads of the University of Wisconsin, hardly in the team

category. But he has often skied with the children, and the family

has frequently gone on ski trips together— to Switzerland, to Austria,
to Canada, to Aspen, Colorado. On such trips, the Lindberghs trav-

eled incognito and registered at resorts under an assumed

name

that is part of his mother's family tree. Once, at a Canadian resort,

a man penetrated the Lindbergh nom d'emprunt and came up to
him on the slope in evident excitement saying, "Why, hello, Mr.

Lindbergh!" Lindbergh immediately took off his skis, collected his
brood, marched them to the hotel, packed, and left— all within a

space of an hour or so. His children are sure that he is recognized
oftener than this, but so long as no overt move is made to disclose
his identity he does not feel threatened.

On skis, Lindbergh is adequate but not proficient. He can get
down slopes, but does so in his own inelegant style. He skis from
one side to the other, then sits down or does a jump turn, and skis
back across the slope. In order to learn speed skiing, to schuss down
steep trails, it is necessary to take risks and to fall down. His

338

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

children have learned to ski this way. Lindbergh is a cautious skier,
however. "In my business," he says, "you're allowed only one fall."
Local ski trips were often made in a Volkswagen, a favorite
Lindbergh family vehicle. At one time there were several Volkswagens parked in the Lindbergh driveway. One of the Lindbergh
children has one at school. Lindbergh himself often favors a Ford
station wagon. He once told a friend that of American cars he
preferred the Ford over all other makes. This brand loyalty undoubtedly goes back to his first family car, a Model T Ford, as well
as to his long friendship with the late Henry Ford, Sr. Lindbergh
told the same friend not only to buy Fords but also never to use
anything but regular-grade gasoline in the engines, no matter what
the manufacturers instructions said. The friend says, "I ruined two

Ford engines that way."

A friend recalls being driven to the Lindberghs' on a snowy day,
and Lindbergh demonstrating the control he could exert over the
car while skidding. "Want to bet five dollars I can't skid it through
the gate?" he asked. He then proceeded to do just that. The friend
thinks of this as one of Lindbergh's practical jokes, but actually his

purpose was more practical than funny. He not only deliberately
put the car into a skid so he could control it; he taught his children
to do the same and how to react when a car they are driving
begins to skid. As a result, one of his children was recently saved
from an accident when her car hit a slick spot on an icy road. "I just
knew what to do automatically, without thinking," she said. He has
given them driving lessons starting at a very early age— around
twelve years, almost as young as the age he started to drive.
On the road, Lindbergh is apt to be impatient with other drivers.
Since he can maneuver the Volkswagen through snow, he becomes
irritated with drivers who get themselves bogged down and halt
traffic.

Not many years ago, Lindbergh rented a small plane at the
Danbury, Connecticut, airport and took his youngest daughter,
Reeve, for a ride. As always, he first had himself checked out in the
plane and tried it in the air before boarding his passenger. Then he
took off with Reeve and flew around. He was demonstrating climbing stalls when the engine died and could not be restarted. His
daughter asked him if they were in danger, if they would crash.
Lindbergh, who, of course, had several times been in a single-

FAMILY LIFE

339

engine plane that had lost its power, said firmly, "No." The child
was completely reassured.
He had sufficient altitude to locate a pasture, and was able to
glide the plane into it without damaging it, his daughter, or himself.
But the landing area was so small the plane couldn't be flown out.
The wings had to be removed and they and the fuselage had to be
trucked out.
Lindbergh's way of bringing up his children reflects his attitude

he believes in sound minds in healthy
bodies; in inculcating independence and responsibility in young
people; in the benefits of a sound nutrition; in calculating risks but
not worrying about dangers; in the relationship between physical
skills and mental stability (i.e., people skillful with their hands do
not have nervous breakdowns); in intellectual honesty; in fiscal
responsibility; in public school education; in outdoor activities; and

toward

life

in general:

in many more.

Probably some of Lindbergh's ideas on child-rearing derive from
the very strong opinions of his friend the late Dr. Alexis Carrel.

(Carrel was also certain that the development of physical

skills

strongly influenced one's mental health. ) But the ideas also go back
to the Lindberghs, the Lands, and the Lodges.

A visitor at Long Barn, the house the Lindberghs occupied in
England in 1936 and 1937, recalls being awakened in the morning by
a loud hammering. She wondered what the noise could be. Later in
the morning, after breakfast, she was talking to Lindbergh when
Jon, then about five years old, came in and stood waiting. His father
said, "What is it, Jon?" Jon said, "Well, sir, would you put some
more nails in the boards for me?"
Lindbergh said, "But I've put some in for you."
"I've used them up, sir," said the boy.
Lindbergh seemed a bit surprised, the visitor relates, and said,
"Excuse me for a moment please." He went out to where Jon was
constructing a tool house. Lindbergh believes in practical ends to
his lessons, not merely learning to exercise a talent futilely. This tool

house was being built of two-by-fours and full-size planks— pieces
of wood too large for little Jon to handle. Lindbergh would put the

planks in place and fix each with one nail, marking crosses with a
pencil where the other nails were to go.

The visitor saw that Jon was wielding an enormous hammer, so

340

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

large that he had to use two hands to lift it. She thought he might
hit himself on the head and knock himself out with it. So she said to

Lindbergh later, "I think that's a fine idea, learning to use his hands
in a practical way, but don't you think it would be a good idea for
him to have a smaller hammer?"
Lindbergh said, "I've given him three small hammers and he's lost
every one of them. Now he's just going to have to make out with
that one until he finds the others."
Although there were several servants at Long Barn, Lindbergh
did not like having them in the room while the family was dining.
The servants would put the food on a sideboard in the long Tudor
dining room and retire. Lindbergh would then carve and serve.
One night, the family and guests were eating, having been served
by Lindbergh, but Jon's chair was vacant. The door opened and Jon
came in. He was so small he had to reach up to grasp the doorknob.
Lindbergh's back was to Jon, who went directly to the sideboard
and took a large carving knife and fork. He reached up and began
to carve himself some roast beef. The visitor saw this and did not

know whether to interrupt Lindbergh to tell him what was going
on— she didn't know him very well. So she sat silent and waited,
expecting at any moment to hear a piercing scream indicating that
the child had cut off his thumb.

Not at all. Jon sliced off a huge
hunk of roast beef without injuring himself and heaped his plate
with vegetables. He carried it over and put it on the big table. Then
he climbed up into the seat of his huge chair. He settled himself in
the chair, picked up a full-sized knife and fork, and began cutting
his meat and eating.
After a while his father looked at his watch and said, "Three
minutes, Jon." These words were the first overt notice he had taken
that the child was there.
"Yes, sir," said Jon, and shoveled food into his mouth as fast as he
could.

In three minutes, Lindbergh rang the bell and the butler came in
and cleared the plates. He brought dessert, of which Jon had a fullsized portion.
Later, the guest said to

Anne Lindbergh, "You know,

I

was

appalled when I saw that child reaching up to the high sideboard

with that knife."

FAMILY LIFE

341

Mrs. Lindbergh said, "Yes, it is quite frightening, isn't it? But he
manages quite well/'
In this small incident can be glimpsed the application of several
of Lindbergh's principles. Jon was late for dinner, but was made
aware of his lapse only by being forced to serve himself and eat
faster. His mother didn't show that she was concerned with his
handling the big knife. Nobody helped him into his chair. Nobody
cut the food on his plate. At the age of five, he accepted the
responsibility for his

own behavior that many children years older
In a way, this repeats Lindbergh's own

are not ready to do.

enforced precocity. But there is an important difference: his chil-

dren have been brought up with the support of a continuity which
he did not have.
On another occasion, in Paris a year or two later, Jon was taken
up to the top of the Eiffel Tower by his father, along with a couple
who had a daughter a few years older than the boy. As they rode up
the inclined elevator, Jon wanted to get up on a seat so that he
could look out. The seat was quite high for him to reach, and noting
his difficulty, the mother of the other child helped Jon onto it.
Lindbergh saw this out of the corner of his eye and, without
saying a word, he pulled Jon off. He said, holding on to him, "You
want to get up on there?"
"Yes, sir," said Jon.

"Well, then," said Lindbergh, letting go of his son, "get up." And

Jon did manage to scramble onto the seat by himself, while Lindbergh said to the woman, "I've the greatest difficulty with mothers,
preventing them from trying to help their children too much."
Descending from the Eiffel Tower, the three adults and the two
children walked down the steep iron stairs. It had been raining, and

the steps had pools of water in their worn hollows. Lindbergh and
the father of the other child were striding down in advance. The

mother was

trailing

by a flight with the two children. She was

especially concerned about Jon, who might easily slip on the slick

wet iron.
She said, "Jon, hold on to the railing and be careful."
Lindbergh heard her and turned around and said, "Let go of the
railing, and run down, Jon."
The woman said, "For heaven's sake, why do you say that? Do
you want him to break his neck?"

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

342

Lindbergh replied, as his son obeyed his command and
scrambled down the stairs, "If he's going to be too careful, he is apt
to have an accident. But if he'll just forget about it, he wont have
any trouble at all."

With

his

usual single-mindedness, Lindbergh has applied his

theory of calculated risks to
years after the Eiffel

all his

children.

For instance, some

Tower incident, he took his two youngest

and Reeve, to visit neighbors not far from their
Connecticut house. While Lindbergh sat inside talking to his

children, Scott

friends, the children played around in the spacious yard.

There was a large ash tree near the house, the trunk two or three
and correspondingly high. The children came in
and said to Lindbergh, "Father, can we climb that tree?"
Lindbergh interrupted his conversation and excused himself. He
went out with the two children and sat with them on the edge of the
porch, Scott on one side and Reeve on the other, and looked up at

feet in diameter

the tree.

"Now, you want to climb this tree, don't you?" Lindbergh asked.
They said they did.
He asked, "How are you going up?"
Scott looked up at the tree— he was twelve or so at the time— and
said he'd first take this limb and then that one and so on.
His father said, "Then you're going to get stuck there, aren't you?
You can't get any farther if you go up that way, can you?"
Scott agreed that he would be stopped part way up, and so did
Reeve.

Lindbergh said, "Now, figure out how you're going to get up
there for yourself."

The children calculated and theoretically tested various routes up
the tree. At last they solved it. They told Lindbergh how they would

climb the tree, until they had reached the top.

Then Lindbergh

said,

"All right,

go up the

tree."

He arose,

turned his back and walked into the house, and resumed his
conversation with his friends.
His host said, "Charles, that was a great lesson in education."

Lindbergh replied, "Yes, they must learn to take calculated risks.
As long as they figure out everything ahead of time and just don't
go off half cocked."

The woman of the house shuddered a little as she recalled the

FAMILY LIFE

343

them out there on that huge tree,
must admit they did get up and down without an
accident. I must say," the woman concluded, "the children don't
admire him any less for their Spartan upbringing. Or love him any
the less. Only I couldn't do it that way, and I don't know any other
story.

"I

although

couldn't have left
I

parent who could."

Lindbergh has also consistently applied the principle of selfby which he himself was raised, to his own children,
starting with Jon. It was not only in the dining room, or in manual
training, but in matters where the children were exposed to real
danger. When he was thirteen, Jon had a dinghy and a small outboard engine. He set up a line of lobster pots in the Sound, and
sold his catch in the local fishmarket. Some days he made as much
reliance,

as ten dollars.

Once, he was late coming back. It was getting dark, and Jon was
somewhere out of sight of land, without a compass, when Lindbergh went down to the dock to look for him. The waves were
rising, and the wind was strengthening. The local fishermen were
worried, but Lindbergh said, "No use calling for a Coast Guard
search yet. Let's wait and see if he can't make it back on his own."
Jon returned safely after dark, and Lindbergh said, "I don't see
you wearing a life jacket."
"No," Jon said, "but I'm towing a rubber raft, just in case."
"Fine," said his father, "but get a jacket and compass before you
go out again. Always leave yourself several ways out of possible
trouble."

Afterward Lindbergh asked Jon why he always seemed to be out
in storms (once the boy very nearly didn't get back). Jon replied,
"It's more fun. And in bad weather more lobsters are around."
"Good reasons," Lindbergh said, "but only a fool goes against the
odds consistently. They always catch up with you."
Charles and Anne Lindbergh were out of the house one evening
when young Scott Lindbergh, then eleven years old, failed to return
from an outboard motorboat trip with some of his friends. The
cook, at home with the girls, began to get worried when Scott didn't
show up for dinner. As the evening wore on, she became almost
frantic wondering whether to call the Lindberghs or the police.
Finally, about nine-thirty, Scott came home with his friends. They
were all covered with mud. It seems the boat had got stuck in the

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

344

mud and they had been trapped by low water. But somehow they
had succeeded in dragging the boat home.
The next day, the cook told Lindbergh about the incident. He
said, without any sign of being disturbed, "Don t worry about
them. They know how to take care of themselves."
Lindbergh has stuck by his principles and seen them work— too
well. Like any good father, he has found himself phased out of his
parental responsibility by the growing self-reliance of his children.
For example, there is his relationship with Jon, his eldest son.
Lindbergh is a strong swimmer— although his swimming, like his
skiing, is more utilitarian than stylish. For years he has set a hard
example for his children, particularly the boys. He could outswim
them all, and dared them to swim in the coldest weather.
Jon Lindbergh took up skin diving when he was about fifteen, in
the Florida keys. He became an expert underwater swimmer; he
could swim three lengths of a pool without coming up for air. He
got an aqualung when he was twenty and became proficient with it.
After that, he served three years as a Navy officer in an underwater
demolition unit.

Some years ago, when Jon was in his early twenties, he invited his
father, then in his fifties, to go for a bit of skin diving on the West

Coast. The two men— Jon is dark and smaller (five feet eleven, a
hundred fifty pounds) than his six-foot- three-inch father: "More of
a Morrow than a Lindbergh," a friend says— equipped themselves
for the dive. Jon gave his father a belt of lead weights and the other
equipment they would need, and both men plunged into the sea
and began swimming.

A friend retells Lindbergh's description of the event in these
words: "We swam and we swam about a mile out, then we got to a
certain reef

and Jon said, 'Now, father, now were going to go

down."

"And I said to him, 'Jon, you're going, I'll wait for you to come
up.'"

The friend continued, "Jon went down and Charles waited up on
top hanging on to a buoy or something and then he swam back and
was exhausted by the time he got to the beach."
Lindbergh was more than exhausted; he was also very pleased.
He said it was the first time that any of the boys was able to do

FAMILY LIFE

345

something that his father couldn't do better. "He had it on me,"
Lindbergh said with relish when he told the story.
It was a great day for Jon Lindbergh, too. "That was the day that
Jon became independent of his father/' the friend observes.
Jon has since gone on to make a distinguished career for himself
in oceanography and deep-sea diving. In 1962 he and another diver

plunged 432 feet below the surface of the Atlantic Ocean off the
Bahamas and set a new world's record by staying at that depth for
forty-nine hours. They were testing a new method of living underwater. By accustoming their bodies to the immense pressure of this
great depth, Jon and his partner were able to dwell in a fragile
fabric structure and to swim freely about without any diving gear.
The apparatus and the idea were the work of Edwin C. Link,
inventor of the famous Link aviation trainer. Link and Jon Lindbergh are associated in oceanographic development work, in a

company called Ocean Systems, Incorporated, in Seattle, Washington.

Lindbergh often visits Jon to watch him work. He was in Caliday Jon demonstrated a revolutionary new lightweight
diving helmet. The helmet utilizes a mixture of oxygen and helium

fornia the

instead of the gases usually favored by professional divers.

Jon was taking the rig down far below the 250-foot limit considered safe for conventional equipment and breathing mixtures.

Yet Lindbergh did not seem perturbed. He asked only technical
questions concerning the amounts and types of gases breathed in
the new helmet. That day, Jon dived to 400 feet, demonstrating
that it was possible to do useful work at depths theretofore considered impossible. He has dived to 550 feet and has worked at a
depth of 500 feet. He is considered a pioneer in the field, the way
his father was in aviation. "Name anything that's dangerous and wet
and he's been involved in it," says Admiral Edward Stephen, a
business associate of Jon Lindbergh's. He is rated one of the top
professional divers in the world, earning as much as $16 a minute,

and is constantly on call to all parts of the world.
Jon has always demonstrated a great respect for money. He wears
(he says they're comfortable as well as
free) and a $3.50 Mickey Mouse watch, owns only one suit and

his father's castoff shoes

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

346

wears

it

rarely.

Mostly he dresses in

jeans.

When he attended

Stanford University (he specialized in marine biology), he lived in
a tent off campus on a site for which he paid $1.00 a month rent.

Lindbergh plays jokes on his family as he does on other people. A
paper cup of water balanced on the top of a door was a typical trick
on the children. The drenching would be small, the danger of being
hurt nil. He would also pull the girls' blond pigtails.
Many years ago he and his wife were in the kitchen of George
Palmer Putnam, publisher of his first book, We. He was drinking a
glass of water. Anne, wearing a blue silk dress, was seated drinking
buttermilk and Charles was standing beside her. He let a few drops
of water drip from his glass on her shoulder. Water stains silk. She
said nothing. He tried it again. Still no response. After the third
time, however, she suddenly swung around and let fly the buttermilk from her glass into his face and all over his tie, shirt, and
jacket. A moment of shock—and then he burst out laughing.
With his friends the Truman Smiths, in Berlin, he was full of fun.
Once, when he was driving them (Mrs. Smith in front with Lindbergh), Major Smith and Mrs. Lindbergh were jointly reading a
copy of the Paris Herald in the back. Lindbergh lit a match and,
reaching over the back of the seat, set fire to the paper. "This is
always a surprise to people," he remarked casually to Kay Smith as
her husband and Anne Lindbergh beat out the flame.
His jokes are often a comment on the people he plays them on
and on customs he considers silly. Once, when his wife was giving a
large sit-down dinner to a group of people, she set out the wines to
breathe with the corks out of the bottles. Lindbergh observed this
ritual, and indicated his reaction by secretly adding a bit of salt
to each bottle. When the wine was poured, Mrs. Lindbergh, who,
unlike her husband, drinks wine, tasted it and knew instantly what
had happened— and, of course, who had done it. She said nothing
to her husband, but ordered the bottles replaced, thereby topping
the joke.

Lindbergh is a teetotaler not out of temperance convictions but
mainly because he does not like the taste of whiskey, wine, or beer.

He has tried the stuff—he will sip a bit for a toast if the occasion
demands it— but he just doesn't care for any alcoholic beverage. He
once told a friend who offered him a cup of breakfast coffee that he
didn't want to become dependent on any stimulants. His favorite

FAMILY LIFE

347

is milk, which nourishes, does not stimulate, and is not
supposed to be habit-forming. But since he has been drinking it all
his life, this last attribute may be questionable.
Lindbergh never had any hobbies. "Everything always had a
purpose/' one of his children said recently. The same child was
surprised to learn that her father had been photographing wild
game in Africa. "I didn't know until a few months ago that Father
had a camera," she said, "or knew how to take pictures. I'm glad he
is getting an interest in that kind of thing." (Actually, Lindbergh
has taken pictures since his youth.) Lindbergh has proposed to his
family a trip to Kruger National Park, in Africa, "Where you re in
the cage— inside a car— and an elephant has the right of way,"
another Lindbergh offspring said. "Father thinks that is very demo-

tipple

cratic."

Since his childhood in Little Falls and the hunting trips with his

Lindbergh has always been an active outdoorsman, and he
around his house and grounds, as
he did on the farm. At home, he usually wears work clothes, chinos
and a shirt with an open collar. His only power tool is a mechanical
father,
still

likes to work with his hands

saw.

Both Lindberghs have an aversion to ostentation and luxury,
even to comfort. A guest recalls that they didn't even have a
proper sofa in the living room, but a kind of day-bed with
iron arms, slip-covered. There was a large and very good piano,
however. There were also a few good paintings— the Lindberghs
own works by Vlaminck, a painter of the French Fauve group—
and a head of Mrs. Lindbergh by an unidentified sculptor. (A
friend thinks it was not Jo Davidson or Epstein, but of the same
genre.) However, the house was distinctly underfurnished for its
size, location, and price. When the Saturday Evening Post sent a
photographer to get a picture to run with the serialization of
Lindbergh's autobiography in the magazine, in 1953, it was with
some difficulty that a grouping of furniture could be put together to
fill the photograph with a comfortable atmosphere.
The children's rooms were correspondingly ascetic. A guest recalls
that each child had a kind of iron bedstead; that the row of
bedrooms— all with doors open while the children slept— gave
something of an impression of a barracks. Each Lindbergh child
was required to make his own bed— a rule that was observed when

348

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

Lindbergh was at home but broken when he wasn't. There were no
servants in the house other than the cook, a middle-aged German

woman named Martha Knecht, who had a warm heart and an
interest in music. The children were all fond of her, but the one who

loved her most dearly was the youngest, Reeve. Almost every day
Reeve left a small note for the cook— usually rhymed, often illustrated—lauding her cookies, apologizing for some misdeed, and the
like. The cookies were rationed by paternal order, only three a day
per child. One of the Lindbergh children wrote to the cook from

Aspen, Colorado, during Christmas week of 1957, saying that their
Father was pretty mad when three of them turned up with so many
cookies in their bag. But the cookies were gone in three days, she
said, and it was Father who ate most of them.

Lindbergh had many more
rationing cookies, however.

specific ideas

about nutrition than

He forbade the use of white sugar in

the house; instead, he insisted on brown sugar. But it is impossible
to cook everything with brown sugar, so some white sugar was used
without his knowledge. He forbade such things as chocolate cake.

But once, when he had to go away for a couple of days, the children
asked the cook to bake a chocolate cake. "Make a big one," they
said.

When Lindbergh returned unexpectedly, the children grabbed

hunks of cake and went to their rooms. The cook hid the rest of the
cake in her room.
Generally, the food in the house was plain, substantial, and
plentiful. A typical dinner consisted of a roast, a salad with dressing
of oil, vinegar, and spices prepared by Mrs. Lindbergh. Lunch was
a buffet, with many different kinds of cheese. Twenty-two quarts of
milk were consumed in the Lindbergh house every two days when
all the children were home.
The dog in the family— a German shepherd named Siggy (after
Siegfried)—was much beloved by the children and was an integral
part of their growing up for several years. Then Siggy bit a neighbor.
The children said it was not his fault, but the Lindberghs were
faced with a suit for damages, so he had to be given away. After
that, they got a cocker spaniel.

Although the senior Lindberghs did not

socialize

with their

neighbors, the children often invited their friends home to dinner.

The children would get together on Saturday nights, roll up the
rugs in the living room, and dance to records. Lindbergh would

)

FAMILY LIFE

349

watch, but not dance. Young Anne played the piano and the flute.
Scott and Land played guitars.

V

Reeve and Scott were also fond of rock
roll and other contemporary popular music. One day, they played a favorite record of
the Kingston Trio over and over. Lindbergh, who was downstairs
trying to write, finally came upstairs and took the record and broke
it in half without any show of anger. It was not that he was opposed
to their having the music; it was just that they were playing it too
loud and too often, a fact that they understood immediately and
accepted without rancor.
When it came to money, Lindbergh was generous with his
children, but it is the impression of others that his wife was even
more so. The children's allowances were not fixed or regular, but

depended on several variables. One was how much work they did
around the house; they received payment for raking leaves, for
example, at a dollar an hour. They could also earn money by being
ready with the right answer when Lindbergh would ask, at dinner,
for the author of some quotation. The usual bonus for such knowledge was five dollars. There was always a box of money in his
closet, from which the children could help themselves freely. They
used to leave IOUs stuck in his mirror: "I took 350 for ice cream."
Lindbergh's only rule was that they had to account for what they
took. It didn't make any difference how much money they spent, as
long as they reported the amount and the purpose seemed sensible.
One Lindbergh child said, "You could buy an ice cream soda for
a friend, but if you bought a hundred ice cream sodas you'd have to
tell him about it, so you just never did it. We all hated it, but it did
teach us to handle money."
Lindbergh's purpose in making the children financially responsible was to prepare them to manage the fortunes they inherit from
him and from the Morrow estate when they turn twenty-one.
And his methods seem to have worked. Although all the children
are well off, none is a spendthrift. The most extravagant is probably
Scott, who drives an M.G. sports car and owns a great Dane. "He
was able to talk Father into it that he needed both the dog and the
car," one of Scott's siblings said. ( The dog was for protection.
Lindbergh has attempted to play the martinet but often ends by
being a soft touch. A man of many principles— 1 never saw so
many principles," a friend said— and strong purpose, he also has a

350

soft side.

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

When he was being too strict, one of the children would

say, "Oh, Father," and he would immediately let up.

Sometimes the children would hope out loud that their stern
parent would leave on one of his numerous trips. But when he was
gone they missed him. A visitor accompanying Lindbergh when he
came home from a trip recalls seeing young Anne barrel down the
banister directly into her father's arms and hug him as hard as she
could.

Lindbergh was also a man of many prohibitions. "He was always
saying 'don't' to the children/' a family friend recalls. " 'Don't do this
and don't do that/ " He forbade the cook to buy a television set for
her room, for fear the children would spend their time in her room
watching it instead of doing their homework. Later, he relented and
allowed the cook to have a set and told the children they must not
watch it. But, as is usual in such domestic situations, his rule was
only loosely obeyed, and mostly when he was around to enforce it.
Meals in the Lindbergh house were always punctual; that is, they
were served punctually. But the children were not always on time,
like Jon. Their punishments for infractions of the house rules were,
like his, not physical. So far as is known, Lindbergh himself was
never spanked by his father or mother, and his children have never
been spanked. It was not necessary for him to make his point with
violence, or even to shout. His voice would simply get cold and
hard.

His children feared his angry voice as much as other children
might fear a beating. One night young Anne went to a dance and
came home after her father's curfew. She had forgotten her key, and
she was afraid to wake anyone in the house to let her in. Instead,
she climbed up the trellis to her room.
Neither Charles nor Anne Lindbergh is a regular churchgoer, and
they have not brought up their children to attend church. Sunday
was the day the children were allowed to stay in bed. They could
sleep until ten o'clock. Then Lindbergh would wake them. But as
they got older and began staying out later on Saturday night, this
rule was stretched. They began sleeping to eleven and twelve

without parental protest.

However, if there was something worth seeing, Lindbergh didn't
hesitate to wake them. A few years ago Connecticut suffered violent
floods. Lindbergh woke his children at two in the morning at the

FAMILY LIFE

351

height of the torrent. "Come look at the flood," he said. "You may

never see anything like this again."

Lindbergh doesn't swear, but he loves to shock people. Thus,

when Mrs. Lindbergh entertained friends, he would walk past the
room and say, sotto voce, "Jesus Christ on a bicycle." This is about
the strongest language he has been heard to use around the house.

Lindbergh has insisted that the children be as wary of reporters
as he is. He wants them to follow his lead in not giving interviews to

newspapers or cooperating with magazine writers, television and
radio people. Jon once got his picture on the cover of Life magazine
in connection with his underwater work. Lindbergh was almost as
upset at this publicity as another father might be if his son was
arrested for juvenile delinquency.

"Jon probably didn't feel too unhappy about his picture being on
the cover of Life," said a friend of the family, "but he probably had
to defer to his father's loudly expressed opinion. To Charles it was
like being seen in public with a tear in your britches. It didn't lose

you total respect, but it was the sort of thing that was much better if
it hadn't happened."

Jon and Land both think that their father's phobia of the press is
rather far-fetched, according to one acquaintance, but they honor
his desire for anonymity and generally will not discuss Lindbergh or

themselves with anyone who might write about the family. One of

them said not long ago, "I may disagree with him, but it's his life
and that's the way he wants it. I've got to go along with him."
Scott is almost as publicity-shy as his father.

Some overenthusi-

him

to his lodgings in

astic

British journalists recently tracked

England. Young Scott dashed from his quarters, got into his M.G.,
and took off at a high rate of speed. The Laurel-and-Hardy news-

papermen set out in hot pursuit; they got so close, in fact, that they
nearly forced the boy into a tree. Scott, dark and good-looking, is

known as the least tractable of the Lindbergh children, and was
always a fast driver in Connecticut. At university he is said to favor
blue jeans and dark-colored shirts.
The girls are both blond and beautiful. Reeve is a student at an
Eastern girl's college. Like her sister Anne before her, Reeve did not
enter the college her mother would have perferred. Anne Morrow

Lindbergh is a Smith alumna. But both her daughters elected to go
to another school because, according to someone close to the girls,

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

352

they preferred the quality of instruction there and because it is coeducational, connected with a mens university.

Reeve has lived in a dormitory and then in a house with twelve
other girls. They do their own cooking or eat out in inexpensive
restaurants. Reeve is an alert, bright, friendly, and very popular girl
who, according to a classmate, is much more interested in literature
than in science. (She thinks her father is an adequate writer on
some subjects.) She shares clothes with her housemates; on one
occasion recently she was wearing a green loden coat which the
others describe as "a friendly coat, we all wear it." A friend said that
Reeve does not think of herself as a privileged person because she is
a Lindbergh. Nor does she act as though she has money, or comes
from a moneyed family.

Anne Spencer Lindbergh, the elder sister, met her husband-to-be,
Julien Feydy, in Switzerland in 1959 before she entered college.

Then she went to college and was introduced into a world quite
strange and different from the sheltered life she had been given. She
met and knew many kinds of people she had never seen before.
After a couple of years at college, Anne came to Paris and met
Julien Feydy again, and married him. The Feydys and their one
child live in Paris.

Being so far from the family home poses no problem to Anne
Feydy or to the Lindberghs. One of the Lindbergh children said,
"After all, Jon lives on the West Coast. Mother says that Paris is no
farther than Seattle from New York. None of it takes very much
time."

Land Lindbergh (tall and blond) not long ago bought a large
cattle

ranch in Montana.

He has settled there with his wife and

children. Ranching has long been his interest; he has studied it and
will raise beef.

The Lindbergh children occasionally bridle at their fathers high
standards and rigid principles. One of them said, with just a shade
of resentment, "He thinks we should all be the best at whatever we
do— because we're Lindberghs." "He doesn't converse so much as

he lectures," another child complained.
"We never used small names for our parents, like Mummy or
Daddy," a Lindbergh child said, "always Mother and Father. It
used to frustrate us, but now it seems rather distinguished."
Lindbergh used to run a pretty taut house. But as the children

FAMILY LIFE

353

got older, discipline began to break down, and at last came the day

when he was heard to say, just like any other parent, "I cant do
anything any more with my children/'

His friends agree that Lindbergh feels a twinge at seeing his
children grow up. "He's got emotions even if he doesn't show them,"

one said. His children love him—"adore him," one friend says—but
they are grown up now and they don't need him the way they once
did. This fact,

combined with his increasing detachment from his

old friends—"it's a wonder he has so many good friends," one of his
children said recently, 'lie sees so little of them"— makes Lindbergh

seem more alone, more aloof, more lonely than ever.
Lindbergh has influenced

his wife's

development, as she has

influenced his. When they moved to the quiet English countryside
in 1935, in a house staffed with plenty of servants, Anne Lindbergh
might have retreated into the life of a housewife. She told a friend,
"I always had the excuse that I never had the time." But after they
had settled into Long Barn, Lindbergh said to her, "Now you've got
the time, and if you're ever going to be a writer, now's the time to
prove it." He wanted her to write a second book.
He had her lock herself in the library with some sandwiches and
milk, and told the servants to disturb her only "if the house was
burning down." "If the child broke a leg, just send for the doctor,"
Mrs. Lindbergh says he told them.
Inside the locked library, Anne Lindbergh fiddled with the tools
of writing. She sharpened pencils. Moved paper around. Organized
everything. Until she had no choice but to begin. Once she began,
she did not stop until, with her husband's urgings and criticism, she
had finished Listen! the Wind. The book was published, and the
Lindberghs were in Berlin when they got the critics' notices.
Anne was out walking with Mrs. Smith when the reviews came,
and Lindbergh read them first. When the two women returned from
their walk, they found him sitting on a bed covered with clippings.
He pointed to them, his face shining with pleasure. "It's wonderful!"
he said.
Lindbergh had written the foreword and drawn the maps in the
book. Almost certainly, too, the appendix which detailed the plane's
equipment and the log of the flight were his.
A friend remembers once saying to Anne after some demonstra-

354

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

tion of his strict discipline, "Anne, Charles makes me think of the

angel with the flaming sword." She looked at the friend quickly and
said, "No. Charles is lightning."

Lindbergh's mother taught at Cass Technical High School, in

one year (1928-29) at
Constantinople Women's College in Turkey. She had the reputation

Detroit, after 1924, with an interlude of

of eccentricity; she wore her hat in school all the time, and sat alone
at staff meetings reading a book.

In 1942 she retired from Cass without any warning and without
giving a reason. She refused to submit to an annual physical
checkup by a nurse, as required for all pensioners of the Detroit
public school system, but received her pension in spite of this.

One of the reasons for her shyness was also the reason for her
retirement. She had noticed the first paralytic symptoms of Parkin-

sonism, a disease for which there was no effective treatment at the
time. So she retreated quietly to her house, where she lived with her

brother until she died in 1954, at the age of seventy-eight.

Her will divided her $5,000
brother:

estate

between her son and her

"My son, Charles Augustus Lindbergh, is my heir and

would be the natural recipient of my estate. Such a disposition
would be my preference because in an inadequate way it would
recognize a devotion to me which has been full and constant and in
many material and spiritual forms. My son, however, has stated that
the disposition herein made would be his preference and I am
happy to accede to his request."

27

CHANGE

LINDBERGH S INSISTENCE ON PRIVACY HAS HAD A CURIOUS
Many people still think of him as a slim
hair.
Others recall him as an America
youth with wavy blond
Firster; they have a different idea about him, but the physical
picture is that of a young man, less than forty years old. Most
people do not think of him as gray-haired. They are always a little
startled to learn that he is now sixty-six. So it is not surprising that
effect on his public image.

they still attribute to him the ideas and attitudes of the young man
they recall.

Perhaps this is reinforced by the fact that Lindbergh has twice
written the autobiography of his early years, but both times stopped
at the age of twenty-five. His other writings have not had the same

impact as these revelations, because when they were published he

was largely invisible to the public.
Lindbergh has always been pictured as a rather stiff, unbending
young man, partly as a result of his shyness in public. Also, his
refusal to explain himself has given the impression of rigidity. It is
natural, therefore, for people to think that he hasn't changed.

Lindbergh is quite unlike this stereotype. He has demonstrated a

marked ability to grow, to learn.
Lindbergh has educated himself. A friend of many years says,
"When I first met Charles, I was struck by his originality— you
might say genius. He had a fresh way of looking at everything. Yet I
was better educated than he— and I do not consider myself a highly
educated man. He felt this lack of knowledge keenly, and he was
always trying to correct it."

Lindbergh has a tough mind, but not an impermeable or im355

356

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

movable one. He can be argued (by his friends) out of positions
and ideas, although he is stubborn and gives up grudgingly. In fact,
he likes to argue; he also likes to gossip and reminisce. He likes, in
short, to talk, but only in private, only with friends or people he
trusts.

Lindbergh has learned a lot from life, too, and although he has
an obsession about never turning his back on any former credo or
commitment in public, he has privately changed many of his ideas
over the years.

Some of this can be seen in The Spirit of St. Louis. This book took
fourteen years to write (1938-52) and went through a number of
drafts before it was submitted for publication. It covered essentially

the same ground as the 1927 book

We

(

the first twenty-five years of

his life, up to the end of the Paris flight). The motive for rewriting

the earlier book was to rectify a work Lindbergh had long deplored.

Lindbergh combined his active life as aviation consultant with his
literary work. He was able to do so because he can work anywhere
—in a plane, a taxi, a waiting room. From his habit of marking each
page with the name of the place where he wrote it, the itinerary of
the literary Spirit of St. Louis can be traced. Some of the places he
worked were aboard the S.S. Aquitania, in the Army and Navy Club
in Washington, D.C., on an atoll in the Marshall Islands ( during his
combat service), in a bomber flying back from the North Magnetic
Pole, in Japan, in the Florida keys, in Arabia, in the Italian Alps, in

Germany.
As he finished each section of the book, Lindbergh mailed it to his
wife for criticism. A typical response from her was "Keep your style,
stay in character. Cut out all that is not in character even when it is
good. Your style is clipped— short sentences— precise—not careless.
Recognize your style, then keep to it. Tour own style' is the style in
which you speak. Imagine you are speaking to me, not writing at
all."

With this kind of help, and by the most careful writing and
rewriting, Lindbergh did hammer out a distinctive prose style. As to

the actual construction of sentences and paragraphs, Lindbergh told

a friend, "I don't know anything about those things. I play it by ear.
If it sounds well and says what I

am trying to say, then it is likely to

be all right."
"As a matter of fact," he went on, "Anne doesn't know any more
than I do about grammar and syntax."

CHANGE

357

For his authorities in such matters, Lindbergh relies on Webster's

New International Dictionary, unabridged, and A Dictionary of
Modern English Usage, by H. W. Fowler.
His method of writing the book was to begin by trying to recall
events from memory. This was a useful first step, since it worked
easily with his mobile existence;

it

required no research, no files.

Memory was like a strong beam of light that outlined the high and
low spots. There were bound to be omissions and vague areas, "But

memory ," says Lindbergh, "by eliminating detail, clarifies the picture as a whole." Pilots, according to Deac Lyman, who has known
many, have extraordinarily keen memories for details of weather
and topography. And Lindbergh has a phenomenal memory even

among pilots.
After he had set down his recollections, Lindbergh began inter-

viewing and digging up records that would give him accurate details.
Often such sources were in conflict, and he had to resolve this by
selecting the likeliest account of circumstances. Too, Lindbergh
allowed himself several artistic licenses. For example, the latter part
of The Spirit of St. Louis which deals with the flight from New
York to Paris— is divided into hourly sections. Each of these is
prefaced by a log entry giving details of speed, weather, temperature, engine r.p.m., fuel consumption, and the like. Yet the log he
quoted in The Spirit of St. Louis is not the log of the Spirit of St.
Louis. As noted, that precious document, stolen from his plane at Le
Bourget, has never been found. The log in his autobiography is a
composite of reckoning, remembrance, and recapitulation of other
data.

The finished work was, as many critics noted on publication, a
remarkable piece of writing. Hung on the framework of the eight
months between the middle of September, 1926, and May 21, 1927,
from the genesis of the idea of the flight to Paris through to the
finish of the flight itself, The Spirit of St. Louis also tells the story
of Lindbergh's life from his earliest recollections up to the age of

twenty-five years, three months, and seventeen days. It achieves this

by what movie theoreticians call "montage"; i.e., the careful trimming and interpolation of scenes. Lindbergh uses many flashbacks
throughout the book, but not in chronological sequence.
Stylistically the work is, as many reviewers noted, a tour de force.
It is told

almost entirely in the historical present— both the flight

and the flashbacks— giving a sense of suspense to the flight and a

358

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

feeling of immediacy about his early life. The tension and excitement are sustained through approximately 250,000 words, a feat
that would be envied by most professional writers.
The Spirit of St. Louis was serialized in the Saturday Evening
Post before book publication under the title "33 Hours to Paris"; was
a best-seller; was condensed in the Readers Digest; won Lindbergh
the Pulitzer Prize for biography in 1954; and in 1957 was made into
a motion picture starring James Stewart as Lindbergh. The fact that
Stewart, then around fifty, was playing Lindbergh at the age of
twenty-five may have been one of the reasons that the picture lost
money. Also, Lindbergh's campaign to keep himself out of the news
had been so successful that in 1957 movie audiences, made up
largely of young people, did not know who he was. The book and
movie ( and the publicity ) did not go one day beyond the end of his
1927 flight to Paris, so the contemporary Lindbergh was able to

preserve his privacy.

The Spirit of St. Louis reveals the doubts, fears, and difficulties
Lindbergh had carefully omitted from We. In Spirit, too, he gives his
philosophy of danger. He exposes some of his spiritual musings
about death and life. He also tells, as he did not do at all in We, the
full details of the many real dangers he encountered. In Spirit he
takes more than 150,000 words to tell just the story of the flight,
which he had tossed off in 4,000 or so in We.
But the differences between the two books are not only in size
and detail, but in depth, perception, and literary skill. There is no
poetry in We, while parts of Spirit rank with the most lyrical
writings on flying.
The development from 40,000 words written in three weeks in
1927 to more than 250,000 words twenty-five years later is also a
record of the interior growth of the author. Lindbergh has tried to
preserve that unsmiling, impenetrable public face, that rigid posture
of never clarifying, refuting, or denying; yet he has perhaps un-

wittingly given us a glimpse of a man who has matured.

A few years ago the Library of Congress, to which Lindbergh is a
consultant on aeronautics, requested that he donate to the Library

the manuscripts, reference material, and correspondence relating to

The Spirit of St. Louis. Lindbergh complied, with the proviso that
his papers be sealed from all people not authorized by him. He gave

access to the documents to

two men— John Grierson, and Marvin

CHANGE

359

McFarland of the Library staff— neither of
permission to write about Lindbergh.
Typically, Lindbergh delivered his

driving

files to

whom has used this
the Library himself,

them down from Connecticut in the back of his station

wagon.

The Library's formal announcement accepting this material
was drafted by McFarland: "Students who follow [the manuscript's
evolution] through successive handwritten drafts and typescript revisions to the final edited printer's

man of action

.

.

.

copy will find it a record of a

discovering himself as a man of contemplation

and developing talents of a high literary order."
This sums up what had been happening to Lindbergh during the
war and after. He had been an empiricist, his thought deriving from
and directed toward action. Starting around 1942, perhaps earlier,
the quality of his thinking began to change away from the practical
to the literary and philosophical. The whole basis of Lindbergh's
commitment shifted, too, and with it the area and character of his
concerns. As a young man he was a mechanist; at the end of the war
he was a man for whom spiritual values were the highest in life.
Underneath his mechanism there had always been a certain
amount of doubt and mysticism. Some of it was there from his
childhood in his thoughts about God and death. Some of it was
perhaps reinforced by his association with Carrel.
Once, many years ago, a friend guided the young Lindbergh
through one of Europe's fine museums. His guide recalls, "I didn't
think he would be interested in the Siena school of Italian painting,
with all those saints and their golden halos. But this interested him
immediately. 'There are those who say they can see auras around
the heads of people, in different colors according to their charac-

he said quite seriously. So it seemed quite natural to him for
the saints to have golden halos."
The belief in auras was originally Carrel's; he thought that
someone sufficiently clairvoyant could literally see such things.
Lindbergh himself has explored the occult, though with a practical purpose in mind. He once studied Yoga to learn how bodily
processes could be controlled. He had the idea that if people could
learn to stop their heartbeat, it might be useful in surgery. He did
ters,'

learn

how to stop his own pulse, or, at least, to make it imper-

ceptible.

360

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

He demonstrated this to a friend who expressed skepticism. "Put
your hand on my wrist and feel my pulse/' he said.
The friend ( a woman ) did so and remarked on the powerful beat
of Lindbergh's heart.
Then he looked off into the distance, and she could no longer feel
his pulse. "I had a good grip on his wrist and could feel no pulse
whatever," she relates. "It was frightening."
She said, "Charles, start it up again!"
Lindbergh kept staring off into space. "Charles, please start it up
again," the woman pleaded.

At last, after what seemed a very long time, Lindbergh looked at
her and smiled. "It's beating again," he said.

He gave up the idea of stopping the heartbeat as not practicable
for surgery, because it would take a patient too long to master the

technique.

He never explained how he had learned to control his

pulse.

Most men's opinions are eroded by time and are changed gradually by circumstances and the influence of other people. Lindbergh's

in ideas are often sudden, and sharp. They are usually
brought on by violent, dangerous, life-threatening situations. Thus,
from his nearly fatal high-altitude test of the Thunderbolt fighter,
described earlier, he emerged with a new attitude toward life.
"Returning from the border of death always makes one more
aware of life," he wrote a few years later. "The mechanic who told
me that my [oxygen] pressure gage read 50 pounds too high
carried dull news.
That had caused all my trouble— a quarterinch error of a needle. I felt a sudden revulsion for such details, an
shifts

.

.

.

impatience with needles, instruments, and readings. What fools
men were to impress their minds, enslave their bodies, with figures
and machines when life lay everywhere around them, free for the
taking, unperceived.

.

.

.

"This altitude flight at Willow Run taught me that in worshiping
science man gains power, but loses the quality of life."

He figured out a reverse corollary to this idea the time he nearly
got shot down by the Zero in the South Pacific and was saved by his

armed P-38s. It was that "without a
highly developed science modern man lacks the power to survive."
When he went to Germany after the war, to survey German
aviation and rocketry for the United States government, he brought
friends in their fast, heavily

CHANGE

361

with him his firsthand prewar knowledge that the Germans had
been leaders in aeronautical science and manufacturing. He had
admired them then for their efficiency, their energy, their scientific
exactitude. Yet, with all this, he saw the evidence of their catastrophe, tragic and inescapable. It gave him a third new thought. It
wasn't enough, Lindbergh reasoned, to be the first in science, or
industry, or air power. "In Germany, I learned that if his civilization is to continue, modern man must direct the material power of
his science by the spiritual truths of his God.

,,

These three conclusions are remarkable because they come from
Lindbergh. They are ideas he did not have before the war; they are
not the sort of ideas he would have had before the war. And they
are not just words; they are sincere, deeply felt changes in his
attitude toward life.

He recognized this himself, "To me in youth," he wrote, "science
was more important than either man or God. The one I took for
granted; the other was too intangible for me to understand/' Today,
Lindbergh has lost his scientist's arrogance. And, as for God— God
may be dead for some theologians, but not for Lindbergh. He has

become a God-fearing man.

28

A FREE MAN

WHEN LINDBERGH MOVED TO CONNECTICUT AFTER THE
war, he had three ongoing professional occupations he was writing;
:

he was a consultant to Pan American World Airways; and he was constantly on call for various surveys and reports to the Air Force— even
though he still held no rank. Still out of uniform, he became a
special consultant to the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, the newly
created separate service. He visited, surveyed, and reported on
American air bases in Alaska, Japan, Europe, and the Philippines.
He flew the new American jet fighters and accompanied bomber
missions on polar flights. He also continued to help adapt new
equipment for Pan American.
In his various activities, Lindbergh's relationship with people can
be gauged to some extent by how they address him and by what he
calls himself. To old friends, particularly pilots and others connected with flying, he is "Slim." To newer friends, and to his wife,
he is "Charles. " To acquaintances, juniors, and others, he used to be
"Colonel" and, after 1954, "General." He was once very proud of his
rank and his uniform. Today, however, he does not like being called
"General," another example of the basic change in his attitude
toward life.
When he travels among strangers, he does not go as "Lindbergh."
And he has two signatures. Letters are signed formally, "Charles A.
Lindbergh" or, informally, "Charles." But his bank account at
Morgan Guaranty Trust is credited to "C. A. Lindbergh," the way
his father used to sign his name.
The bank signature is one bit of evidence supporting the charge
by a psychiatrist, during the time of America First, that Lindbergh

A FREE MAN

363

was a "case of identification with his father." The striking parallels
between his speeches at the time and those of his father opposing
U.S. entry into World War I give further credence to the idea. His
wife noted this when she told a friend how lonely she was in her
isolationist position. "Charles at least has the memory of his father

with him," she said metaphorically during the time she was at political opposites with her mother. "I'm entirely alone." Nevertheless,

when a friend said to Lindbergh not long ago, "Slim, there's a good
deal of your father in you," Lindbergh look perplexed. He stopped
talking, concentrated on the idea,

and said seriously, ''You may be

right. I never thought about it before."

Another of Lindbergh's friends sees his risk-taking, his constant
drive to surpass himself, as an attempt to measure up to his father.
"If C. A. Lindbergh had lived long enough to see Slim fly the ocean,
I

don't think he would be quite so driven to prove himself all the

time," this friend says.

With his father gone, Lindbergh tried to impress the other
Lindberghs— his children. He did this the way his father did it with
him, by a combination of authoritarianism and challenge.
Now that his children have all moved out on their own, Lindbergh travels more than ever, is alone more. His friendships have
usually developed out of his concerns and have been strung out
along the vectors that form his lines of interest and his routes of
travel. And, of course, these have changed. He is now less the
military man, more the philosopher; less the technical consultant,
more the conservationist. He doesn't see many of his old friends.
Knowing him, they understand the reason is simply that he is too
busy with other things and occupied with other people in other
places. Most of them accept this as inevitable, and are still as
zealously protective of him as ever. But there is some feeling in the
group of rejection, of being neglected.
Lindbergh is probably unaware of this, since it is an experience
he has not had for many years; nobody ever refuses him anything,
one man says, simply because you don't refuse a force of nature.

And that is how many of his friends regard him, as outside the
norm, above and beyond the concerns of average men. "You write
him, and he may not answer," one says. "You have to leave that up
to him."

Another tells the story of running into Lindbergh in New York

364

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

one night unexpectedly some years ago. "He asked me out to the
man said. "It was late in the evening, about eleventhirty. I said, 'O.K., but I don't have a damn thing with me, how
about going back to the hotel for some things?'
'What do you need?' Slim asked me. 1 can give you a toothbrush and a razor/
"I couldn't think of anything else I really needed, or any reason
not to go. When he says go, you go. We got into his car and drove
out to Darien. We got there maybe one in the morning. He bounded
up the stairs the way he does. Everyone was asleep. Slim rummaged
around in the bathroom and gave me a toothbrush and a razor, one
that needed stropping. He stropped it right there in the middle of
the night, with all those kids sleeping."
Lindbergh has long believed that the government should guarantee people the right to earn a decent living, although he has never
spelled out exactly how it should happen. Sometimes he seems to
think it has happened. For instance, he once told a friend who
worked in a college and had no other source of income, "You should
figure out what you and your family need to live on for the year;
then you should plan to earn exactly that much money. You
shouldn't draw on savings or investments." He himself needed
$25,000 a year he said, and that was what he earned.
The man, recounting the incident, said, "I didn't have any savings
or investments to draw on. My kids weren't coming into trust funds.
I was just about making it. But that never occurred to Slim. When
you needed money, all you had to do was reach out and take it."
As this suggests, his friends think that he is unsophisticated in
some things. Also, he likes so much to talk with people he knows
well that he often says more than he realizes. They are able to
divine his activities many times when he thinks he is concealing
what he is doing.
He has a quick wit, as Will Rogers once testified. Rogers was
riding in a tri-engined Fokker piloted by Lindbergh many years
ago, over Long Beach, California. He asked Lindbergh how he
could tell the wind direction on the ground, since the wind sock at
the airport was not filled. Said Lindbergh, pointing down, "Didn't
you see that wash blowing on the line down there?"
house," the

Rogers, whose eyesight was not so keen, replied, "What would you
do if it wasn't Monday?"

A FREE MAN

365

"I wouldn't fly over such a dirty place," Lindbergh retorted
without hesitation.

Of course, in appraising Lindbergh's character, it is impossible to
separate him from flying. He found his metier early, and has never

abandoned it. It was at first his main career, and always essential to
freedom of movement; that is to say, basic to his way of life.
Most men live in a two-dimensional world; Lindbergh, even more
than most airmen, has the extra dimension of free flight. He is still an

his

extremely skillful flier. His military rating is the highest, "Command
Pilot." This means he can fly just about any kind of craft, including

supersonic jets.

He still prefers to fly small airplanes, particularly

those with open cockpits—like his old Jenny.

However, he does not recommend such planes to his older
friends. For example, a couple he knows well chartered a small
plane and hired a pilot to fly them to some Mayan ruins in Central
America. When the wife told Lindbergh about the trip, he was
horrified. He said, "You oughtn't to travel in a little plane like that.
The man has no instruments. If he had to land in the jungle, your
husband could never walk out of there." Lindbergh knows that he is
still able, at sixty-six, to walk out of almost any place. He is
unbowed by his years, has great stamina and excellent vision. If he
has ever been seriously ill, he has managed to keep it a secret from
his closest friends.

Lindbergh voted for Coolidge and Hoover and Nixon and Goldhim automatically as a Republican would
probably be wrong. He supported Coolidge and Hoover out of
positive conviction that they were superior candidates. But he voted
for Nixon and Goldwater because he didn't think either could win.
So his current politics can be summed up as being more "against"
than "for." Actually, Lindbergh liked John F. Kennedy very much as
a man, and thought him a fine President. He had, as noted, known
young Jack during the prewar years in London when Joseph P.
Kennedy was transmitting Lindbergh's warnings to the United
States. Mr. and Mrs. Lindbergh made their first public appearance
in many years to attend a White House party that the John F.
Kennedys gave for Andre Malraux, French Minister of Cultural
Affairs, in 1962. On that occasion, the Lindberghs stayed overnight
at the White House.
In politics, as in most other things, Lindbergh has been an
water, yet to stamp

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

368

outsider. This detachment, or limited involvement, marks all of his
enterprises, including his long-time association with Pan American

World Airways. In that organizations management chart, Lindbergh would appear to have a direct connection with the head, Juan
Trippe. Only in 1965 did he join the firm's board of directors.
This is about as much responsibility as he seems to want. Certainly he has never craved power.

There were times when politi-

cians seriously considered him as a possible Presidential candidate.

Lindbergh never encouraged this. He also rejected any offers of
government jobs, and has never run for public office. His most
effective political activity—America First— took place

outside the

machinery of politics.

"A number of

.

.

.

accounts [of my life and flights] have been

Lindbergh
wrote in the appendix of The Spirit of St. Louis, "some caused by
carelessness, some by ignorance, some put there by intent.
"Little is to be gained by recording here more of the erroneous
statements that have been printed about my life and activities.
Few articles touching the subject have been written which do not at
least in some degree conflict with fact and the story in The Spirit of
St. Louis. No work is infallible; desire, records, and memory combined cannot produce exactness in every instance; but sufficient
effort has been expended on the pages of this book to warrant that
in the majority of cases where there is conflict, accuracy will rest
with the account carried herein."
The detail and tone of this appendix reflect very well Lindbergh's
attitude toward the writings of others about him. The calm assurance that his work must be the most accurate is also typical of his
feeling about himself. It is of a piece with his refusal to recant or
explain or change any of his past views. He told one of his children
that his opposition to Franklin Delano Roosevelt was "a matter of
principle," that Roosevelt was out to get him on any pretext, that "if
it hadn't been America First, it would have been something else."
Undoubtedly he believes this— and he may well be correct in one
sense— but it begs the entire issue of whether he was right or not
about America First.
Some reporters have doubted that Lindbergh was really sincere
in trying to avoid publicity. They said that his secretive ways
actually attracted more attention than an attitude of cooperation

carefully written, but

most are riddled with

errors,"

.

.

.

.

.

.

A FREE MAN

367

with the press. They also resented him for the reason that many felt
they had made" Lindbergh, and that he owed them his confidence
'

in return.

Neither of these points seems valid in the light of the evidence.
Lindbergh tried to give reporters and photographers cooperation
within his own determination of privacy and necessity. They were
never satisfied; they wanted to know all his thoughts and feelings,
to invade his private life. He tried to protect the part of his life that

he deemed belonged to him alone. To "cooperate" on the terms
demanded would have meant abandoning this privacy.
As for being "made," there is no doubt that Lindbergh wanted
publicity when he made his flight to Paris and his subsequent goodwill flights. Those were all public performances for a public purpose. He refused anything that might have been considered selfaggrandizing resulting from the publicity. And the newspapers
themselves benefited a good deal from his activities. Every time he
made news, they sold more papers; this was money in their pocket,
and a larger base for selling advertising. It is an open question as to

who used whom; or who benefited more.
Besides, he earned what he got. By any realistic test, his flight was
the epic deed of a hero, one of those unique syntheses of scientific

and technical progress, joined and thrust forward by the fresh perception and personal courage of one man, that help propel the entire world into a new era. It cannot be entirely accidental that before the flight U.S. civil aviation was largely a game, and that
afterward it became an industry. History gave Lindbergh the opportunity to grasp the commercial possibilities of the new dimension of air and dramatize them to the world. Other men might
have done the same things— other men did soon afterward—but
Lindbergh was the first.
Lindbergh has always been repelled by both the positive and the
negative emotional reactions he has evoked in strangers. Their gift
of love—or hate—was not meant for him but was an offering to a
god who had achieved the impossible through magic.
To have accepted glory on these terms would have meant trading
his self-respect. Besides,

it

was embarrassing. A few years ago, a

tough military leader was introduced to Lindbergh in the Army and
Navy Club in Washington. This man said out loud that Lindbergh
was to his mind the "finest human being to walk the earth since

THE LAST HERO: CHARLES A. LINDBERGH

368

Jesus Christ/' He behaved as though he were in the presence of a
deity,

and succeeded

in

making Lindbergh thoroughly uncom-

fortable.
It was also obvious that bowing to hero worship meant embracing

harassment. There are many celebrities who spend large sums of

money to make sure they are recognized, mobbed, and badgered for
autographs. With Lindbergh it was the opposite. Since he rejected
could never understand why he had to
pay the price of accepting it, in intrusiveness.
Over the years Lindbergh has cultivated detachment from society
at the same time that he has felt even more deeply responsible for
safeguarding civilization. His basic commitment today is to "the
quality of life," a favorite and recurring phrase in his writing, as it
was in the writings of Alexis Carrel. 'The quality of life is more
important than life itself/' Carrel wrote in his posthumously published Reflections on Life.
He has grown a modern philosophy over the substructure of
this sort of exploitation, he

family devotion, patriotism, dedication to his profession.

He is

almost atavistic in his adherence to ancient virtues, values and ways

He has gone on making the contributions he deems
necessary, in the areas he selects, at times and places of his own
choosing, in spite of fog, bullets, and shifts in the consensus. It now
of living.

seems to

this

writer that Lindbergh's

many

contributions,

im-

portant as they are, are less significant than his attitude toward

on doing things his own way.
His long silences, his refusal to explain or recant, have

life, his insistence

made

Lindbergh an attractively impassive figure to ideologists and theoreticians. To biographer Kenneth Davis, he fulfilled the role of the
classic hero, elevated by his deed, denigrated by a populace disappointed by his inability to grant the boons they craved. To
Professor Daniel J. Boorstin, of the University of Chicago, Lindbergh was a convenient example of the true hero "in the best epic
mold" devalued by a cheap society into a celebrity. To another
professor, Paul Seabury, of the University of California (Berkeley),
Lindbergh appeared as an exemplar of "the politics of nostalgia":
a tremendously attractive personality without previous political
commitments, a clean slate on which the public could write its own
ticket.

Lindbergh can

also

be counted

in

the currency of popular

A FREE MAN

369

thought as an existential hero, a man with a well-developed sense of
commitment but no wish for leadership or authority. He is, in
another frame, as alienated as any hipster; detached, unassimilated,
yet dedicated and noble.
But perhaps his true appeal to our consensus-ridden society, with
its constantly eroding liberties and encroaching conformities, is his
freedom. An inner-directed man in an increasingly other-directed
world, Lindbergh

may be more heroic for us today in his anti-

heroism, doing exactly what he decides is his duty, than he was
as the doer of glamorous deeds.

We can find in his un trammeled

way of life at least a vicarious counterpoise to our own desperate
predicament. More than ever, these days, it is heroic to be oneself.

The late Henry Luce once described another thorny and controversial American, General Douglas

applicable to Lindbergh: "You

MacArthur, in words that seem

may not like him, but he meets

the test of greatness. He fills the living space around him. He can-

not be trespassed upon, or toyed with, or subtracted from. Whatever ground he stands on, it is his."

One man, formerly a bitter enemy, calls Lindbergh a saint. Some
people insist that he was, and is, a Nazi. He seems always to evoke
extreme judgments, a measure perhaps of his stature. It is a mark
of the man that he traded fame for privacy, to safeguard his family
and explore his concerns. It is a comment on society that he had to.

Sources and Acknowledgments

The best authority on Lindbergh is Lindbergh. He researches his own works
exhaustively, and is dedicated to accuracy. The bulk of material about his
early years comes from his two autobiographies,
(G. P. Putnam's Sons,

We

1927) and The Spirit of St. Louis (Charles Scribner's Sons, 1955). Both these
works are limited to the same period of his life, from birth through his Paris
flight in 1927 at age twenty-five. He has also written a brief memoir of some
wartime incidents, Of Flight and Life, published in 1948 by Scribner's. The
latter two books also give a good sampling of Lindbergh's later ideas and
prose. Lindbergh's public speeches and magazine articles are useful sources, too.
In addition, he has worked with a number of writers who were researching
subjects in which Lindbergh played some role. He has helped these people with
interviews and copies of correspondence revealing facets of his interests and
career. Such books as Seed Money by Milton Lomask, about the Guggenheim
foundations (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1964), and This High Man by Milton
Lehman, about Dr. Robert H. Goddard, are two good examples. Lindbergh's
introductions to books (for example, The Voyage to Lourdes by Alexis Carrel,
Harper & Brothers, 1950) are further clues to his concerns. Other good closeup
material of Lindbergh can be gleaned from certain newspaper and magazine
articles, in which he is not much quoted but on which he worked with the writers
because he was interested in having certain material on the record. Typical
stories are Lauren D. Lyman's exclusive report of the Lindbergh family's departure from the United States (New York Times, December 23, 1935), C. B.
Allen's "The Facts About Lindbergh" (Saturday Evening Post, December 28,
1940), and the long memoir by Colonel Truman Smith on the Berlin years
(unpublished, but available in the Sterling Library, Yale University).
There is much useful information on Lindbergh in other books and articles
which are identified throughout these source notes. But such material must be
sifted carefully, for a number of errors about Lindbergh have never been corrected, and continue to be repeated as later authors use the works of earlier
writers for source material. The reason for the perpetuation of such errors can
be laid partially to Lindbergh's refusal to cooperate with any writer not of his
own choosing who may wish to write about him; and this goes back to his
stated wish not to have a biography published while he is alive.
Mrs. Lindbergh's accounts of their trips together (North to the Orient and
Listen! the Wind, published by Harcourt, Brace in 1938 and 1940 respectively)
may be considered accurate accounts of part of her relationship with her husband. Harold Nicolson's official biography, Dwight Morrow (Harcourt, Brace,
1935), and his Letters and Diaries 1930-39 (Atheneum, 1966) also provide
good closeups of Lindbergh on several occasions.
371

372

SOURCES AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Kenneth S. Davis's The Hero: Charles A. Lindbergh and the American Dream
Doubleday & Company, 1959 ) is useful to biographers because it delineates so
many sources of material. Al Stump's article in True, "The Lone Eagle's Other
Son" (December, 1966), has some good anecdotes about the character of Jon
and of his relations with his father.
I would like to acknowledge personally the many debts of gratitude I owe to
people who know Lindbergh more or less well and were willing to talk about
him because they wish to leave a clear picture of Lindbergh on the record.
(

This means, as noted, risking his displeasure or even the loss of his confidence

and friendship; yet many, so motivated, did speak up. It is unfortunate that
because of Lindbergh's well-known dislike of publicity one is least able to thank
those who gave most generously of their time and recollection. I have simply
indicated in the following notes that material has come "from a personal interview" when the source has requested that he not be identified.
I would like to make special mention of the generosity of my friend John
Aschemeier, a collector of Lindberghiana, for the loan of his books and clippings
about the flier. Jules Loh of the Associated Press was kind enough to let me use
his feature story as a source, and to offer his sources to me. I wish to thank
Miss Dorothy Berger, who spent long hours checking and compiling these
source notes. Miss Louise Fisher typed several versions of the manuscript from
rather marked-up copy; my thanks to her.
But my deepest thanks go to Miss Genevieve Young, of Harper & Row. It
was Miss Young who first suggested this book, and it was she who did a most
careful and complete job of editing an early version. Her searching questions
resulted in a rewritten, expanded book. I am forever in her debt for her interest,
her enthusiasm and her dedication to this project.

Notes

The Last Hero

(introduction)

PAGE
time of marvelous stunts: John Lardner, "The Lindbergh Legends," in
Isabel Leighton, ed. (N.Y.: Simon and
Schuster, 1949), p. 190.

xiii

The Aspirin Age: 1919-1941,

chapter 1.

Lindbergh Today

The description of Lindbergh's current way of life is derived from a series
of interviews with various of his friends and acquaintances, as well as from
a feature article written by Associated Press correspondent Jules Loh, "Lindy,
Yesterday's Famous Hero, Is Today's Quiet Pioneer," which appeared in The
State Journal of Lansing, Michigan, on May 20, 1962.

4

Report on wedding of Lindbergh's daughter: New York Times and New
York Herald Tribune, December 27, 1963.
I got lost: from a personal interview.
5
you'd better marry him: from a personal interview.
5
5
Information about SST and Falcon airplane from Pan American World

4

Airways.
Lindbergh's visit to Nairobi: reported in East Africa Standard, February 20, 1964.
6
For the first time: Charles A. Lindbergh, "Is Civilization Progress?,"
Readers Digest, July 1964, p. 70.
Life itself is more important: Ibid., p. 74.
6

5-6

6
6-7

Is civilization progress: Ibid.

Information on Lindbergh's early career

biographies,

7

may be found in his auto-

We and The Spirit of St. Louis.

Information on Lindbergh's recent Air Force career:

U.S. Air Force

records.

7

Selection of Yale as repository for Lindbergh's papers: from a personal
interview.

7-8
Help given by Lindbergh to author of biography of Dr. C. H. Land:
from a telephone interview with the author.

chapter 2.
10

Origins

When this Swedish peasant-gentleman: Lynn and Dora B. Haines, The
Lindberghs (N.Y.: Vanguard Press, 1931), p. 4. This book is about C. A.
373

NOTES

374

Lindbergh and his parents, with some references to Charles A. Lindbergh, Jr.
Lynn Haines was a friend of C. A. Lindbergh's. This book is shaky on some
facts, but has useful anecdotes and letters, provides insights into the character
of Lindbergh's father and a good deal of background information on the
family.

Reverend Harrison quotes: Dale Van Every and Morris De Haven
Tracy, Charles Lindbergh: His Life (N.Y.: D. Appleton, 1927), pp. 14-15.
13
a fair-sized building: Haines, op. cit., p. 32.
I do not think we should wait longer: Ibid.
13
When it came time: Ibid., p. 33.
13
Conversation between teacher and C. A. Lindbergh: Ibid., p. 36.
13
14
Ignatius Donnelly quote: Ibid., p. 49.
He discovered and He could: Ibid., p. 59.
15

11

15
15

His colleagues: Ibid., p. 60.
could never: Walter Eli Quigley, "Like Father, Like Son," Saturday
Evening Post, June 21, 1941. Quigley was C. A. Lindbergh's law partner, and
in this personal memoir of his relationship with the two Lindberghs he draws
some obvious parallels between the politics of father and son and gives an
inside account of the stormier portions of Congressman Lindbergh's career.
you have a head: Haines, op. cit., p. 70.
Now
15
Children manage: Walter Eli Quigley, op. cit., p. 42.
16
16
I'm sorry you're having this trouble: Haines, op. cit., pp. 78-79.
Haven't you: Ibid., p. 76.
17
You may regret it: Ibid., p. 81.
18
18
See if you can: Ibid., p. 95.
18-19
some of [his] views: Ibid., p. 101.
all trade: Ibid., p. 102.
19
Labor gives and The day: Ibid., p. 103.
19
19-20
Excerpt from C. A. Lindbergh speech against Aldrich-Vreeland Bill:
.

.

.

Ibid., p. 176.

whether there are not: Ibid., p. 181.
20
20-21
Duluth editor quote: Ibid., p. 141.
Old Guard politician quote: Ibid., p. 257.
21
21
To a greater extent: C. A. Lindbergh, Your Country at War and What
Happens to You After a War (Philadelphia: Dorrance & Company, 1934),
p. 15. This book, published in 1917 and suppressed in 1918, was republished
in 1934 with an introduction by Walter Eli Quigley. It delineates C. A.
Lindbergh's central wartime ideology.
Trespass upon our rights: Ibid., p. 16.
21
In my judgment: Quigley, op. cit., p. 39.
23
the good Sisters Haines, op. cit., p. 293.
23
24
We must not: Ibid., p. 283.
24
The 1918 campaign: Haines, op. cit., p. 279.
punished by the press: Quigley, Preface to C. A. Lindbergh, op. cit,
24
:

P
25
25
25
25

26

.

ii.

honest, progressive: Haines, op. cit., pp. 211-212.

Replying: Haines, op. cit., p. 287.
I was sworn in: Ibid., pp. 287-288.
I

am not blaming: Ibid., p. 286.

I will be here: Ibid., p. 297.

NOTES

375

chapter 3.

Boyhood

28

curve upward: Charles A. Lindbergh,
Charles Scribner's Sons, 1955), p. 333.
28
As a child: Ibid., p. 339.
29
You mustn't watch: Ibid., p. 373.
29
Father will: Ibid.
29
hours on end: Ibid., p. 374.

The Spirit of St. Louis (N.Y.:

30
It's even hotter: Ibid., p. 308.
30
Through the years: Ibid., p. 309.
For me: Ibid., p. 311.
30
32
There he is: Ibid., pp. 316-317.
32
c. h. land, dentist: Ibid., p. 317.
There's the stuffed: Ibid.
32
My grandfather: Ibid., p. 318.
33
hum in my ears: Ibid.
33
These problems: Ibid., p. 320.
33
34
Once he was riding: Ibid., pp. 320-321.
34
The trouble: Haines, op. cit., p. 261.
I'm sorry: Ibid., p. 72.
35
Father thought: Lindbergh, op. cit, p. 377.
35
36
Age seemed: Ibid.
36
You can't: Haines, op. cit., p. 209.
36
That trip: Ibid., pp. 147-148.
The trouble: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 392.
37
That's enough: Haines, op. cit., p. 299.
37
I seem: Ibid., p. 87.
37
38
C. A. Lindbergh: Ibid., p. 86.
danger was a part of life: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 245.
39
40
How wonderful: Ibid., p. 244.
40
Flying upriver: Ibid., p. 245.
41-42
Anecdote about Lindbergh's motorcycle: from a personal interview.
43
I would work hard: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 403.
43
Flying is too: Kenneth S. Davis, The Hero: Charles A. Lindbergh and
the American Dream (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Company, 1959),
p. 92. This book is the only attempt at a modern, complete biography of
Lindbergh. Davis did a tremendous amount of research; his bibliographical
essay at the end of the book detailing his sources runs to more than 40,000
words (slightly longer than Lindbergh's early autobiography We). Davis's
book is unfortunately marred in many places by the author's unwillingness

him to
draw palpably false conclusions. The effect is a Procrustean one, and this is
unfortunate because the writer went to so much trouble to get facts.

to let his facts speak for themselves; his anti-Lindbergh bias causes

44

All right: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 231.

chapter 4.
45

Early Flight

Information about the state of aviation in the U.S. in 1922: Lloyd W.
Morris and Kendall Smith, Ceiling Unlimited (N.Y.: Macmillan, 1953),
chaps. 2-4.

NOTES

376

Lindbergh, The Spirit of St. Louis, p. 247.
Information about Hispano-Suiza, Nebraska Aircraft Corp., and Lincoln
Standard: Ibid., pp. 550, 554.
47
You had to know: Ibid., p. 251.

45
46

I can still:

47
47
47
48
49
49
50
50
51

A novice: Ibid., p. 250.
I lose all: Ibid., p. 249.
seen the earth: Ibid., p. 250.
but watch: Ibid., p. 254.
a feeling of anticipation: Ibid., p. 255.
I'd like: Ibid., p. 256.
I might want to buy: Ibid.
It isn't more dangerous: Ibid.
Slim, that was: Ibid., p. 260.
How soundly: Ibid.
Strangely enough: Ibid., p. 261.
Don't count: Ibid., p. 263.
In flying: Ibid., p. 262.
The day I stood: Ibid., p. 265.
Information about Jenny: Ibid., p. 554.
Let's push: Ibid., p. 437.
But my engine: Ibid., p. 441.
Then I rolled up: Ibid.
blood washed from his face: Davis, op. cit., p. 101.
That was the summer; Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 449.
airplane crashes near savage: Lindbergh, We, p. 72.

51
51
52
52

52
53
54
55
55
56
56
58

chapter 5.

Army

59
59
60
60

Information about DH's: Lindbergh, The Spirit of

61
61

Don't fly: Ibid., p. 279.
Information about Canuck: Ibid., p. 550.

62
63
64
65
65
66

It was quite: Ibid., p. 410.

St.

Louis, p. 552.

They train: Ibid., p. 407.
I heard: Ibid., p.

274.

Where did: Ibid.

After all: Ibid., p. 412.

Photography: Ibid., p. 420.
Their wings: Ibid., p. 421.
He will: Quigley, "Like Father, Like Son," p. 42.
I saw no other ship: Charles A. Lindbergh, We (N.Y.: G. P. Putnam's
Sons, 1927), pp. 144-145.
Then it happened: Lindbergh, The Spirit of St. Louis, pp. 214-215.
67
Every few seconds: Ibid., p. 215.
67

chapter 6.

Air mail

an accepted: Lindbergh, The Spirit of St. Louis, p. 281.
69
69-70
Information about early air-mail business: Morris and Smith, Ceiling Unlimited, pp. 242-253.

70
71

The ground was right there: Lindbergh, The Spirit of St. Louis, p. 301.
braced for: Ibid., pp. 307-308.

NOTES

377

71

I've never chosen: Ibid., pp. 268-269.

72
73
73
76
77

There was never: Kenneth S. Davis, The Hero, p. 128.

By that time: Lindbergh, The Spirit of St. Louis, p. 283.
Our contract: Ibid., p. 284.
There's

.

.

.

nothing: Ibid., p. 11.

Judging from the accounts: Ibid., p. 14.

chapter 7.

The Spirit of St. Louis

Information about background of Atlantic flights: Morris and Smith,
Ceiling Unlimited, pp. 230-233; also F. Alexander Magaun and Eric Hodgins,
A History of Aircraft (N.Y.: McGraw-Hill, 1931), pp. 397-401.
Why shouldn't I: Lindbergh, The Spirit of St. Louis, p. 15.
78

78-80

Who am I: Ibid., p. 17.

80
81

St. Louis: Ibid., p. 24.

82
83
83
84
84
86
86
87
87
87
87
88
88
88
88
89
90
91
91

I

can furnish: Ibid., p. 25.

as though:

Roy Alexander, speech at Lotos Club, May 16, 1967.

I said: Ibid.

We have: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 34.
We didn't: from a personal interview with Ken Boedecker.
Slim, you've: Lindbergh, op. cit., pp. 66-67.
please state: Ibid., p. 69.

willing to make: Ibid., p. 71.
What would: Ibid., p. 74.

We will sell: Ibid., p. 75.
dumfounded: Ibid.

Good morning: Ibid., p. 76.
Will you guarantee: Ibid., p. 82.

The risks: Ibid.
You don't: Ibid., p. 83.
One boy's a boy: Ibid., pp. 191-192.

What freedom: Ibid., p. 94.
Safety: Ibid., p. 97.
If I get to Paris: Jules

Loh, "Lindy, Yesterday's Famous Hero,

Is

To-

day's Quiet Pioneer."

92
93
93
94
94
96
96

I don't swim:

from a personal interview.

What started: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 113.
One makes errors: Ibid.
near collision and narrowly escaped disaster: Ibid., p. 123.

My God! Ibid., p. 119
Stop mail: leave address: Ibid., pp. 108-110.
It looks: Ibid., p. 135.

chapter 8.

New York-Paris

I've got: Harry A. Bruno, Wings Over America: The Story of American
Aviation (Garden City, N.Y.: McBride, 1944), p. 172. Bruno's book is a
history of flying that has some good personal material on Lindbergh. Most
of the anecdotes originated with Bruno's partner, the late Dick Blythe, who
was Lindbergh's personal press representative.
They're your buffers: Ibid., p. 173.
99

98

NOTES

378

99
we bedded: Ibid.
100
a flattened: from a personal interview.
100
Do you carry: Lindbergh, The Spirit of St. Louis, p. 155.
These fellows must think: Ibid., p. 166.
100
Bruno, why: from a personal interview.
100
101
Good-bye, Charles: Bruno, op. cit., p. 178.
101
Neither from a personal interview.
102
Accuracy: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 166.
102
taken the show: Ibid., p. 159.
102
The attention: Ibid., p. 165.
102
Lindbergh gave the St. Louis: Meyer Berger, The Story of the New
York Times ( N.Y. Simon and Schuster, 1951 ) p. 291.
Up to date: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 165.
103
103
He knew: Bruno, op. cit., pp. 176-177
103
The way: Lindbergh, op. cit., pp. 165-166.
104
That'll teach: Bruno, op. cit, 173.
104
IVe always had an ambition: Harry A. Bruno, with William S. Dutton,
"Lindbergh, The Famous Unknown," Saturday Evening Post, October 21,
1933, p. 23. Bruno also used some of the material in his book in three
magazine articles in the Saturday Evening Post in 1933. Since Bruno wrote
his book at a time when Lindbergh was being strongly criticized, and since
Bruno was quite critical of Lindbergh's politics and behavior, the many good
words he has to say for the young Lindbergh gain luster.
There's Lindbergh: Bruno, Wings Over America, p. 174.
104
very little room: Milton Lomask, Seed Money (N.Y.: Farrar, Straus and
105
:

,

Giroux, 1964), p. 92. This

is

the story of the

Guggenheim families' com-

plicated philanthropies; it has important sections on Lindbergh's relationship

with Dr. Goddard, background on Goddard, and some data on Lindbergh's
48-state tour.

105
106
106

when you're ready: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 169.
I'll

take: Ibid., p. 173.

Background on Levine-Chamberlin and Byrd: New York Times, June
7, 1927, and July 1, 1927.
Slim: Lindbergh, op. cit, p. 175.
107
Are you going: Lauren D. Lyman, "Lindbergh's Flight—A Takeoff for
107
Aviation," Aerospace, May 1967, p. 5.

108
109
109
110
110
113
113
114
115
116
116
117
118

We knew: C. B. Allen, speech at Lotos Club, May 16, 1967.
If it was fifty: from a personal interview.
It's less a decision:

Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 185.

Do you want: from a personal interview.
By God: Bruno, Wings Over America, p. 182.
To the pilot: Lindbergh, op. cit, p. 289.
They enmesh intruders: Ibid., p. 330.
Every cell: Ibid., p. 180.
But the alternatives: Ibid., p. 423.
If security: Ibid., p. 433.

which way: Ibid., p. 459.
Before I made: Ibid., pp. 466-467.
like a living creature: Ibid., p. 48ft

NOTES

379

chapter 9.
120
121
121
121
122
122
123
124
124
124

Paris and Return

Joe Humphreys: Lardner, "The Lindbergh Legends," p. 200.
Cars, trucks: from a personal interview.
When I circled: Lindbergh, The Spirit of St. Louis, p. 495.

When the Times bought: Berger, op. cit., pp. 293-301.
Are there: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 495.
It seemed wisest: Ibid., p. 496.
long avenue: Ibid., p. 500.

Come on in, Mac: MacDonald, op. cit., p. 108.

We intended to isolate: Berger, op. cit., p. 304.
MacDonald's encounter with Lindbergh, quotes are from: MacDonald,

op. cit., p. 108.

A thousand: New York Times, May 12, 1927.
124
125
enough to have: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 548.
125
What about you: New York Times, May 22, 1927.
125
under Uncle Sam's roof: Davis, The Hero, p. 212.
125
So I did: from a personal interview.
125-126
If I had believed that: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 548.
126
Vive Lindbergh: Davis, op. cit., p. 214.
126
I suddenly: Lindbergh, We, pp. 238-239.
127
aeronautical we': Ibid., p. 302.
127
This young man: Ibid., p. 241.
129
I'm going to keep on flying: from a personal interview.
130-131
Not so bad: Bruno, Wings Over America, pp. 182-183, and "Lindbergh, The Famous Unknown," p. 40.

132
What do you think: Bruno, "Lindbergh, The Famous Unknown," p. 40.
132
He returned: Bruno, Wings Over America, p. 183.
132-133
Those closest: Lindbergh, We, p. 272.
133
The same story: Ibid., pp. 274-278.
133
Just as when: Ibid., p. 285.
135
if you have: Ibid., p. 301.
eighty of: Ibid., p. 309.
136
Hello, flier: Bruno, "Lindbergh, The Famous Unknown," p. 40.
137
The visit: Davis, The Hero, p. 234.
138

chapter 10.

"We"

Harry, almost everyone: Lomask, Seed Money, p. 93.
I heartily approve: Berger, op. cit., p. 305.
after the flight: Lauren D. Lyman, "How Lindbergh Wrote a Book,"
The Bee-Hive, published by United Aircraft, Summer, 1954, p. 18.
140
reinforced with secretaries: George Palmer Putnam, Wide Margins: A
Publishers Autobiography (N.Y.: Harcourt, Brace, 1942), p. 233.
140
a good job: Ibid., p. 234.

139
140
140

140-141
no and found no fault: Ibid.
141
For one thing: Lomask, op. cit., p. 93.
Irate customers: Putnam, op. cit., p. 235.
141
141
At that juncture: Ibid., p. 234.
141
at least 40,000 Ibid., p. 235.

NOTES

380
I didn't know:

Lomask, op. cit., p. 93.
one could almost: Putnam, op. cit., p. 235.
Being young: Lindbergh, The Spirit of St. Louis, p. 547.
If the manuscript: Putnam, op. cit., p. 236.
Sign it: Lomask, op. cit., p. 94.
In one week: Bruno, Wings Over America, p. 185.
143
143
In my presence: Harry A. Bruno with William S. Dutton, "Fortunes In
Flight," Saturday Evening Post, March 11, 1933, p. 59.
143
a home in Flushing Meadows: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 527.
144
Well, under his contract: Bruno, Wings Over America, pp. 185-186.
144
You're the symbol: from a personal interview.
141
141
142
142
142

chapter 11.

Celebration

For years the American people: Frederick Lewis Allen, Only Yesterday
(N.Y.: Harper & Row, Perennial Library Edition, 1964), p. 183.
148
Ordinarily our job: Bruno, Wings Over America, p. 185.
147

148
he'd have looked: Ibid., p. 187.
148
The most popular: Ibid., p. 188.
149
It blinds you: Lauren D. Lyman, "The Lindbergh I Know," Saturday
Evening Post, April 4, 1953. A good personal look at Lindbergh is taken in
article by Lyman, a longtime friend. It was the introduction to the
Saturday Evening Post's serialization of Lindbergh's The Spirit of St. Louis
(serialized as "33 Hours to Paris") in 1953. Lyman's article contains many
vignettes and insights into Lindbergh's character and career.
this

chapter 12.

Forty -Eight-State Tour

We'll save time: Donald E. Keyhoe, Flying With Lindbergh (N.Y.:
150
G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1928), p. 6. Keyhoe's book is cloyingly adulatory. At
the same time, Keyhoe's reporting is generally consistent with known facts.
The book details the 48-state tour which Keyhoe and Phil Love made with
Lindbergh.
151
We must remember: Ibid, pp, 11-12.
151
I hope you: Lomask, Seed Money, p. 95.
152
Don't tell: Keyhoe, op. cit., p. 14.
152
Is it true: Ibid., pp. 17-18.
You don't: Ibid., p. 19.
153
153
lightning: Ibid., p. 20.
153
We ought to: Ibid., p. 22.
153
Colonel Lindbergh had the following luncheon: Ibid. t p. 28.
154
Do you know: Ibid., pp. 32-33.
154
You're going ahead: Ibid., p. 46.
Parachutes should not: Ibid., p. 147.
155
155
Where's Slim: Ibid., p. 54.
155
I could have landed: Ibid., p. 55.
156
It's the best: Ibid., p. 64.
156
Let them go ahead: Ibid., p. 193.
157
Slim: Ibid., pp. 103-104.
157
all these men: Professor William A. Williams, letter.
157-158
So, my mother: Ibid.

NOTES
159
159
159
160

381

in excellent health: Lomask, Seed Money, p. 95.
Aboard 'Spirit of St. Louis': Ibid., p. 239.

will you: Ibid., p. 297.
Information about cost of trip, and results:

chapter 13.

Lomask, op. cit., pp. 94-96.

Mexico

admired baseball players: from a personal interview.
I know what I can do: Harold Nicolson, Dwight Morrow (N.Y.: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1935), p. 299. Nicolson's biography of Dwight
Morrow is a full-length picture of an interesting man. It has some fine bits
about Anne Lindbergh and her husband.
After returning from Europe: Ibid., p. 311.
162
162
You get me the invitation: Ibid., p. 312.
162-163
How's Dick?: Bruno, Wings Over America, p. 184.
Information about Congressional Medal of Honor: New York Times,
163
161
162

I've always

December 10-13, 1927.
hummocky: Davis, The Hero, p. 257.

164
164
165
166
166
166
167
167

There were numerous railroads: Nicolson, op. cit., p. 312.
Dwight and Capt. Winslow: Ibid., p. 313.
It is just: Davis, op. cit., pp. 260-261.
closer spiritual: Ibid., p. 260.
I don't see why: Keyhoe, Flying with Lindbergh, p. 123.
Three short flights: Lindbergh, The Spirit of St. Louis, p. 512.
no more unless he crashes: Lardner, "The Lindbergh Legends," p.

201.

168
168

The New York-Paris flight: Keyhoe, op. cit, pp. 289-290.
The first time: Harold Nicolson, Diaries and Letters 1930-1939 (Lon-

don: Collins, 1966), Nigel Nicolson, ed., p. 182. This book, published in the
United States by Atheneum in 1966, gives some closeup looks at the Lindberghs through the eyes of a trained observer. Nicolson was present during
some of the most tense moments in their lives, and also was their landlord in
England. He was also present at several of Lindbergh's conversations with
high British officials concerning war and defense.
168
At Boiling Field: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 516.
169
Information about Ryan: Ryan Aeronautical Company.

chapter 14.
170

A New Life

Information about Kelly bill: Morris and Smith, Ceiling Unlimited, p.

251.

170
ill-advised: Lomask, Seed Money, p. 96.
171
top close to the Panama Canal: Morris and Smith, op. cit., p. 268.
171-172
Information about Pan American: Ibid., pp. 286 et. seq.
173
The moment Keys: Bruno, Wings Over America, p. 251.
174
Ambassador and Mrs. Davis, The Hero, pp. 275-276.
174-175
Well, I see: Ibid., p. 276.
175
Landing on one wheel: Lindbergh, The Spirit of St. Louis, p. 116.
177
Information about merger between TAT and Western Air Express and
information about Walter F. Brown: Morris and Smith, op. cit., p. 284.
177-178
Information about Pan Am: Ibid., pp. 286 et. seq.
:

NOTES

382

178
179
179

forty-four multi-engined: Ibid., p. 287.
It's all right:

Nicolson, Diaries and Letters, p. 184.

I have had the most horrible nightmare: Nicolson, Dwight Morrow, p.

124.

180

What in substance: Ibid., p. 291.
chapter 15.

To the Orient

182
Information about Sirius: Lockheed Aircraft.
183
Of course: Anne Lindbergh, pp. 29-35. Anne Morrow Lindbergh,
North to the Orient (N.Y.: Harcourt, Brace, 1938), p. 20. Three of Anne
Morrow Lindbergh's books are especially revealing. This account of the 1931
flight, as well as Listen! the Wind, a report of ten days in the 1933 flight, gives
a good picture of her relationship with her husband during the flights.
185
Think what that: Ibid., p. 28.
185
Or shoes: Ibid., pp. 28-29.
186
Don't look so: Ibid., p. 45.
186-187
I like to feel that in flying: Ibid., p. 62.
187
Is aviation too arrogant: Lindbergh, The Spirit of St. Louis, p. 288.
189
Here we are: Anne Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 153.
189
Like a knife: Ibid., p. 155.
189
The wind flattened: Ibid., p. 156.
189
Really, it was: Ibid., p. 157.
190
What's the matter: Ibid., pp. 158-159.
191
Yes-a thirty-eight: Ibid., pp. 216-217.
193
Northwest's use of Great Circle Route surveyed by Lindbergh: Northwest-Orient Airlines.

chapter 16.
194
194
197

Deaths in the Family

Breakfast was for a long time: Nicolson, Dwight Morrow, p. 160.

Who do you like best: Ibid., pp. 162-163.

Dear Sir: George Waller, Kidnap (N.Y.: Dial Press, 1961), Giant
Cardinal Edition, pp. 14-15. This book, based on newspaper stories and the
transcript of the trial of Bruno Hauptmann, is a useful source for that episode
in Lindbergh's life. There are several other books on the subject, but Waller's
seems the most complete and dispassionate. The New York Times carried
verbatim transcripts of most of the testimony in the Hauptmann trial starting
with the Friday, March 5, 1935, issue.

197
197
199
199

Indication: Ibid., p. 15.

Colonel Lindbergh's baby: Berger, op. cit., pp. 384-388.
immediate use: Waller, Kidnap, p. 19.

A half cup: Ibid., p. 27.

Mrs. Lindbergh and I: Ibid., pp. 27-28.
200
money is ready: Ibid., p. 36.
203
Dear Sir: Mr. Condon: Ibid., p. 38.
203
203-204
Money: Ibid., p. 43.
204
Yes: Ibid., p. 83.
205
Bergen: Ibid., p. 84.
205
I guess: Ibid., p. 85.
your work: Ibid., p. 88.
206

NOTES
206
207
207
208
210

383

Well: Ibid.

Take that off: Ibid., p. 123.
distorted mind: Ibid., p. 134.

Mrs. Lindbergh and I: Ibid., p. 186.

To provide for: Ibid., p. 223.
chapter 17.

The Hauptmann Case

The North Atlantic: Charles A. Lindbergh, Introduction to Listen! the
Wind by Anne Morrow Lindbergh (N.Y.: Harcourt, Brace & Company,

211

1938), Dell edition, p. 7.

212
It was necessary: Ibid., p. 9.
212
I believe that: Lindbergh, report to Juan Trippe.
214
shy, Japanese, clever: Nicolson, Diaries ana Letters, p. 180.
If he wags his tail: Ibid., p. 181.
215
215
Well, I have: Ibid., p. 184.
215
Obviously he was telling: Ibid.
215
Courage?: Ibid., p. 190.
216-217
Was he healthy?: Waller, Kidnap, pp. 331-345.
220
Do you believe: Nicolson, op. cit., p. 196.
220
Hauptmann: Ibid.
221
One could hear: Ibid., p. 197.
221
The sentence: Waller, op. cit., p. 570.
221
the charge: Ibid., pp. 575-576.
223
we Americans: Roger Butterfield, "Lindbergh: A Stubborn Young Man
of Strange Ideas Becomes a Leader of Wartime Opposition," Life Magazine,
August 11, 1941, p. 65.
224
I've got something: Berger, op. cit., pp. 414-419.
225
The Times had put over: Ibid., p. 291.
225
tolerable home: Waller, op. cit., pp. 600-601.
226
he would have: Ibid., p. 601.
226
it was impossible: New York Journal American, August 24, 1941.
227
But you'll only have to: from a personal interview.
228
the defendants: New York Times, January 18, 1967, p. 1.

chapter 18.

Dr. Carrel

there are no words: Joseph T. Durkin, S. J., Hope for Our Time: Alexis
Carrel on Man and Society (N.Y.: Harper & Row, 1965), p. xxiii. This study
by Father Durkin of Alexis Carrel's social ideas is a scholarly book. Carrel's
works, particularly Man, the Unknown and The Voyage to Lourdes, furnish
source material to the student of his ideas.
230
Information about Rockefeller Institute: Encyclopaedia Britannica,
1958 edition, Vol. 19, p. 366.
230-231
both spoke: Davis, The Hero, p. 343.
231
For me that began: Charles A. Lindbergh, Preface to The Voyage to
Lourdes by Alexis Carrel (N.Y.: Harper & Brothers, 1950), p. vi. Lindbergh
has written prefaces to several works, giving indication of his interests and
commitments. His preface to The Voyage to Lourdes is pertinent for this
reason as well as for what he writes.
232
direct, sensitive: Dr. Richard J. Bing, letter.

229

NOTES

384

232
233
233
233
233
234

a bucket of water: Ibid.

removed from: Davis, op. cit., p. 347.
You've got to understand: from a personal interview.
a step in the right direction: from a personal interview.
The newspapers from a personal interview.
The composition of all gas: Alexis Carrel and Charles A. Lindbergh,
The Culture of Organs ( N. Y. Hoeber, 1938 ) p. 17.
235
The career: Durkin, op. cit., p. xi.
235-236
Carrel's earlier: from a personal interview.
236
The author: Alexis Carrel, Man, the Unknown (N.Y.: Harper &
:

:

,

Brothers, 1935), pp. 213-214.

237
237

He had some notion from a personal interview.
we ought to: Alexis Carrel, Reflections on Life
:

(N.Y.:
Books, 1953), pp. 15-17.
how his theories Durkin, op. cit., p. xvi.
238
The human being: Carrel, Reflections on Life, p. 105.
238
238
Each human being: Durkin, op. cit., p. 13.
239
oblivious to the real: Durkin, op. cit., p. xvi.
239
Still more than Marxism: Ibid., p. 133.

Hawthorn

:

240
Any foolish talk: Ibid., p. 149.
Lindbergh was obviously: from a personal interview.
240
240-241
Some cases of: Durkin, op. cit., p. 115.
241
Carrel was a man: Lindbergh, Preface to The Voyage to Lourdes, p.
vii.

241

Carrel spoke: Ibid.

chapter 19.

Dr. Goddard

Flying cross country: Lomask, Seed Money, p. 141.
I realized the limits: Milton Lehman, This High Man (N.Y.: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, 1963), p. 160. This biography of Dr. Robert H. Goddard
has facts about Lindbergh's relationship with the inventor. Since Lindbergh
gave materials to both Lehman and Lomask ( Seed Money ) these books offer
some useful information about Lindbergh.
Couldn't we develop: Lomask, op. cit., p. 142.
243
243
to equal the thrust: Ibid.
244
Carol, Harry's second wife: Ibid.

243
243

,

244
244
245
246
247
248
251
251
251
252
252
252

Moon Rocket and by 238,799^ miles: Ibid., p. 140.
May be the answer: Ibid.
Of course, Bob: Lehman, op. cit., p. 159.
that more than: Ibid., p. 162.
Mr. Dan: 'then: Lomask, op. cit., p. 145.
was as mortified: Lehman, op. cit., p. 211.
the next war: Lomask, op. cit., p. 148.
like trying to: Ibid.
I want you to: Ibid., p. 149.
Every liquid-fuel: Lehman, op. cit., p. 363.
practically every one: Lomask, op. cit., p. 146.

This is a story: Charles A. Lindbergh, Preface to Lehman, op.

xiv.

253

Am I a man: Ibid., p.

xiii.

cit.,

p.

NOTES

385

chapter 20.

The Air Mail Controversy

immense salaries: Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr;, The Coming of the New
255
Deal (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1958), p. 449.
If we were holding this meeting: Ibid., p. 450.
255
The control of American aviation: Ibid., pp. 450-451.
255
256
your action: Davis, The Hero, pp. 333-334, and Schlesinger, op. cit.,
p. 452.

257
Now Colonel Lindbergh: Schlesinger, op. cit., p. 452.
hurt: Ibid., p. 453.
257
257
I am certain: Davis, op. cit., p. 334.
257
in an undignified: Ibid.
legalized murder: Schlesinger, op. cit., p. 452.
258
258
The continuation of deaths Ibid., p. 453
Colonel Billy Mitchell remarks: Ibid., pp. 454-455.
258
258-259
i believe: Davis, op. cit., p. 336.
259
Whenever his face: Schlesinger, op. cit., p. 453.
259
Very little: Davis, op. cit, p. 337.
259
If an officer: Ibid., p. 338.
:

chapter 21.

England, France, Germany

All quotes in this chapter, unless otherwise specified, are taken from an unpublished memoir by Colonel Truman Smith, U.S.A. (Ret.) written between 1954 and 1956. It is called "Air Intelligence Activities Office of the
Military Attache American Embassy, Berlin, Germany, August 1935 April
1939 with special reference to the Services of Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh,
Air Corps (Res.)." There are typed copies of this manuscript in the Yale
University Sterling Library and a couple of government institutions. In the
introduction to this manuscript Smith wrote, "If I have a primary purpose
in preparing this record, it is that I wish to leave an accurate account for
history of the services of Colonel Lindbergh to American interests in connection with the birth and development of the Luftwaffe. It is my sincere hope
that Lindbergh's future biographers read this record and evaluate its facts
before they attempt to describe or comment on his activities in Germany and
America between 1936 and 1941." The document gains validity because
Lindbergh helped Smith in its preparation by lending him his diaries and
logs of the period.
Lindbergh's letter to Ambassador Kennedy is worth reading because it
265
embodies the judgments and concerns which informed Lindbergh's later
isolationist politics. It cannot be reprinted without Lindbergh's permission,
but it can be read in the unpublished Smith memoir, which is in the manuscript collection of the Sterling Library at Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.

267
267
271
272

Which is the best plane: from a personal interview.
You mean to say: from a personal interview.
possess [ed] the most powerful: Nicolson, Letters
I said to Charles : Davis, The Hero, p. 503.

and Diaries, p. 272.

NOTES
chapter 22.

Air Power

Again, all quotes in this chapter are taken from Smith, "Air Intelligence,"
unless otherwise specified.
276-277
is ten times superior: Nicolson, Letters and Diaries, p. 343.
282
It would be entirely contrary: from a personal interview.
282
an adventurer, pure and simple: Nicolson, op. cit., p. 302.

chapter 23.

Speaking Out

All quotes in this chapter are taken from Smith, "Air Intelligence."

chapter 24.

America First

extended active duty: C. B. Allen, "The Facts About Lindbergh,"
Saturday Evening Post, December 28, 1940, p. 51.
291-292
Colonel, I am going on vacation: Butterfield, "Lindbergh: A Stubborn Young Man of Strange Ideas Becomes a Leader of Wartime Opposition,"

290

p. 68.

292

Information about Neutrality Act.

edition, Vol. 16, p. 261.
292
Woodring was sure:

Encyclopaedia Britannica,

Harold L. Ickes, The Secret Diary of
Ickes, Vol. Ill, 1939-1941 (N.Y.: Simon & Schuster, 1954), p. 11.

1958

Harold L.

get Lindbergh: from a personal interview.
293
294
The only interest: Robert E. Sherwood, Roosevelt and Hopkins (N.Y.:
Harper & Brothers, 1948), p. 124.
In those two: Ibid.
294
294
risked political suicide: Ibid., p. 125.
294
I hope the United States: Ibid.
296
I speak tonight: The Radio Addresses of Col. Charles A. Lindbergh
(Lake Geneva, Wisconsin: Scribner's Commentator, 1940), pp. 2, 3.
296
this was a fight: Sherwood, op. cit., p. 201.
296
We must learn: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 4.
297
undoubtedly Roosevelt's: Sherwood, op. cit., p. 153.
297
we must draw: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 5.
297
to draw this hemisphere: Ibid., p. 6.
297
Our bond with Europe: Ibid., p. 7.
297-298
Four points of policy: Ibid., p. 8.
298
But the cost: Ibid., p. 10.
298
regardless of which side: Ibid., p. 11.
298
when in his discretion: Ibid., p. 228.
Suppose my neighbor's home: Sherwood, op. cit., p. 225.
299
299
payment or repayment: Ibid., p. 228.
299
the arsenal and A nation: Ibid., p. 226.
300
ploughing under: Ibid., p. 229.
I want neither: Davis, The Hero, p. 398.
300
What an avalanche: Sherwood, op. cit., p. 166.
300
Personally: Davis, op. cit., p. 398.
300
It was almost with ferocity: Lardner in The Aspirin Age, p. 192.
301
as cynical: Wayne S. Cole, America First: The Battle Against Inter301
vention 1940—1941 (Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press,

NOTES

387

1953), pp. 142-143. Strangely, there is little published material aside from
stories on America First or on Lindbergh's pre-America-First
isolationism. The best source for the student are the America First papers in
the Hoover Library on War, Revolution and Peace at Stanford University,
California. Dr. Wayne S. Cole has written a solid book based on this

newspaper

material.

301
301
301

ignorant: Ibid., p. 476.

Sherwood's and Ickes' statements: Ibid., pp. 142-143.

A day or two: Walter Lippmann, New York Herald Tribune, April 22,

1941.

302
302
302
301

Knight of the: New York Sun, July 18, 1941.

Up to that time: Ickes, op. cit., p. 58.
For many months: New York Sun, July 18, 1941.

All popular doubts: Thurman Arnold, "In a Democratic Society
Dissent Is Not Sacred," National Observer, May 15, 1967, p. 12.
302
Mr. President: New York Sun, July 18, 1941.
302
a whining one: Ickes, op. cit., p. 581.
302-303
in preaching: Ibid.
303
slipped badly: Ibid.
303
There is a saying: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 12.
mortgaging the lives: Ibid., p. 13.
303
303
an organized minority: Ibid., p. 15.
303
so-called democratic nations: Ibid., p. 17.
303-304
the
military strength: Ibid.
The wave of the future is coming: Anne Morrow Lindbergh, The Wave
304
of the Future (N.Y.: Harcourt, Brace & Company, 1940), p. 37. This book is
expository of Mrs. Lindbergh's political thinking and, perhaps, of her
husband's.
.

304
304
305
305
305
305

.

.

We have waked: Ibid., p. 40.

There is a proverb: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 17.
America simply cannot: Cole, op. cit., pp. 120-121.
I presume: Ibid., p. 114.
only one private: Butterfield, op. cit., p. 67.
July 20, 1940: William L. Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich
(N.Y.: Simon & Schuster, 1960), p. 749n.
307-3' -8
Stated principles and objectives of America First: Cole, op. cit., pp.
15-16.

309
309
310
310
311

the Committee: Ibid., p. 175.
as the world: Sherwood, op. cit., pp. 382-383.
to persuade us to send: Davis, op. cit., p. 400.

hysterical chatter: Sherwood, op. cit., p. 153.

A rattlesnake rattles: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1958 edition, Vol. 6,

pp. 421-422.

311
summer soldiers: New York Sun, April 25, 1941.
311
While our leaders: Colliers, March 29, 1941, p. 14.
311
President Roosevelt's remarks: New York Sun, April 26, 1941.
312
Your remarks at the White House: New York Sun, April 28, 1941.
312
powerful elements: Cole, op. cit., p. 143.
312-313
Excerpts from Lindbergh's Des Moines speech: Ibid., p. 144.
313
It would be: Ibid., p. 145.
It may have been: Ibid., pp. 145-146.
313

NOTES

388

314
not as anti-Semitic: Ibid., p. 147.
Many
314
supporters: Ibid., p. 150.
Colonel Lindbergh and his: Ibid., p. 152.
314
314
falsely ascribed: Ibid., p. 153.
315
a grave threat: Ibid., p. 161.
315
Our principles: Ibid., p. 195.
316
believes Jews will: Butterfield, op. cit., p. 65.
318
There are some things: from a personal interview.
318
I stopped talking: New York Journal- American, August 24, 25, 1941.
319
except from an academic: New York Times, November 19, 1945.
319
world organization: Ibid.
319-320
There is little: Davis, op. cit, p. 425.
.

.

.

chapter 25.
321
321

Lindbergh's Personal War

We have been stepping: Davis, The Hero, p. 416.
not enough and he gathered that: Lyman, "The Lindbergh

I

Know,

p. 86.

321
employing Lindbergh: Newsweek, December 5, 1949.
323-324
Forty thousand feet: Charles A. Lindbergh, Of Flight and Life
(N.Y.: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1948), pp. 3-7. This book presents some of
Lindbergh's wartime experiences and thoughts.
out-guessed: Lauren D. Lyman, "Lindbergh: 'Tech Rep,'" The Bee324
Hive, January 1950, p. 14.
324
We wanted: Ibid.
study the performance: Ibid.
324
325
Made a curving take-off: Ibid.
maneuvered into position: Ibid.
325
probably the heaviest: Ibid., p. 15.
325
326
With a lighter load: Ibid.
like threading a needle: Ibid.
326
Are you a pilot: Colonel Charles MacDonald, "Lindbergh in Battle,"
328
Colliers, February 16, 1946, p. 11. Colonel MacDonald was Commander of
the 475th Fighter Group with whom Lindbergh flew in Dutch New Guinea.
indefatigable: Ibid., p. 12.
328
get your wheels up: Ibid., p. 76.
Lindbergh
328
329
Lindbergh had, in effect: Ibid., p. 75.
329
Of all the attacks: Ibid., p. 76.
329
The enemy plane: Lyman, "Lindbergh: 'Tech Rep,' " p. 15.
Then our fuel: Lindbergh, op. cit., pp. 12-13.
330
The Jap must not have been: Colonel Charles MacDonald, "Lindbergh
331
in Battle," Part 2, Colliers, February 23, 1946, p. 30.
It was the last few miles: Lindbergh, op. cit., p. 14.
331
Lindbergh said he had no intention: General George C. Kenney,
331
U.S.A.F. (Ret.), Boston Sunday Advertiser, September 1, 1957.
332
when Lindbergh joined us: Ibid.
.

.

.

chapter 26.

Family Life

All quotes in this chapter, except those otherwise noted, have been taken
from personal interviews with persons who requested that they not be
identified.

NOTES

389

Through these years: Lindbergh, We, p. 22.
I hear your father: Lyman, "The Lindbergh I Know," p. 83.
This was the first time: Al Stump, 'The Lone Eagle's Other Son/' True
Magazine, December 1966, p. 26.
336
You go alone today: Ibid.
336
Not try: Ibid.
337
It's become: Ibid.
343
no use calling: Ibid.
Name anything that's dangerous: Ibid., p. 16.
345
334
336
336

chapter 27.

Change

355
When I first met Charles: from a personal interview.
356
Keep your style: Lyman, "How Lindbergh Wrote a Book," pp. 19-20.
356
I don't know: Ibid.
357
but memory: Ibid.
358-359
Library of Congress information: Library of Congress press release,
New York Herald Tribune, May 21, 1954.
359
I didn't think: from a personal interview.
360
Put your hand: from a personal interview.
360
Returning from the border: Lindbergh, Of Flight and Life, p. 8.
360
This altitude flight: Ibid., p. 10.
360
without a highly developed science: Ibid., p. 14.
361
In Germany, I learned: Ibid., p. 21.
361
To me in youth: Ibid., p. 50.

chapter 28.

A Free Man

a case of identification with his father: Dr. Foster Kennedy of Bellevue
Hospital, address of June 9, 1941, to American Psychopathological Associa-

363

tion.

363

Charles

.

.

has

.

... his father: Butterfield, "Lindbergh: A Stubborn

Young Man of Strange Ideas Becomes a Leader of Wartime Opposition,"
p. 75.

363
Slim, there's a: from a personal interview.
363
If C. A. Lindbergh: from a personal interview.
363
You write him: from a personal interview.
364
He asked me from a personal interview.
364
You should figure: from a personal interview.
364
Didn't you see: from a personal interview.
365
You oughtn't to: from a personal interview.
accounts: Lindbergh, The Spirit of St. Louis, p. 547.
366
A number of
366
a matter of principle: from a personal interview.
367-368
Finest human being: from a personal interview.
The quality of life: Alexis Carrel, Reflections on Life (N.Y.: Hawthorn
368
:

.

.

.

Books, 1954), p. 11.

368
in the best epic mold: Daniel J. Boorstin, The Image, or What Happened to the American Dream (N.Y.: Atheneum, 1962), p. 66.
the politics of nostalgia: Paul Seabury, Charles A. Lindbergh: The
368
Politics of Nostalgia (N.Y.: Meridian Books, 1960), p. 123.
369
You may not like him: Emmett John Hughes, Newsweek, March 13,
1967.

Index

Acosta, Bert, 92
Adams, Samuel Hopkins, 307

Adlershof

Air

Research

Institute,

Germany, 268
Aftonbladet, 125
Air Force, U.S., 7, 362; see also Army
Air Corps
Air Force Academy Site Election Com-

177-78

Air-mail service, 69-70, 74-77, 85-86,
160, 170, 172, 177, 211, 254-60
Albert,

Austria, 288

Aviation Corporation of Delaware, 255
Aviation industry, 170-71, 211-12,

mittee, 237
Airlines, 171-73,

Arnold, General Henry H., 171, 172,
251, 282, 287, 288, 290, 321
Associated Press, 4
Astor, Lord and Lady, 129, 278
Astronauts, the, xiv
Atomic bomb, 291, 319
Auburn, Massachusetts, 244

321
Avions Marcel-Dassault, 5

King of Belgium, 128

Alcock, John, 79, 112
Aldrich-Vreeland
Emergency
rency Act, 19-20

Baeumker, Adolf, 250, 279
Bahl, Erold, 48-49
Balchen, Bernt, 99-100
Baldwin, Stanley, 129, 276
Balikpapan, 330
Banking and Currency (Charles A.

Cur-

Alexander, Roy, 83-84
Allen, C. B., 4 n., 105, 108, 224, 293
Allen, Frederick Lewis, 146-47
Alvarez, General, 165
America (airplane), 99, 100, 106 n.,
136, 146
America First, the Battle Against Intervention, 1940-41 (Cole), 313
America First Committee, 281, 300,
30&-16, 321, 362, 366
American Airlines, 177
"American Clipper" (airplane), 178
American Importer, S. S., 224
American Legion, 92
American Legion (airplane), 92, 94
American Rocket Society, 251
Anti-Semitism, 313, 314, 316-18
Aquitania, S. S., 356
Army, U.S., 263

Lindbergh, Sr.),20
Barnes, Harry Elmer, 310

Baruch, Bernard, 25
Battle of Britain, 299

Bavarian Motor Works, 273
Beard, Charles A., 310, 315
Belgium, 127-28, 147
Bellanca, Giuseppe, 82, 84, 87, 92
Benton, William, 307
Berger, Meyer, 225
Biffle, Ira, 47-48

Bing, Richard J., 232
Birchall, Frederick, 103, 121, 139
Bird City, Kansas, 53
Bitz, Irving, 201

Bixby,

Army Air Corps, U.S., 59, 63-68, 87,

Harold, 81, 85, 86, 87, 88,

172 n.

255, 257-59, 263, 276, 290, 291, 321

Black, Hugo, 254-55
391

INDEX

392

Black Committee, Hugo, 254-55, 256,
257, 291
Blair and Company, 172
Bleriot, Louis,

127

Blythe, Richard, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102,
104, 105, 106, 130-31, 132, 137-38,
143, 144, 148, 162-63

Boedecker, Ken, 85, 101, 107, 108,
109, 110
Boetticher, General Friedrich von, 305
Boiling Field, Washington, D.C., 136,
164, 168
Boorstein, Daniel J., 368
Boston, Massachusetts, 154
Bowles, Chester, 307
Brandewiede, Gregory, 104
Braun, Wernher von, 252
Breckinridge, Henry C, 142, 171, 197,
203, 204, 208, 256, 317-18
Brett, General George H., 251
Brisbane, Arthur, 199, 216
Brisbane, Australia, 327
British Aircraft, Ltd., 5

Bronx Home News, 202
Brooks Field, Texas, 62, 63
Brown, Arthur, 79, 112
Brown, Walter F., 177, 254, 255, 256,

Camp Wood, Texas, 62-63
Cannon, Joseph, 19

Canuck airplane, 61-63, 64, 69
Cape May, New Jersey, 206
Capone, Al, 199, 201
Carnegie Foundation, 246
Carrel, Alexis, 229-42, 252, 339, 359,
368
Carrel, Mme. Alexis, 240
Cass Technical High School, Detroit,
44, 354
Caterpillar Club, 67-68
Catholic Bulletin, 23
Catholic Church, 22-23, 24
Challenge to the Poles (Grierson),
188 n.
Chamberlain, Clarence, 87, 92, 106
Chanute Field, Illinois, 61
Charles XV, King of Sweden, 10
Chase, Stuart, 310
Cherbourg, France, 121
Chicago, Illinois, 75, 86, 158
Chicago Tribune, 125
Chichester, Sir Francis, xiv

Chinese Relief Commission, 192
Churchill, Winston S., 276, 299, 301
Civil War, American, 14

257
Brundage, Avery, 307
Bruno, Harry, 4 n., 99, 100, 103, 105,

Clark, Bennett Champ, 30, 307
Clark University, 244, 245, 246, 247,

106, 107, 108, 110, 138, 143, 148,
162-63, 173, 281
Bruno & Blythe (press representa-

Cleveland Air Races ( 1929), 181
Coast to Coast in Forty-eight Hours
(film), 173
Cobb, Orvin S., 307

tives), 95, 98
Brussels, Belgium, 128
Bullitt, William

C, 283

Burbank, California, 182
Burch, Frank B., 306 n.
Burrage, Admiral, 132
Busch, Bishop, 23
Bush, Vannevar, 291
Butte, Montana, 157
Butterfield, Roger, 317
Byrd, Admiral Richard E., 87, 94, 99100, 105, 106, 136
Cachalot (boat), 206
Calles, Plutarco Elias, 162, 164, 165,

166

Camp Kearney, California, 94
Camp Knox, Kentucky, 42

248, 250

Cole, Wayne S., 306 n., 313
Coli, Lieutenant, 92, 94, 95, 100,

127

Colliers magazine, 311

Colonial Air Transport, 171
Columbia (airplane), 106 n., 146
Columbia Aircraft Corporation, 85

Columbia University, 27

Commerce Department, U.S., 150
Committee of Witnesses, 222-23
Communist party, American, 310
Compton, Karl T., 291
Conant, James B., 291
Concord, New Hampshire, 155
Concorde (airplane), 5
Condon, John F., 202-06, 207-08,
214, 217, 219-20
Congress, U.S., 291, 300, 315

INDEX

393

Coogan's Academy, 14
Coolidge, Calvin, 129, 132-33, 163,
166, 168, 179-80, 365
Corrigan, Douglas "Wrong- Way," 93
"Corsair" (F-4U) fighter planes, 324,

325
Corwin, Edwin S., 315
Coughlin, Father Charles, 308
Cryobiology magazine, 233
Culture of Organs, The (Lindbergh

Curtin, Lawrence, 80

John Hughes, 202, 206, 207,
208-09, 220

Curtis,

Curtiss, Glenn H., 40

Curtiss Field, New York, 98, 108, 139
Curtiss JN-4D ("Jenny"), 53-54, 57,

Aeronautical

Com-

pany, 321

Czech air force, 286
Czechoslovakia, 277
Daimler-Benz liquid-cooled engines,
274
Daladier, Edouard, 283, 284
Danbury, Connecticut, 338
Darien, Connecticut, 1, 334-35, 336,
364
Davies, Marion, 143
Davis, Dwight F., 130
Davis, Kenneth, 230, 368
Davis, Noel, 87, 92, 94, 100
Dayton, Ohio, 138
(

)

289, 294, 295, 298, 300, 303, 304,

305
Englewood,

New

Jersey,

161,

176,

179, 209, 223, 290

Fairbanks, Janet Ayer, 307

60, 61, 64
Curtiss OX-5 engine, 54, 64
Curtiss OXX-6 engine, 70

De Havilland DH-4B

Early, Steve, 257
Edward, Prince of Wales, 129
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 7, 331

Elizabeth, New Jersey, 198
England, 128-29, 147, 223, 226, 234,
251, 261, 271-72, 276-77, 278, 286,

and Carrell), 234
Cummings, Homer, 255

Curtiss-Wright

Dubos, Rene, 230 n.
Dudley, Delos, 43
Dunkirk, France, 298
Du Pont Company, 243
Durkin, Joseph T., 235, 238, 239, 240
Dynamite, 206

airplanes, 59,

65,74
Delage (French pilot), 122, 123
Denver, Colorado, 71
Denver Post, 125
Dern, George H., 258, 259
Des Moines, Iowa, 157, 312
Des Moines Register, 313
Detroit, Michigan, 31, 32, 158
Detroyat (French pilot), 122, 123
Dewey, Thomas E., 313
Dodd, William E., 263, 278
Donnelly, Ignatius, 14

Falcon airplane, 5
Farley, James A., 256, 257
Federal Bar Association, 257
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 228
Ferber, Edna, 216
Anne Spencer Lindbergh
Feydy,
(Lindbergh's daughter), 4-5, 227,
318, 333, 336, 349, 350, 351, 352
Feydy, Julien, 4, 352
Figaro, Le, 125
Finland, 294
Flemington, New Jersey, 208, 216, 221
Flexner, Simon, 235
Florida Airways, 172
Flynn, John T., 307, 308
Foch, Marshal Ferdinand, 127
Focke-Wulf helicopters, 274
Fokker, Anthony, 82, 87, 94, 104
Fokker airplanes, 82-83, 87, 94, 99
Fonck, Rene, 80, 82, 92, 100, 104
Fondation Francaise pour TEtude des
Problemes Humains, 239
Force School, Washington, D.C., 38
Ford, Henry, 158, 166, 307, 322, 335,
338
Fort Benning, Georgia, 298
Fort Myer, Virginia, 40-41
Fort Snelling, 60

Fort Wayne, Indiana, 314
Foss, Joe, 324
Foulois, General Benjamin D., 255

INDEX

394

Fowler, H. W., 357
France, 117-19, 121-27, 146, 147,
226, 238-40, 251, 261-62, 277, 28384, 286, 294, 295, 303, 304
Frazee, Harry H., 136
French Air Ministry, 261
French Aero Club, 127, 144
Frogge, Johnny, 107

Guggenheim Fund (Cont'd)
142, 150, 151, 159, 160, 171, 176,

247
Gurney, Bud, 47, 48, 51, 61, 70
Haines, Lynn, 10, 13, 24
Hall, Donald, 88-89, 92, 106

Hammaker, Bishop Wilbur E., 307
Hammond, General Thomas S., 306

Galveston, Texas, 66

Hanesse, Colonel F. K., 263, 265, 273,

Geist, Raymond, 279

284
Hankow, China, 192

"General Estimate of Germany's Air
Power" (Smith), 274-76
General Motors Corporation, 172
George V, King of England, 129
George VI, King of England, 271

German Air Ministry, 262, 279
German- American Bund, 308, 310
Germany, 246, 250, 251-52, 261, 26271, 273-76, 278-79, 285-86, 28788, 289, 295, 303, 304, 320, 360-61
Gish, Lillian, 307
Goddard, Robert H., 244-53
Goddard, Mrs. Robert H., 244-45,
246, 251, 252

Goering, Hermann, 262, 263, 264, 265,
266, 269-70, 281, 284, 302, 304
Goff, U.S.S., 130
Goldsborough, Brice, 99, 100

Goldwater, Barry M., 365
Gosport, England, 129
Gould, Bruce, 104
Gow, Betty, 195-96, 207, 217, 219
Grand Rapids, Michigan, 158
Granger movement, 14
Great Britain, see England
Green, Fitzhugh, 126, 133, 141, 147
Greenland, 212, 319
Grierson, John, 188 n., 358

Grimwood, I. R., 6
Guatemala City, Guatemala, 167
Guggenheim, Carol, 141, 244
Guggenheim, Daniel, 247, 248
Guggenheim, Harry, 105, 139, 141,
142, 150, 151, 170, 171, 244, 247,

248, 249-50, 251, 317

Guggenheim Foundation, Daniel and
Florence, 248, 249, 250, 252

Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion
of Aeronautics,

Daniel,

105,

139,

Hardin, Charles, 49-50, 51, 52
Harrison, Rev. C. S., 11
Hartford, Connecticut, 151-53
Hartson, Joe, 99
Hauptmann, Bruno Richard, 214, 215,
216, 217, 218, 219, 221-22, 226
Hauptmann murder case, 213-23,

226-28
Havana, Cuba, 167
Hawks, Frank, 60
Hayden, Stone & Company, 172
Hayes, Harold T. P., xv
Hayes, Patrick Joseph Cardinal, 135
Hearst, William Randolph, 142-43,
198
Hearst, William Randolph, Jr., 198
Heinkel, Dr., 279
Henderson, Pilot, 54-55
Henderson, Sir Nevile, 282
Hermes, H.M.S., 192
Herrick, Myron, 95, 104, 123, 124,
125, 126, 127
Herrick, Parmely, 124
High Fields, Hopewell, New Jersey,
210
Hingwa, China, 190-91
Hispano-Suiza V-8 engine, 46, 64
Hitler, Adolf, 261 n., 266, 269, 270,
279, 284, 294, 295, 301, 316
Hoare, Sir Samuel, 128, 129
Hoffman, Harold, 222
Hollandia, New Guinea, 327
Homeopathic Observer, 34
Hoover, Herbert C, 177, 199, 365
Hopewell, New Jersey, 179, 195, 203,
209, 210, 218
Hopkins, Harry, 294
Hormel, Jay C, 306
Houghton, Alanson B., 128

INDEX

395

House of Representatives, U.S., 18-21,
22, 30, 36, 163

Huff-Daland Company, 84, 87
Hughes, Charles Evans, 134, 136
Hull, Cordell, 286
Humphreys, Joe, 120

Humphrey's Field, Colorado, 71-72
Hunsaker, Jerome C, 270
Hurst, Fanny, 216
Iceland, 212, 213
Ickes,

Harold L., 292-93, 301-03

Iliec Island, 235

Kidnap, the Story of the Lindbergh
Case (Waller), 227
Kilmer, General W. G., 291
Kimball, Dr., 104, 106
Kindelberger, J. H., 270
Klink, Leon, 61-62, 63, 64, 69

Knecht, Martha, 348
Knickerbocker, H. R., 301
Knight, Harry, 81, 85, 88, 89, 96, 102,
105, 137, 172 n.
Knox, Frank, 299
Knutson, Harold, 26
Kramer-Klett, Baron and Baroness,

273

India, 271
Ingalls, Laura, 306 n.

Inskip, Thomas, 271
Internal Revenue Service, 293, 294
Congress
Cytological
International

Krock, Arthur, 258
Kruger National Park, 347
Kusterer, Milburn, 151, 154
Kwajalein Island, 326

(1936), 233
Ireland, 116-17, 121
Irey, Elmer, 199, 204
Italy, 271

La Follette, Philip, 307
La Follette, Robert M., Sr., 24, 30
La Guardia, Fiorello, 281
Lambert, Major, 83

James,

Edwin L.,

103, 121-22, 124,

126, 139
Janesville, Minnesota, 57

Japan, 295, 315
Jessup, Philip C, 315
Jet propulsion, 243-44, 251

Jewett, Frank B., 291
Joffre, Marshal Joseph, 127

Johnson, General Hugh S., 307
Journal of Experimental Medicine, 232

Keep America Out of War, 310, 317
Kellogg, Frank B., 21, 25, 166
Kelly, Larry, 226, 318-19
Kelly Act (1925), 170
Kelly Field, Texas, 65
Kelly Foreign Air Mail Act (1928),

172
Kennedy, John F., 285, 365
Kennedy, Joseph P., 285, 286, 287, 365
Kenney, General George C, 327, 33132
Kesselring, Marshal Albert, 270
Ketoi Island, Japan, 190
Keyhoe, Donald E., 150, 151, 152,
153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159,

179
Keys, Clement M., 172, 173

Lambert Field, Missouri, 60, 61, 70,
82, 83, 85, 97, 137, 167, 168
Land, Charles H. ( Lindbergh's grandfather), 8, 32-33, 240, 241
Langley, Samuel Pierpont, 163
Lansing, E. Ray, 102
Lardner, John, 120
Latin America, 167-68, 171, 295
Lawrance, Charles, 105
Le Bourget Field, Paris, 95, 118-19,
121-23, 127, 357
Le Chambre, Guy, 283, 284
Lee, Ivy, 151
Lehman, Milton H., 252 n.
Lend-Lease bill, 299, 300
Leningrad, Soviet Union, 277
"Letter to Americans, A" (Charles A.
Lindbergh, Jr.), 311
Levine, Charles A., 85, 87-88, 106 n.
Lewis, Fulton, Jr., 254-55, 291-92,

297
Lewis, John L., 310
Lewis, Sinclair, 31
Liberty engines, 74, 78-79, 158
Library of Congress, 358-59
Life magazine, 316, 351
"Lightning" (P-38) fighter planes,
327, 328, 329-30, 331, 332

INDEX

396
Lilienthal, Otto, 320

Lilienthal Aeronautical Society, 273

Lincoln, Abraham, 311
Lincoln, Nebraska, 45, 49, 52

Lincoln

Standard

Turnabouts

(air-

planes), 43, 46, 72

Lindbergh, Anne Spencer Morrow
(Lindbergh's wife), 1, 161, 166,
173-75, 351, 356, 363; articles and
books by, 181, 211, 213, 304, 353;
4-5, 178, 209, 27172, 318, 333-54; family life of, 333,
340-41, 346, 348, 350, 351, 353;
Hauptmann case, 216-17, 221; kidnaping of Charles A. Lindbergh, III,
195-96, 199, 207, 227; marriage of,
176; radio operator on Oriental
children of,

flight,

1,

181, 183-93

August
( Lindbergh's
grandfather), 9-12, 13, 14, 17, 32
Lindbergh, Charles Augustus, Jr.,
adulation of, xiii-xv, 146-49; airmail controversy, 254-60; air-mail
pilot, 69-70, 74-77, 85-86; America
First activities, 309-16, 321, 362,
366; American air power surveyed
by, 250; ancestral and parental
background, 9-26; archaeological
interest, 178; Army flying school experience, 59, 61, 62, 63-68; articles
and books by, 6, 126, 140-42, 143,
145, 232, 234, 256, 303, 311, 323,
331, 334, 346, 355, 356-59, 366;
Atlantic Ocean survey by, 212-13;

Lindbergh,

barnstorming and stunt flying, 4849, 52-53, 59, 62-63, 70, 71-74, 78;
birth of, 17, 28; boyhood of, 28-44;
Brussels reception of, 128; Carrel
and, 229-42; character and personality

of,

69,

355-61,

362-69;

4-5, 178, 209, 27172, 318, 333-54, 363; commercial
exploitation rejected by, 139, 14244, 148; commissioned Brigadier
General, 331; commissioned Colonel, 130; commissioned First Lieuchildren of,

1,

tenant,

commissioned

74;

Second

Lieutenant, 68; courtship of, 17376; criticism of, 301-06, 311, 313,
316-19; education of, 38, 41-44;
family life of, 333-54; flight train-

Lindbergh, Charles A., Jr. (Cont'd)
ing, 45-58, 63-68; forty-eight-state
good-will
flight,
150-60;
142,
French air power surveyed by, 26162, 286; German air power surveyed
by, 262-71, 273-76, 278-79, 282,
285-86, 287-88; Goddard and, 24453; Hauptmann case and, 213-23,
226-28; honors and awards, 127,
129, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 143,

144-45, 163, 168, 173 n., 278-82,
331, 358; invasion of privacy of,
xv-xvi, 178-79, 209-10, 223; isolationism of, 295-98, 309-14, 316-17,
319; jump experiences, 49-51, 52,
53, 67-68, 70-71, 75-76; kidnapping and death of Charles A. Lindbergh, III, 195-207; Latin-American good-will flight, 167-68; LeaseLend bill opposed by, 300-01; London reception of, 128-29; marriage
of, 176, 179-80; Mexican good-will
flight, 161-67; Nazi medal awarded
to, 278-82; New York-Paris flight,
98-119; New York reception of, 13437; nicknames of, 47, 53, 100, 157,
362; Oriental survey flight of, 18193; Paris reception of, 120-27; perfusion pump developed by, 22934; plane crashes, 56, 57-58, 62, 63,
66-67, 70, 175; plane testing, 70,
74, 93-94, 322, 323-24; present life
pattern of, 1-8, 362-69; press relations of, 93, 94, 100-01, 102-03,
124-25, 152, 175-76, 199, 200-01,

366-67;

pro-Nazi

criticism of, 278; public

image of,

225,

227,

351,

355; radio broadcasts and speeches
on the war, 295-98, 303-06,
309-14, 316-17, 318, 319-20; residence established in England by,
223-26; rocket development and,
243-53; Roosevelt and, 292-93, 295,
298, 302-03, 310-12, 319, 321, 322,
366; St. Louis reception of, 137-38;
Soviet air power surveyed by, 277,
278, 286; technical consultant for
of,

Pan American and

TAT

airlines,

172-73, 174, 177-78, 181-93, 195,
211-13, 243, 256, 362; transatlantic
flight plans

and considerations, 78-

TNDEX

397

Lindbergh, Charles A., Jr. (Cont'd)

Washington reception

291;

tours,
of,

inspection

transcontinental

97;

131-34;

interest, 6;
tions,

wild-life

conservation

World War II contribu-

321-32

Lindbergh, Charles Augustus, Sr.
(Lindbergh's father), 2, 10, 11, 1226, 27-28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 3438, 43, 53, 56, 65-66, 133, 240, 241,
254, 290, 316, 363
III
Charles Augustus,
Lindbergh,
(Lindbergh's son), 178, 186, 195-

96, 207, 227

Lindbergh,

Eva

(Lindbergh's

half

sister), 17,25,29,31,35

Lindbergh, Evangeline Lodge Land
(Lindbergh's mother), 27, 29, 3132, 34, 38, 40, 42, 44, 53, 57, 101,

125, 126, 130, 132, 133, 145, 158,
159, 166, 167, 176, 354

Lindbergh, Frank (Lindbergh's uncle), 15
Lindbergh, Jon Morrow (Lindbergh's
son), xiv, 209-10, 211, 223, 262,
333, 336-37, 339-42, 343, 344-46,
351, 352

Lindbergh, June (Lindbergh's aunt),
15
Lindbergh, Land Morrow
(Lindbergh's son), 271-72, 333, 349, 351,

352

Listen!

the

Wind

(Anne

Morrow

Lindbergh), 213, 353
Little Falls, Minnesota, 1, 15, 16, 26,
27, 29, 31
Locarno Pact, 261
Lodge, Albert, 34
Lodge, Edwin, 33, 34
Lodge, John C, 32
Loening, Grover, 104
London, England, 128-29, 285
London Daily Mail, 79
Longworth, Alice Roosevelt, 307
Los Angeles (dirigible), 132
Lost Generation, 146
Lourdes, France, 240-41
Love, Phil, 66, 74, 86, 150, 151-52,
153, 154, 155, 156, 157
Luce, Henry, 369
Lufthansa Airline, 171, 223, 265
Luftwaffe, 262, 263, 265, 268, 269,
270, 276, 277, 288, 289
Lyman, Lauren D. ("Deac"), 4n.,
104, 108, 178, 197, 198, 201, 22325, 281, 321, 324, 325,

357

Lyman, Mab (Mrs. Lauren D.), 224
Lynch, H.
157

J.

("Shorty"), 51-53, 72,

Maben, Mississippi, 56
MacArthur, General Douglas, 327, 369
MacCracken, William P., Jr., 150,
158-59

Lindbergh, Lillian (Lindbergh's half

MacDonald, Colonel Charles H., 327-

17,29,31,34,35
Lindbergh, Linda (Lindbergh's aunt),

MacDonald, J. Carlisle, 122, 124, 139,

sister),

28, 329, 330, 331

15
Lindbergh,
Louisa
( Lindbergh's
grandmother), 10, 11
Lindbergh, Mary La Fond, 15, 17, 27
Lindbergh,
Reeve
( Lindbergh's
daughter), 1, 227, 333, 334, 335 n.,

140, 142
MacDonald, Ramsay, 271
Mackay, Clarence, 136
MacNider, Hanford, 307
Madison, Wisconsin, 41-42

338, 342, 348, 349, 351, 352
Lindbergh,
Scott
Morrow (Lindbergh's son), 1, 271-72, 333, 342,
343-44, 349, 351
"Lindbergh law," 228
"Lindbergh Line," the, 256
Lindberghs, The (Haines), 10
Link, Edwin C, 345

Madison, Wisconsin, 41-42
Mahoney, B. F., 88, 89, 105
Mahoney Aircraft Company, 169

Lippmann, Walter, 301
Lischner, Hyman, 314

Macom (yacht), 134, 135

Maloney, Jim, 120
Malraux, Andre, 365

Man, the Unknown (Carrel), 230 n.,
236-37
Manning, Bishop William T., 199
Marietta, Martin, 105
Markey, Morris, 176

INDEX
Marshall, Erwin E., 207
Marshall, General George

C,

282,

301 n.
Marshall, Minnesota, 56
Martin, Glenn, 270
Mary, Queen of England, 129

Mason, Gregory, 314
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,

244
Mayer, Ferdinand, 263, 264

Mayo

Clinic,

Rochester,

Minnesota,

322-23
McAllister, Lieutenant, 66, 67, 68

McCahill, Frank, 108
McCarter, Thomas N., 307

McFarland, Marvin W., 138, 359
McGee, John F., 23
McKaig, Ray, 307
McKellar, Kenneth D., 259
McLean, Evalyn Walsh, 201-02, 206
Means, Gaston B., 201-02, 206, 207,
208
Mein Kampf (Hitler), 266
Melrose, Minnesota, 10
Memphis, U.S.S., 129, 130, 131, 132,
140
Mencken, H. L., 222
Meridian, Mississippi, 55
Method of Reaching Extreme Altitudes (Goddard), 245
Mexico, 164-67, 174, 175
Mexico City, Mexico, 164, 173
Michigan, University of, 14, 15, 27, 41
Milch, General Erhard, 263, 267, 283,
284
Miles "Mohawk" (airplane), 265
Mil-Hi Airways & Flying Circus, 7173
Miller, Danforth P., 330 n., 331
Mills, Ogden, 199
Mindanao, 330
Minneapolis, Minnesota, 26, 29
Minnesota Public Safety Commission,
23
Missouri Historical Society, 145, 280
Missouri National Guard, 74
Mitchell, General Billy, 130, 258, 269
Mitchell Field, New York, 134, 136,
151, 159, 176
Monnet, Jean, 283
Moose Factory, Canada, 187

Morgan, Aubrey, 317 n.
Morgan, Elisabeth Reeve
194, 215-16, 229
Morgan, J. P., 180

Morrow,

Morgan & Company, J. P., 204
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, 362
Morrow, Constance, 165, 174, 271, 318
Morrow, Dwight W., 130, 139, 148,
150, 161-62, 164, 165, 179-80, 192,
194, 214
Morrow, Mrs. Dwight W., 165, 166,

176, 195, 211, 214, 215-16, 220,
221, 271, 272, 318
Moscow, Soviet Union, 277
Mott, General J. Bentley, 240

Mueller, Esther B., 143
Mulligan, Ed, 99, 101, 107, 108, 109,

110

Mundt, Karl, 307
Nanking, China, 190
Natal, 213

National Advisory Committee for
Aeronautics, 290
National Aeronautic Association, 92,
106, 134

National Air Transport, 172
Defense Research
National

Com-

mittee, 291

National

Flood

Relief

Commission,

190-91
National Press Club, 134
Naval Research Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland, 233-34
Navy, U. S., 78, 147, 192, 193
Nebraska Aircraft Corporation, 43, 44,
45-46
Nelson, Knute, 56
Nelson, Thomas, 74
Neuman Committee, 7
Neutrality Act (1937), 292, 294, 315
New, Harry S., 134, 170, 177, 254
Newfoundland, 112
Newspaper Club of New York, 105,
106
Newsweek magazine, 322
New York, N.Y., 134-37
New York American, 203, 204, 225
New York Daily Mirror, 106, 107
New York Daily News, 226

INDEX
New York Herald-Tribune, 224, 22526

New York Times, The, 4, 102-03, 121,
124, 125, 139-40, 164, 167, 198,
221, 224-25, 257, 258, 259, 312

New York World, 67, 166
168, 179, 214-15,
220, 221, 226, 271, 276-77, 300
Nixon, Richard M., 365
Nobel Prize, 230, 241
Nome, Alaska, 187, 188

Nicolson, Harold,

Nonpartisan League, 22, 23, 24

399

Pan American World Airways, 3, 4,
362, 366
Papers of Wilbur and Oroide Wright,
The (McFarland), 138
France, 118-19, 121-27, 129,
277, 283, 284, 352
Paris Herald, 4
Parker, Raymond C, 235
Paterson, New Jersey, 84, 105, 137
Patrick, General Mason M., 130, 132
Pearl Harbor, Japanese attack on, 315,
Paris,

316

Norris, George W., 257

Pendray, G. Edward, 251, 252

Norris, Kathleen, 216, 307
North American Aviation, 172
North American-General Motors, 255
North to the Orient (Anne Morrow
Lindbergh), 181, 211
Northwest-Orient Airlines, 177, 193
Nova Scotia, 111-12

Perfusion pump, invention of, 229-34
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 159

Nungesser, Charles, 92, 94, 95, 100,
127
Nungesser, Mme., 127
Nye, Gerald P., 307

Ocean Systems, Inc., 345
Ochs, Adolph S., 140
Of Flight and Life ( Charles A. Lindbergh, Jr.), 323, 331
O'Gorman, Juan, 166
Old Orchard Beach, Maine, 155
Olympic games (1936), 265
Omaha, Nebraska, 157
O'Mahoney, Jeremiah T., 259
Only Yesterday (Allen), 147
Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 322
Orteig, Raymond, 79, 136
Orteig Prize, 79-80, 81, 82, 83, 92,
94, 105, 137

Orteig Trustees, Raymond, 143
Ortiz, Jose, 166

Ottawa, Canada, 186, 187
Page, Ray, 46, 48, 49, 51, 52
Paine, Thomas, 311

Palmer, Albert W., 307

Pan American, Inc., 172
Pan American Airways, Inc., 171, 172,
174, 177-78, 181, 192-93, 211, 243,

256

Pictorial Review, 336

Pinchot, Amos R. E., 307

Pioneer Instrument Company, 99

Plummer, Richard, 43
Plymouth, England, 121
Point Barrow, Alaska, 187
Poland, 277, 294, 295, 306
Portland, Maine, 154, 155, 175
Post Office Department, U.S., 254, 255
Prensa, La, 125
Princeton, New Jersey, 179, 231, 244
Pujo Committee (1917), 20
Pulitzer Prize, 8, 225

Putnam,

George Palmer,

139,

141,

142, 143, 346

Quigley, Walter Eli, 15, 21, 56, 65, 66

Rae, Bruce, 224
Reader's Digest, 358
Rechlin air testing field, Pomerania,

273-74
Reflections on Life (Carrel), 237-38,

368
Regnery, William H., 306
Reich, Al, 203
Reilly, Edward J., 217-19

Republic Aircraft Corporation, 322
Richards Field, Missouri, 71
Rickenbacker, Edward, 258, 307
Rise and Fall of the Third Reich
(Shirer),261n.
Robertson, Bill, 70, 83
Robertson Aircraft Corporation, 70,
74-75, 86, 129, 144, 170
Rockefeller, John D., 230 n.

INDEX

400
Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, 230, 232, 235, 238
Rockefeller University, 230 n.
Rockets and rocketry, 243-53, 268,

319
Roehm, Ernst, 270
Rogers, Will, 165, 214, 364

Roi Island, 325
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 199, 254, 255,

256, 257, 258, 260, 286, 292-95,
296, 297, 298-300, 301, 302, 308,
309, 310-12, 314-15, 316, 319, 321,

366
Roosevelt, Theodore, 30
Roosevelt, Theodore, Jr., 104, 121

New York, 80, 99,
108, 112, 129
Rosner, Morris, 201, 207
Roswell, New Mexico, 248, 250, 291
Roosevelt Field,

Rous, Peyton, 230 n.

Roussy de Sales, Raoul de, 216
Royal Air Club, 128
Royal Air Force, British, 129
Rumania, 277
Runyon, Damon, 216
Russian Air Force, 278
Ryan, T. Claude, 169
Ryan Aeronautical Company, 169
Ryan Airlines, 86, 88-89, 96, 169
Ryan M-l monoplane, 86; see also
Spirit of St. Louis
Ryerson, Edward L., Jr., 307

Sackville-West, Victoria, 215
St. Cloud, Minnesota, 12,

St. Cloud Democrat,

15

14

Saint-Gildas Island, 234, 235
St. John, Adela Rogers, 216
St. John's, Newfoundland,

St.

112-13

Louis, Missouri, 60, 61, 69, 70, 74,

81, 88, 96, 97, 98, 137-38, 168
St. Louis Flying Club, 85
St. Louis Globe Democrat,

102

St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 83, 95

San Diego, California, 88, 92, 95, 96
San Pedro, California, 90
Santiago Island, 213
Saturday Evening Post, 347, 358
Sauk Center, Minnesota, 11, 14, 31
Scadta, 171
Scanlon, Colonel, 264

Schleicher, General von, 270

Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr., 255

Schulman, Sam, 107
Schwarzkopf, Colonel, 207
Science magazine, 232
Scott, General Winfield, 27
Seabury, Paul, 368
Searle, Judge, 15
Selective Service Act, 309
Sevenoaks-Weald, Kent, England, 226,
265
Sherman Anti-Trust Act, 255
Sherwood, Robert E., 294, 296, 297,
301, 309
Shirer, William L., 261 n.
Shishmaref, Alaska, 188
Shortt, Lionel, 216

Sikorsky, Igor, 80, 92, 267, 270, 279,
315, 333
Silver Shirts, 308
Sirius (airplane), 182-92

Skidmore, Abram, 108, 110
Smith, Alfred E., 136
Smith, Kay (Mrs. Truman), 262, 263,
267, 280, 346, 353
Smith, Meryl M., 330 n.
Smith, Truman, 261-66, 267, 268, 269,
270, 273, 274-76, 278, 279, 280,
281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 288,
289, 298, 346
Smith College, 174
Smithsonian Institution, xv, 30, 163,
168, 245, 246, 249
Sorenson, Ted, 155
Souther Field, Georgia, 53-55
Soviet Union, 250, 277, 278, 286, 294
Spaatz, General Carl, 291
Spirit of St. Louis (airplane), xv, 87,
92-97, 99, 102, 105, 106-07, 108,
110-19, 121, 122, 123, 124-25, 12728, 129, 134, 136, 137, 146, 149,
150, 151, 154, 155, 156, 158, 159,
160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 167, 16869, 357
Spirit of St. Louis,

autobiography),
357-59, 366

The (Lindbergh's
8,

28,

67,

356,

Spitale, Salvy, 201

Stabler, Jennie, 13

Stanford University, 346
State Department, U.S., 177, 286, 287

INDEX

401

Stefansson, Vilhjalmur, 39, 213

Stephen, Admiral Edward, 345
Stewart, James, 358
Stimson, Henry L., 177, 299, 321
Stinson, Texas, 63, 64
Stockholm, Sweden, 212
Stout, William B., 158
Stuart, R. Douglas, Jr., 306

Stuka (airplane), 268-69
Sub-Aviation, 5
Sulzberger, Arthur Hays, 102
Svenska Dagbladet, 144

(1919), 262, 266,

Villard, Oswald Garrison, 307

Vlaminck, Maurice, 347
Vought, Chance, 104
Voyage to Lourdes, The (Carrel), 241,

252
Vultee, Gerard F., 181

New Jersey, 151,

33 Hours to Paris (Charles A. Lindbergh, Jr. ), 358
This High Man-The Life of Robert H.
Goddard (Lehman), 252 n.
This Week magazine, 278
Thomas, Norman, 310, 314, 322
Thompson, Earl, 81-82
Thomsen, Hans, 305-06
Tighe, Dixie, 216
Timberg, William H., 228
Time magazine, 232
Timm, Otto, 47
Tingmissartoq (airplane), 212, 213
Townsend, Ralph, 306 n.
flight

Treaty

290

Taft, William Howard, 30, 163
Taylor, A. J. P., 316
Tempelhof Airport, Berlin, 284

Transatlantic

Valbuena Airport, Mexico City, 164,
167
Vallandigham, Clement L., 311
Van Atta, Lee, 327
Vaud, Switzerland, 1
Vaughan, Guy, 95
Vaughn, Wrav, 71-73
Versailles

Tabor, Louis, 307

Teterboro Airport,
161

V-2 rockets, German, 252
Vacuum Oil Company, 99, 143

attempts,

79-81,

87, 92, 94, 100

Transport
Air
Transcontinental
(TAT), 171, 172-73, 177
Transcontinental & Western Air Express (TWA), 177, 243, 256, 259
Travel Air Company, 86
Trenchard, Thomas W., 220, 226
Trippe, Juan Terry, 3, 4, 7, 171-72,
177, 181, 212, 366
Turner, Roscoe, 182

Udet, General Ernst, 268, 273, 283,

284
United Aircraft Corporation, 255, 321,
324, 327
United Airlines, 172, 177, 258

Walker, James J., 127, 135
Wallace, Henry A., 299
Waller, George, 227

Wanamaker, Rodman, 87, 136

War Department, U.S., 286, 291, 292,
298, 321

War Industries Board, 25
Washington, D.C., 30-31, 131-34, 163,
186

Wave of the Future— A Confession of
The, (Anne Morrow Lindbergh), 304
We (Charles A. Lindbergh, Jr.), 126,
140-42, 143, 145, 334, 346, 356, 358
Weiss, Pierre, 123
Western Air Express, 171, 177
West Point Military Academy, 290
Whalen, Grover, 136 n.
Whateley, Oliver, 197, 218
Wheeler, Burton K., 300, 306, 307
Wheeler, Mrs. Burton K., 307
Faith,

Whipple, George H., 307
White, William Allen, 300
White Bird ( airplane ) 95
Whitehead, General, 327
Wilbur, Ray Lyman, 315
Wilentz, David, 216, 221, 222
Williams, Al, 104
Williams, Joe, 308
Williams, William A., 157-58
Williams, William Carleton, 157
Willkie, Wendell, 295, 296, 300, 308,
313
,

INDEX

402

Wilson, Hugh R., 278-79, 280, 281
Wilson, Woodrow, 30
Winchell, Walter, 216, 271
Wisconsin, University of, 41, 43,
173 n., 337
Wood, General Robert E., 306
Woodring, Harry, 292
Woollcott, Alexander, 216
Wooster, Stanton H., 87, 94, 100
Wright, Orville and Wilbur, 40, 52,
138, 169

Wright Aeronautical Corporation, 95,
99, 172 n.

Wright-Bellanca airplane, 76-77, 80,
81, 82, 84-85, 87, 92, 94, 99, 100

Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio, 213
Wright "Whirlwind" engine ( J-5), 82,
83, 89, 105, 109, 159, 169, 182

Yale University, 7, 240
York Harbor, Maine, 176
Young, Clarence M., 92-93
Young, Genevieve, xv

Your Country at War, and What Happens to You After the War, and
Related Subjects (Charles A. Lindbergh, Sr.), 21-22
Yucatan, 178
Yugoslavia, 271

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Walter S. Ross was born in Newark, New Jersey, in 1914. He
attended Hawthorne Avenue School and West Side High School in
Newark, and later attended the University of North Carolina and
Rutgers University.
Mr. Ross has been in publishing since his college days, and is a
free-lance writer and novelist.

His career in publishing dates back to 1947-48, when he became
publisher of '47 and '48 The Magazine of the Year: he also served as
Director of Public Relations of Broadcast Music, Inc.; was

News

and Feature Editor for Warner Bros. Pictures; was a Senior Editor
for Coronet magazine, and Articles Editor for Colliers magazine.
Mr. Ross is the author of three earlier books, The Immortal, Coast
to Coast and The Climate Is Hope, and his articles have appeared in
national magazines, including Look, McCalVs, the Ladies'

Home

Journal, Esquire, and the Readers Digest. The Last Hero: Charles A.

Lindbergh is his first biography.
Mr. Ross and his wife divide their time between homes in New
York City, Peconic, Long Island, and Paris.
About his writing career, Mr. Ross comments, "I've always wanted
to be a writer, as far back as I can remember. One would think
that attaining this status would dull the edge of ambition. Not so.
Banal as it sounds, there are always new challenges in the work itself, and I know that one can learn to do it better."

Format by Katharine Sitterly
Set in Linotype Caledonia

Composed, printed and bound by American Book-Stratford Press, Inc.

Harper & Row, Publishers, Incorporated

'

I

V

BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY

3 9999 01775 565

1

Tt-54-0

Boston Public Library

HYDE PARK
BRANCH LIBRARY

The Date Due Card in the pocket indicates the date on or before

which this
book should be returned to the Library.
Please do not remove cards from this

pocket

!

Section
"All the

Sty* Jfotr

News That's

Fit to Print."

1

LXXVI....N0.

VOL.

NKW

25.320.

YORK.

S"

LINDBERGH DOES IT!
FLIES 1,000 MILES THh
CHEERING FRENCH^
MID HAVE GONE 500 M ILES FARTHER
Gasoline for at Least That

Much More

Flew at Times From

Feet to

1

1

0,000 Feet Above Water.

A1E ONLY ONE ANO A HALF OF HIS FIVE SANDWICHES

Fell Asleep at Times but Quickly

Awoke— Glimpses

of His Adventure in Brief Interview

MAP OF LINDBERGHS TRANSATLANTIC

at the Embassy.

LEVINE ABANDONS
LINDBERGH'S OWN STORY TOMORROW.

LINDBERGH

BELLANCA FLIGHT

TRW

THRILLS COOLID

Captain Charlet A. Lindbergh was loo exhausted after his arrival
in

Paris late last night to do more than indicate, as told below, his

experiences during his flight.
the

full

ttor\>

of

his

AW York Times.
By

After he awakes today, he

will narrate

remarkable exploit for readers of Monday's

Venture Given Up as Designer
Splits With

Him— Plane Nar-

President
'

rowly Escapes Burning.

CARLYLE MACDONALD.

Cnpyruli-. 10:T. by Th* NVw V^rk
Fp»cl»l r»bl* to Till New

T!mn Ompiiny.

BYRD'S

CRAFT

IS

Pra*

for NungesserandColi.

NAMED

Vnm Ti\u*
PARIS. Sunday, May 22.— Captain Lindbergh was disLindbergh Cheered at Cerecovered at the American Embassy at 2:30 o'clock this morning.
Commander, Now Last
Attired in a pair of Ambassador Herrick's pajamas, he sat on mony
in Field, Waits on Weather.
the edge of a bed and talked of his flight. At the last moment
Ambassador Herrick had canceled the plans of the reception
committee and, by unanimous consent, took the flier to the
Through no fault of his own, Clarembassy in the Place d'lena.
ence D. Chamoerlin, who with Bert
A staff of American doctors who had arrived at Le Bourget Acosta established a world's non-stop
will
Field early to minister to an "exhausted" aviator found in- flying reeord a few weeka ago,
not fly the reonrd-breakinfj monostead a bright-eyed, smiling youth who refused to be examined.
plane in an attempt to establish a
"Oh, don't bother; I am all right," he said.
<econd New York-Paria non-stop
"I'd like to have a bath and a glass of milk.
flight.
I would feel
G. M. Bellanca, designer of the
better," Lindbergh replied when the Ambassador asked him
plane, and Charles S. Levine of the
what he would like to have.
Columbia Aircraft Company, owner
A bath was drawn immediately and in less than five min- of the ship, came to the parting of

Cables

"Heroic Flier" and C»m*

CAPITAL THROBS WIH

Kellogg. New, MacNider

—

and Many More Join Ir
Tribute to Daring >

Special to Th* W#ie for*

WASHINGTON, May

1

I

triumph of Captain Charlei
berjrh in flying from New
Taris without a stop creaH
menrlous sensation in th#
capital

and

found

imrnH

sponse in a ho*t of official <

i

!

and statements congratu><
daring aviator upon his acH
President Coolidge ex|fj
admiration in a message til

m

tk Simi

(Continued from front flap)

the financial backing he secured for Dr.
22,

1927.

PARIS /A

GHSNOW
RRY HU

Robert H. Goddard's pioneer experiments in rocketry; the valuable information about German air power he provided
this country before World War II; his

combat missions in the Pacific as a regular pilot (although he was a civilian
and forty-two ) during which he demon,

strated that the Corsair could carry a

bombload twice its supposed capacity.
Mr. Ross also analyzes Lindbergh's connection with America First, arriving at a
more balanced and thorough appraisal
of his role and motives than was perhaps
possible up to now.

The individualism, perseverance, stoand self-reliance which carried
Lindbergh to glory have sustained him
in relative obscurity today, and allowed
him to pursue his work in aviation,
science, and the conservation of wildlife.
Walter S. Ross says, "It is a mark of the
man that he traded fame for privacy, to
safeguard his family and explore his concerns. It is a comment on society that he
icism,

SHOWING THE SPEED OF HIS TRIP.

had to."

Walter s. ross, a graduate of Rutgers
and presently a free-lance writer, has
been a magazine editor and publisher.

He is the author of three earlier books,
The Immortal, Coast to Coast and The
Climate Is Hope, and his articles have
appeared in national magazines, including Look, McCall's, the Ladies'

Home

Journal, Esquire, and the Readers Digest.

Jacket design by J. Caroff Associates
Jacket photograph courtesy of
the Ryan Aircraft Corporation

A

THE LAST HERO:
CHARLES A. LINDBERGH
by Walter S. Ross

»
r^

HYDE PARK

OSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY

